
      
         
            
            POEMS: By Michaell Draiton Eſquire.
            
            
               N L
            
            
               LONDON, Printed for N. Ling. 1605.
         
         
            
            The Arguments.
            
               THe Barrons warres.
               Englands Heroicall Epiſtles.
               Idea.
               The Legend of Robert Duke of Normandie.
               The Legend of Matilda.
               The Legend of Pierce Gaueſton.
            
         
         
            
            To Sir Walter Aſton, Knight of the honourable order of the Bath, and my moſt worthy Patron.
            
               I Will not ſtriue m'invention to inforce,
               With needleſſe words your eyes to entertaine,
               T'obſerue the formall ordinarie courſe
               That euerie one ſo vulgarly doth faine:
            
            
               Our interchanged and deliberate choiſe,
               Is with more firme and true election ſorted,
               Then ſtands in cenſure of the common voice,
               That with light humor fondly is tranſported:
            
            
               Nor take I patterne of an others praiſe,
               Then what my pen may conſtantly avow,
               Nor walke more publique nor obſcurer waies
               Then vertue bids, and iudgement will allow;
            
            
               So ſhall my loue, and beſt endeuours ſerue you,
               And ſtill ſhall ſtudie, ſtill ſo to deſerue you.
            
            
               Michaell Drayton.
            
         
         
            
            To the Reader.
            THat at firſt I made choiſe of this argument, I haue not as yet repented me for if the Muſe haue not much abvſed me, it was moſt worthy to haue found a more worthie Pen then mine owne; for the Barrons warres, (omitting the qualitie of thoſe Armes, whereof I haue not heere to ſpeake) were ſurely as well for their length in continuance, as for their manifold bloodſhed, and multitude of horrid accidents, meet matter for trumpet or tragedy. Therefore, as at firſt the dignitie of the thing was the motiue of the doing, ſo the cauſe of this my ſecond greater labour was the inſufficient handkung of the firſt, which though it were more then boldneſſe to venter on ſo noble an argument without leiſure, and ſtudie cōpetent, either of which trauell hardly affoords; yet the importunitie of friends made me, contrarie to mine own iudgement, take, vndertakem & publiſh it, ſo as the world hath ſeene; but herein I intend not to be too exact, as if eyther it needed too much excuſe (knowing, that euen as it was it ought to haue paſſed for better then ſome would ſuffer, who can hardly thinke any thing hath ſauour but their own, though neuer ſo vnſauoury) or as if I ſhould ſeeme now to haue excelled my ſelfe, and failing in my hopes, be kept without excuſe. Grammaticaſters haue quarreled at the title of Mortimeriados, as if it had beene a ſinne againſt Syntaxis to haue ſubſcribed it in the ſecond caſe, but not their idle reproofe hath made mee now abſtaine from fronting it by the name of Mortimer at all, but the ſame better aduiſe which hath cauſed me to alter the whole; and where before

the ſtanza was of ſeauen lines, wherein there are two couplets, as in this figure appeareth.

the often harmonie thereof ſoftned the verſe more then the maieſty of the ſubiect would permit, vnleſſe they had all bin Geminels, or couplets. Therefore, (but not without faſhioning the whole frame) I choſe Arioſtos ſtanza, of all other the moſt complete and beſt proportioned, conſiſting of eight, ſix interwouen, and a couplet in baſe.
            
            The Quadrin doth neuer double, or to v
                  •
               e a word of He raldrie, neuer bringeth forth Gemells. The Quiazain too ſoone. The Soſtin hath Twinnes in the baſe, but they detaine not the Muſicke nor the Cloze (as Muſitians terme it) long enough for an Epicke Poeme; The ſtanza of ſeauen is touched before; This of eight both holds the tune cleane through to the baſe of the columne, (which is the couplet, the foote or bottome) and cloſeth not but with a full ſatiſfaction to the care, for ſo long detention.
            Briefely, this ſort of ſtanza hath in it, maieſtie, perfection and ſoliditie, reſembling the pillar which in Architecture is called the Tuſcan, whoſe ſhaft is of ſix diameters, and baſes of two. The other reaſons this place will not beare, but generally all ſtanzas are in my opinion but tyrants and torturers, when they make inuention they their number, which ſometime would otherwiſe ſcantle it ſelfe. A fault that

great Maisters in this Art ſtriue to auoide. Concerning the diuiſion which I vſe in this Poeme, I am not ignorant that antiquitie hath vſed to diſtinguiſh workes into Bookes, and euery one to beare the number of their order, Homers 
                     •
                  liads, and Vlyſiads indeede are diſtinguiſhed by ſeuerall letters of the Greeke Alphabet, as all the world kn
                  •
               wes, and not by the numerall letters onely, which to lot
                  •
                are digit, and afterward compound; the Alpha being our vnite, for the Greeks had no figures nor ciphers in their Arithmeticke. Virgils Aeneis, Statius Theba
                     •
                  s, Silius worke of the Carthaginian warre, Illyricus Argonauticks, Vidas Chriſteis, are all diuided into books. The Italians vſe Cantos, and ſo our firſt late great Reformer Maſter Spenſer; that I aſſume another name for the ſections in this volume, cannot be diſgratious nor vnauowable.
            Laſtly, if I haue not already exceeded the length of an Epiſtle, I am to intreats, that he who will (as any man may that will) make himſelfe a partie to this of ours, would be pleaſed to remember that Spartan Prince, who being found by certaine Ambaſſadors playing among his children, requeſted them to forbeare to cenſure, till alſo they had ſome of their owne. To ſuch I giue as ample power and priuiledge as euer Ius lib
                     •
                  rorum coulain Rome, crauing backe againe at their hands by a regrant, the like of that which I impart; for great reaſon there is, that they ſhould vndergoe the licence which themſelues challenge, and ſuffer that in their fames which they would wrongly put vpon others, according to the moſt indifferent law of the Talio. Fare you well.
         
         
            
            To M. Michaell Drayton.
            
               WHat ornament might I deuiſe to fit
               Th'aſpiring height of thy admired ſpirit?
               Or what faire Garland worthy is to ſit
               On thy bleſt browes, that compaſſe in all merit?
               Thou ſhalt not crowned be with common Bayes,
               Becauſe for thee it is a crowne too low,
               
                  Apolloes tree can yeeld thee ſimple praiſe,
               It is too dull a veſture for thy brow;
               But with a wreathe of ſtarres ſhalt thou be crown'd,
               VVhich when thy working temples do ſuſtaine,
               VVill like the Spheares be euer moouing round,
               After the royall muſicke of thy braine:
               Thy skill doth equall Phoebus, not thy birth,
               He to heauen giues muſicke, thou to earth.
               
                  Thomas Greene.
               
            
         
         
            
            To M. Michaell Drayton.
            
               THoſe painefull wits, which natures depth admire,
               And view the cauſes of vnconſtant ſtrife,
               Doe tremble leaſt the Vniuerſe expire,
               Through laſting iarres, the enemies of life,
               On earthly ſignes let not ſuch Sages looke,
               Nor on the cleere aſpects of hopefull ſtarres;
               But learne the worlds continuance from thy booke,
               which frames paſt natures force eternall warres;
               wherein the Maſes ſhewing perfect glory,
               Adorne it ſo with gracefull harmonie,
               That all the acts of this lamented ſtory,
               Seeme not perform'd for peoples libertie:
               Nor through the awe of an imperious King,
               But that thy verſes their deepe wounds might ſing.
               
                  Iohn Beaumont.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
               
                  
                     
                     THE FIRST BOOKE of the Barrons warres.
                     
                        The Argument.
                        
                           The grieuous plagues and the prodigious ſignes
                           That this great warre and ſlaughter doe foreſhow,
                           Th'eſpeciall cauſe the Baronage combines,
                           The Queenes ſtrong griefe, whence many troubles grow,
                           The time by courſe vnto our fallinclines,
                           And how each country doth to battell goe;
                           What cauſe to yeeld, the Mortimers pretend,
                           And their commitment perfecting the end.
                        
                     
                     
                        1
                        THe bloodiefactions, and rebellious pride
                        Of a ſtrong nation, whoſe vnmanag'd might
                        Them from their naturall Soueraigne did diuide,
                        Their due ſubiection, and his lawfull right,
                        Whom their light error looſely doth miſguide,
                        Vrg'd by lewd Minions tyrannous deſpight;
                        Me from ſoft layes, and tender loues doth bring,
                        Of dreadfull fights, and horred warres to ſing.
                     
                     
                        
                        2
                        What helliſh furie poyſned your hie blood,
                        Or ſhould bewitch you with accurſed charmes,
                        That by pretending of the generall good,
                        Raſhly extrudes you to tumultuous armes,
                        And from the ſafetie wherein late you ſtood,
                        Re
                              •
                           t of all taſte, and feeling of your harmes,
                        That France and Belgia with affrighted eyes,
                        Were ſad beholders of your miſeries.
                     
                     
                        3
                        T
                              〈…〉
                           ueterate ranckor in their boſoms bred,
                        Who for their charter wag'd a former war,
                        Or through your veines, this raging venom ſpred,
                        Whoſe next-ſucceeding Nephewes now you are,
                        Or that hote gore your bowes in conqueſt ſhed,
                        Hauing enlarg'd your Countries bounds ſo far,
                        Enſigne to enſigne furiouſly oppoſe,
                        With blades of Bilbo dealing Engliſh blowes.
                     
                     
                        4
                        O thou the great director of my Muſe,
                        On whoſe free bountie all my powers depend,
                        Into my breaſt a ſacred fire infuſe,
                        Rauiſh my ſpirit this great worke to attend;
                        Let the ſtill night my laboured lines peruſe,
                        That when my Poems gaine their wiſhed end,
                        They whoſe ſad eyes ſhall reade this tragique ſtory,
                        In my weake hand ſhall ſee thy might and glory.
                     
                     
                        
                        5
                        What Care would plot, Diſſentions quickely croſſe,
                        Which like an earthquake rends the tottering ſtate,
                        By which abroade we beare a publique loſſe,
                        Betrayd at home by meanes of priuate hate;
                        Whilſt vs thoſe ſtrange calamities doe toſſe,
                        (The daily nurſe of mutinous debate)
                        Confuſion ſtill our countries peace confounds,
                        No helpe at hand, and mortall all our wounds.
                     
                     
                        6
                        Thou Church then ſwelling in thy mightineſſe,
                        Tending the care and ſafetie of the ſoule;
                        O nurſe not factions flowing in exceſſe,
                        That with thy members ſhouldſt their griefe condole,
                        In thee reſts power this outrage to repreſſe,
                        Which might thy zeale and ſanctitie enrole,
                        Come thou in pureneſſe meekely with the word,
                        Lay not thy hand to the vnhalowed ſword.
                     
                     
                        7
                        Blood-thirſting warre ariſing firſt from hell,
                        And in progreſſion ſeizing on this Ile,
                        Where it before neere forty yeeres did dwell,
                        And with pollution horribly defile,
                        By which ſo many a woorthy Engliſh fell,
                        By our firſt Edward baniſhed awhile,
                        Transferd by Fortune to the Scottiſh meare,
                        To ranſacke that, as it had rauinde heere.
                     
                     
                        
                        8
                        Where hovering ſtill with inauſpicious wings
                        About the verge of theſe diſtempered climes,
                        Returning now, new errour hether brings,
                        To ſtirre vs vp to theſe diſaſtrous crimes,
                        Weakeneth our power by oft diminiſhings;
                        And taking holde on theſe vnſetled times,
                        Forcing our frailty ſenſually at length,
                        Crackt the ſtiffe nerves that knit our antient ſtrength.
                     
                     
                        9
                        Whoſe frightfull viſion, at the firſt approach,
                        With violent madnes ſtrooke that deſperate age,
                        So many ſundry miſeries abroach,
                        Giuing full ſpeed to their vnbrideled rage
                        That did our antient libertie encroach,
                        And in theſe ſtrong conſpiracies ingage,
                        The worthieſt blood the ſubiects loſſe to bring,
                        By innaturall wrongs vnto their naturall king.
                     
                     
                        10
                        When in the North whilſt horror yet was yoong,
                        Theſe dangerous ſeaſons ſwiftly comming on,
                        Whilſt o're our heads portentious meteors hung,
                        And in the skies ſterne Comets brightly ſhone,
                        Prodigious births oft intermixt among,
                        Such as before to times had beene vnknowne,
                        In bloody iſſues forth the earth doth breake,
                        Weeping for vs, whoſe woes it could not ſpeake.
                     
                     
                        
                        11
                        When by the rankenes of contagious aire,
                        A mortall plague inuadeth man and beaſt,
                        Which ſoone diſperſt, and raging every where,
                        In doubt the ſame too quickely ſhould have ceaſt,
                        More to confirme the certaintie of feare
                        By cruell famine hapleſly enereaſt;
                        As though the heauens in their remisfull doome,
                        Tooke thoſe beſt lou'd from wor
                              •
                           er daies to come.
                     
                     
                        12
                        The leuell courſe that we propoſe to goe
                        Now to th'intent you may more plainely ſee,
                        And that we euery circumſtance may ſhow
                        The ſtate of things, and truely what they be,
                        And with what skill, or proiect we beſtow,
                        As our accurrents happen in degree.
                        From theſe portents we now diuert our view,
                        To bring to birth the horrors that enſue.
                     
                     
                        13
                        The calling backe of baniſht Gaueſton,
                        
                        Gainſt which the Barrons were to Longſhanks ſworne,
                        That inſolent laſcivious Minion,
                        A Soueraignes blemiſh, and a countries ſcorne,
                        The ſigniories, and great promotion,
                        Him in his lawleſſe courſes to ſuborne,
                        Stirres vp that hatefull and outragious ſtrife,
                        That coſt ere long ſo many an Engliſh life,
                     
                     
                        
                        14
                        O worthy La
                                 •
                              y, hadſt thou ſparde that breath
                        Which ſhortly after Nature thee denide,
                        To Lancaſter deliuered at thy death,
                        To whom thy onely daughter was affide,
                        That this ſterne warre too quickely publiſheth,
                        To ayde the Barrons gainſt that Minions pride,
                        Thy Earledomes, lands, and titles of renowne,
                        Had not ſo ſoone returnd vnto the Crowne.
                     
                     
                        15
                        The Lordſhips Bruſe vnto the Spenſers paſt,
                        Croſſing the Barrons vehement deſire,
                        As from Ioues hand that fearefull lightning caſt,
                        When fifty townes lay ſpent in enuious fire,
                        Alas too vaine and prodigall a waſte;
                        The ſtrong effect of their conceived ire,
                        Vrging the weake King with a violent hand,
                        T'abiure thoſe falſe Lordes from the troubled land.
                     
                     
                        16
                        When the faire Queene that progreſſing in Kent,
                        
                        Laſtly denide her entrance into Leedes,
                        
                        Whom Badleſmere vnkindly dooth preuent;
                        Who gainſt his Soueraigne in this courſe proceedes,
                        As adding further to this diſcontent,
                        One of the ſprings which this great miſchiefe feedes,
                        Heaping on rage and horror more and more,
                        To thruſt on that which went too faſt before.
                     
                     
                        
                        17
                        Which more and more, a kingly rage increaſt,
                        Moou'd with the wrongs of Gaueſton diſgraded,
                        Which had ſo long beene ſetled in his breaſt,
                        That all his powers it wholy had inuaded,
                        Giuing the Spenſers an aſſured reſt,
                        By whom his reaſons chiefly are perſwaded,
                        By whoſe lewd counſells he is onely led,
                        To leaue his true Queene, and his lawfull bed,
                     
                     
                        18
                        That now herſelfe who while ſhe ſtood in grace,
                        Applied her powers theſe diſcords to appeaſe
                        When yet confuſion had not fully place,
                        Nor former times ſo dangerous as theſe,
                        A party now in theyr afflicted caſe,
                        A willing hand to his deſtruction layes,
                        That time whoſe ſoft palme heals the wound of war,
                        May cure the ſoare, but neuer cloſe the ſcar.
                     
                     
                        19
                        In all this heate his greatnes firſt began,
                        The ſerious ſubiect of our ſadder vaine,
                        Braue Mortimer, that euer-matchleſſe man,
                        Of the old Heroes great and God-like ſtraine,
                        For whom invention dooing beſt it can,
                        His weight of honour hardly can ſuſtaine,
                        Bearing his name immortaliz'd and hie,
                        When he in earth vnnumbred times ſhall lie.
                     
                     
                        
                        20
                        That vncle now (whoſe name this Nephew bare,
                        The onely comfort of the wofull Queene)
                        Who from his cradle held him as his care,
                        In whom the hope of that great name was ſeene,
                        For this young Lord now wiſely doth prepare,
                        Whilſt yet this deepe hart-goaring wound is greene,
                        And on this faire aduantage firmely wrought,
                        To place him highly in her princely thought.
                     
                     
                        21
                        At whoſe deliberate and vnuſuall byrth,
                        The heauens were ſaid to counſell to retire,
                        And in aſpects of happineſſe and mirth,
                        Breath'd him a ſpirit inſatiatly t'aſpire,
                        That tooke no mixture of the ponderous earth,
                        But all compreſt of cleere aſcending fire,
                        So well made vp, that ſuch an one as he,
                        
                           Ioue in a man like Mortimer would be.
                     
                     
                        22
                        The temper of that nobler moouing part,
                        With ſuch rare pureneſſe rectified his blood,
                        Raiſing the powers of his reſolued hart,
                        Too prowd to be lockt vp within a flood,
                        That no misfortune poſſibly could thwart;
                        Which from the natiue greatneſſe where it ſtood,
                        Euen by the vertue of a piercing eye,
                        Shew'd that his pitch was boundleſſe as the sky.
                     
                     
                        
                        23
                        Worthy the grand-child of ſo great a Lord,
                        Who whilſt firſt Edward fortunately raign'd,
                        Reedified great Arthurs auncient boord,
                        The ſeate at goodly Kennelworth ordain'd,
                        The order of old Knighthood there reſtor'd,
                        To which a hundreth duely appertain'd
                        With all the grace, and beauties of a Court,
                        As beſt became that braue and martiall ſport.
                     
                     
                        24
                        The hart-ſwolne Lords with furie ſet on fire,
                        Whom Edwards wrongs to vengeance ſtill prouoke,
                        With Lancaſter and Hartfoord now conſpire
                        No more to beare the Spenſers ſeruile yoke.
                        And thus whilſt all a mutuall change deſire,
                        The ancient bonds of their allegeance broke,
                        Reſolu'd with blood their libertie to buy,
                        And in this quarrell vow'd to liue and dye.
                     
                     
                        25
                        What priuiledge hath our free birth? (ſay they)
                        Or in our blood what vertue doth remaine,
                        To each laſciuious Minion made a pray,
                        That vs, and our nobilitie diſdaine,
                        Whilſt they tryumphing boaſt of our decay?
                        Either thoſe ſpirits we do not now retaine
                        That were our fathers, or by fate we fall
                        Both from their greatnes, liberty and all.
                     
                     
                        
                        26
                        Honour deiected from that ſoueraigne ſtate,
                        From whence at firſt it challenged a being,
                        Now proſtitute to infamy and hate,
                        As with it ſelfe in all things diſagreeing,
                        So out of order, diſproportionate,
                        From her faire courſe prepoſterouſly flying,
                        Whilſt others as themſelues, and onely wee
                        Are not held thoſe we would but ſeeme to bee.
                     
                     
                        27
                        Then to what end hath our great conqueſt ſeru'd,
                        Thoſe acts achiued by the Norman ſword,
                        Our Charters, patents, or our deeds reſeru'd,
                        Our offices, and tytles to record,
                        The creſts that on our monuments are caru'd,
                        If they to vs no greater good affoord?
                        Thus doe they murmure euery one apart,
                        With many a vext ſoule, many a grieued hart.
                     
                     
                        28
                        Whilſt this ſad Queene to depth of ſorrow throwne,
                        Wherein ſhe waſtes her flower of youth away,
                        Beyond beliefe to all but heauen vnknowne,
                        This quickning ſparke, where yet it buried lay,
                        By the ſharpe breath of deſperate faction blowne,
                        Conuerts her long night to the wiſhed day,
                        The wofull winter of misfortune cheering,
                        As the darke world at the bright ſunnes appearing.
                     
                     
                        
                        29
                        Yet ill perplex'd amid theſe hard extreames,
                        All mean
                              •
                           s depreſt her ſafety to preferre,
                        Depriu'd of thoſe late comfortable beames,
                        Whoſe want might make her the more eaſly erre,
                        Her hopes relinquiſht like deceiptfull dreames,
                        Which in her breaſt ſuch ſundry paſſions ſtirre,
                        Where ſtrugling which ech other ſhould controule
                        Worke ſtrange confuſion in her troubled ſoule.
                     
                     
                        30
                        That now diſabled of all ſoveraigne ſtate,
                        That to her graces rightly did belong,
                        To be reiected, and repudiate,
                        So true a Lady, goodly, faire and yoong,
                        Which with more feruor ſtill dooth intimate
                        Her too-deepe-ſetled and inveterate wrong,
                        What wiſedome would, a womans will denies,
                        With arguments of her indignities.
                     
                     
                        31
                        When to effect the angry Fates purſue
                        In heauens high Court that long time did depend,
                        When theſe full miſchiefes to a ripeneſſe grew,
                        And now the harueſt haſtning in the end,
                        And all theſe lines into one centre drew,
                        Which way ſoe're they ſeemingly extend;
                        All theſe together in proportion laide,
                        Each breath of hope, a gale of certaine aide.
                     
                     
                        
                        32
                        Now is the time when Mortimer doth enter,
                        Of great imployment in this tragicke act,
                        His youth and courage boldly bid him venter,
                        And tell him ſtill how ſtrongly he was backt;
                        And at this inſtant in due ſeaſon ſent her,
                        When the ſtreight courſe to her deſire is tract,
                        (And but vpon more certaintie doth ſtay)
                        By a direct, what though a dangerous way?
                     
                     
                        33
                        This dreadfull Commet drew her wondring eie,
                        Which now beganne his golden head to reare,
                        Whoſe glorious fixure in ſo faire a skie,
                        Strikes the beholder with a chilly feare,
                        And in a Region eleuate and hie,
                        And by the forme wherein it did appeare,
                        As the moſt skilfull ſeriouſly divine,
                        Foreſhew'd a kingdome ſhortly to decline.
                     
                     
                        34
                        Yet ſtill recoyling at the Spencers power,
                        As often checkt with their intemperate pride,
                        Th'vnconſtant Barrons wauering euery howre,
                        The fierce incounter of this boyſterous tide,
                        That eaſily might their liuelihoode deuoure,
                        Had ſhe not thoſe that skilfully could guide,
                        She from ſuſpition craftily retires,
                        Careleſſe in ſhew, of what ſhe moſt deſires.
                     
                     
                        
                        35
                        Diſſembling griefe, as one that knew not ill;
                        So can ſhe rule the greatnes of her mind,
                        As a moſt perfect Rectoreſſe of her will,
                        Aboue the vſuall weakenes of her kind;
                        For all this ſtorme immooueable and ſtill,
                        Her ſecret drift the wiſeſt miſſe to find;
                        Nor will ſhe know what (yet) theſe factions meant,
                        With a pleaſd eie to ſooth ſad Diſcontent.
                     
                     
                        36
                        The leaſt ſuſpition cunningly to heale,
                        Still in her lookes humilitie ſhe beares,
                        The ſafeſt way with mightineſſe to deale,
                        So Policie Religions habite weares;
                        Tis now no time her greeuance to reueale,
                        Hee's mad which takes a Lyon by the eares,
                        This knew the Queene, exampled by the wiſe,
                        This muſt they learne that rightly temporize.
                     
                     
                        37
                        The learnedſt Biſhop Torleton in the land,
                        Vpon a text of Politickes to preach,
                        Which he long ſtudying, well did vnderſtand,
                        And by a methode could as aptly teach,
                        That was a Prelate of a potent hand,
                        Wiſe were the man could goe beyond his reach:
                        This ſubtile Tutor Iſabell had taught,
                        In nicer poynts than euer Edward ſought.
                     
                     
                        
                        38
                        Rage which no limits longer can containe,
                        Laſtly breakes foorth into a publique flame,
                        Then ſlipp'd occaſion better to regaine,
                        When to their purpoſe things ſofitly frame,
                        And now diſcerned viſibly and plaine,
                        When treaſon boldly dare it ſelfe proclaime,
                        Caſting aſide all ſecular diſguiſe,
                        Leading prowd legions furiouſly to riſe.
                     
                     
                        39
                        As Severne lately in her ebbes that ſanke,
                        Vaſt and forſaken leaues th'vncouered ſands,
                        Fetching full tides, luxurious, hie, and ranke,
                        Seemes in her pride t'inuade the neighbouring lands,
                        Breaking her limits, couering all the banks,
                        Threatning the prowde hilles with her watry handes,
                        As though ſhe meant her Empery to haue,
                        Where euen but lately ſhe beheld her graue.
                     
                     
                        40
                        Through all the land, from places farre and neere,
                        Led to the field as Fortune lots their ſide,
                        (With th'auntient weapons vſde in warre to beare)
                        As thoſe directed whom they choſe their guide,
                        Or elſe perhaps as they affected were,
                        Or as by friendſhip, or by duetie tide,
                        Swayde by the ſtrength and motion of their blood,
                        No cauſe examin'd, be it bad or good.
                     
                     
                        
                        41
                        From Norfolke, and the countries of the Eaſt,
                        That with the long pyke beſt could mannage fight,
                        The men of Kent vnconquer'd of the reſt,
                        That to this day maintaine their ancient right,
                        And for their ſtrength that we account the beſt,
                        The Corniſhmen, moſt actiue, bold, and light,
                        Thoſe neere the plaine that gleaue and polax weeld,
                        And claime for due vaward of the field.
                     
                     
                        42
                        The noble Britton ſprung of Illyon race,
                        From Lancaſhiere moſt famous for their bowes,
                        With thoſe of Cheſhiere, chiefeſt for their place,
                        Men of ſuch bone, as onely made for blowes,
                        That for their faith are had in ſpeciall grace,
                        And as the guard vnto the Soueraigne goes;
                        Thoſe of the North in feuds ſo deadly fell,
                        That for their ſpeare and horſemanſhip excell.
                     
                     
                        43
                        For euery vſe experience could eſpy
                        Such as in Fens and Marſh-lands vſe to trade,
                        The doubtfull foards and paſſages to try,
                        With ſtilts and loapſtaues that do aptlieſt wade,
                        And fit'ſt for ſcowts and Currers to diſcry,
                        Thoſe from the Mines with pickaxe, and with ſpade,
                        For Pyoners beſt, that for intrenching are,
                        Men chiefly needefull in the vſe of war.
                     
                     
                        
                        44
                        O noble Nation furniſhed with Armes,
                        So full of ſpirit, ſo eminent alone,
                        Had heauen but bleſt thee to foreſee theſe harmes,
                        And as thy valiant Nephewes to haue gone,
                        
                           Paris, 
                                 •
                              oan, Orleance ſhaking with alarmes,
                        As the bright Sunne thy glorie then had ſhone;
                        To other Realmes thou hadſt transferd this chance,
                        Nor had your ſons been firſt that conquerd France.
                     
                     
                        45
                        And thus on all hands making for their reſt,
                        And now ſet forward for this mightie day,
                        Where euery one prepares to do his beſt,
                        When in ſucceſſe their liues and fortunes lay;
                        No croſſe euent their purpoſes to wreſt,
                        Where now they ſtand in ſo direct a way;
                        And whilſt they play this ſtrange & doubtfull game,
                        The Queene ſtands by, and onely giues the ayme.
                     
                     
                        46
                        When this braue Lord his foote had ſcarcely ſet
                        Into the road where Fortune had to deale,
                        But ſhe diſpoſd his forward courſe to let,
                        Her lewd condition quickly doth reueale,
                        Glory to her vaine deitie to get,
                        By him, whoſe birth did beare her omenous ſeale,
                        Winning occaſion from this very hower,
                        In him to proue and manifeſt her power.
                     
                     
                        
                        47
                        As when we ſee the earely riſing Sunne,
                        With his faire beames to emulate our ſight,
                        And when his courſe but newly is begunne,
                        The humorous fogges depriue his wiſhed light,
                        Till through the moiſt clouds his cleare forehead run,
                        Climing the noonſted in his gorgeous height:
                        His bright beginning fortune hindreth thus,
                        To make the reſt more rich, more glorious.
                     
                     
                        48
                        The King diſcreetely that conſidered,
                        The ſpace of earth whereon the Barrons ſtand,
                        What were their powers to them contributed,
                        Now being himſelfe but partner of his land,
                        And of the ſtrength and army that heeded,
                        Gainſt them that doe ſo great a power command,
                        In which t'was well he did ſo wiſely looke,
                        The taske was great that now he vndertooke.
                     
                     
                        49
                        And warn'd by danger to miſ-doubt the worſt,
                        In equall ſcales whilſt eithers fortune hung,
                        Muſt now performe the vtmoſt that he durſt,
                        Or vndergoe the burden of his wrong;
                        As good to ſtirre, as after be inforſt
                        To ſtop the head whence many euills ſprung:
                        Now with the marchers thinkes it beſt beginne,
                        Which firſt muſt looſe, ere he could hope to winne.
                     
                     
                        
                        50
                        The Mortimers being men of greateſt might,
                        Whoſe name was dreadfull, and commanded far,
                        Sturdie to manage, of a haughtie ſpright,
                        Strongly aly'd much followed, popular,
                        On whom if thus he happily could light,
                        He hopes more eaſly to conclude this war;
                        Which he intendeth ſpeedily to try,
                        To quit that firſt, which moſt ſtood in his eye.
                     
                     
                        51
                        For which he expeditiouſly prouided
                        That part of land into his power to get,
                        Which if made good, might keepe them ſtill diuided,
                        Their combination cunningly to let,
                        Who being couioyn'd, would be too ſtrongly ſided,
                        Two, ſo great ſtrengths together ſafely met,
                        The face of warre would looke ſo ſterne and great,
                        As well might threat to heaue him from his ſeate.
                     
                     
                        52
                        Wherefore from London ſtrongly ſetting forth,
                        With a faire Army furniſh'd of the beſt,
                        Accompany'd with frends of greateſt worth,
                        With whom there's many a gallant ſpirit is preſt;
                        Great Lancaſter, the Lord of all the North,
                        The Mortimers are Maiſters of the Weſt,
                        Hee towards mid England makes, the way twixt either,
                        Which they muſt croſſe, ere they could com together.
                     
                     
                        
                        53
                        And thus inueagled with delightfull hope,
                        Stowtly to front and ſhoulder with debate,
                        Knowing to meete with a reſolued troupe
                        That came prepar'd with courage, and with hate,
                        Whoſe ſtubborne Creſts if he inforc'd to ſtoope,
                        He now muſt tempt ſome great and powrefull fate;
                        And through ſterne guards of ſwords & i
                              •
                           efull flame,
                        Make way to peace, and propagate his name.
                     
                     
                        54
                        When now the Marchers well vpon their way,
                        (Expecting ſuch ſhould promis'd ſuccour bring
                        Which all this while abus'd them by delay)
                        Are ſuddainely encountred by a King,
                        And now perceiue their dilatory ſtay
                        To be the cauſer of their ruining,
                        How neere their boſoms blacke deſtruction ſtood,
                        With open iawes prepared for their blood.
                     
                     
                        55
                        And by the ſhifting of inconſtant wind,
                        Seeing what weather they were like to meet,
                        Which (euen) at firſt ſo aukwardly they find
                        Ere they could yet giue ſea-roomth to their fleet,
                        Cleane from their courſe, and caſt ſo far behind,
                        And yet in perrill euery howre to ſplit,
                        Some vnknowne harbor ſuddainely muſt ſound,
                        Or runne their fortunes deſprately on ground.
                     
                     
                        
                        56
                        The elder peere, graue, politique, and wiſe,
                        Which had all dangers abſolutely ſcand,
                        Finding high time his Nephew to aduiſe,
                        Since now their ſtate ſtood on this deſperate hand,
                        And from this miſchiefe many more to riſe,
                        With long experience learn'd to vnderſtand:
                        Nephew (ſaith he) t'is longer vaine to ſtriue,
                        Counſell beſt ſerues our ſafetie to contriue.
                     
                     
                        57
                        The downe-right perill preſent in our eye
                        Not to be ſhund, what certaine end t'aſſures;
                        The next, the weight that on our fall doth lie,
                        And what our life to our deſigne procures,
                        Each hope, and doubt that doth ariſe thereby,
                        Prouing with iudgement how the ſame endures:
                        For who obſerues ſtrict pollicies true lawes,
                        Shifts his proceeding to the varying cauſe.
                     
                     
                        58
                        To hazard fight with the Emperiall powers,
                        May our ſmall troupes vndoubtedly appall,
                        A deſperate end vs willingly deuours;
                        Yeelding our ſelues, by this wee looſe not all,
                        We leaue our friends this litttle force of ours,
                        Reſeru'd for them, though hapleſly we fall;
                        That ſhew of weaknes hath a glorious hand,
                        That falls it ſelfe, to make the cauſe to ſtand.
                     
                     
                        
                        59
                        Twixt inexpected and ſo dangerous ills,
                        That's beſt wherein we ſmalleſt perrill ſee,
                        A courſe that reaſon neceſſary wills,
                        And that doth moſt with pollicie agree,
                        The idle vulgar breath it nothing skils,
                        T'is ſound diſcretion muſt our Pylot be,
                        He that doth ſtill the fayreſt meane preferre,
                        Anſwers opinion how ſo ere he erre.
                     
                     
                        60
                        And to the worl
                              •
                            
                           
                              •
                           s eye ſeeming yet ſo ſtrong,
                        By our diſcending willingly from thence,
                        May vrge the ſhew of our oppoſed wrong
                        Rather b'inforcement then fore-thought pretence,
                        Leauing th'aduantage doth to vs belong,
                        May qualifie the nature of th'offence,
                        Men are not alwayes incident to loſſe,
                        When Fortune ſeemes their forward cauſe to croſſe.
                     
                     
                        61
                        Nor giue we enuie abſolute acceſſe,
                        To lay our fall vpon thy forward mind,
                        Ther's neerer meanes this miſchiefe to redreſſe,
                        And make ſuccesfull what is yet behinde,
                        Nor of our hope vs wholy diſpoſſeſſe,
                        Fortune is euer variouſly inclind,
                        And a ſmall vantage to the courſe of Kings,
                        Guides a ſlight meanes to compaſſe mighty things.
                     
                     
                        
                        62
                        Which ſpeech ſo caught his Nephews pliant youth,
                        Faſtning vpon a dutiful reſpect,
                        Which he with ſuch celeritie purſu'th,
                        (Well could he counſell, well could he direct)
                        Proceeding from integritie and truth,
                        And working with ſuch proſperous effect,
                        Shewes wiſemens counſels, by a powerfull fate,
                        (Seeming from reaſon) yet proue fortunate.
                     
                     
                        63
                        To which they awfull Maieſtie inuite
                        By the moſt due and ceremonious way,
                        With circumſtance, and each conditi'nall rite
                        Might winne reſpect vnto this new eſſay,
                        Or might opinion any way excite,
                        To which the King doth willingly obay;
                        Who as themſelues in finding danger neere,
                        Rather accepts doubt, then a certaine feare.
                     
                     
                        64
                        Which he receaues in preſage of his good,
                        To his ſucceſſe auſpiciouſly apply'd,
                        which cooles the heat of his diſtemperd blood,
                        Before their force in doubtfull Armes was try'd,
                        In his protection when they onely ſtood,
                        At his diſpoſing wholy to abide,
                        vvhereon in ſafety he diſmiſt their power,
                        Sends them away as priſoners to the Tower.
                     
                     
                        
                        65
                        O all-preparing prouidence Diuine,
                        In thy large Booke what ſecrets are enrold?
                        What ſundry helps doth thy great powre aſſigne,
                        To ſtay the courſe thou ſtedfaſtly dooſt hold?
                        What mortall ſence is able to define
                        Thy myſteries, thy counſells manifold;
                        By theſe digreſſions ſtrangely that extends
                        Thy obſcure proceedings to aparent ends?
                     
                     
                        66
                        This was the meane, by which the Fates diſpoſe
                        More threatned plagues vpon that age to bring,
                        Vtter confuſion on the heads of thoſe
                        That were before the Barrons ruining,
                        With the ſubuerſion of ſo many foes,
                        The murther of the miſerable King;
                        And that which came as Epilogue to all,
                        Laſtly, his fearefull, and ſo violent fall.
                     
                     
                        67
                        Which to their hope giues time for further breath,
                        As the firſt pawſe in this their great affaire,
                        That yet awhile deferr'd this threatning death,
                        Truſting this breach by leyſure to repaire,
                        And heere a while this furie limetteth:
                        Whilſt in this manner things ſo ſtrangely fare,
                        Horror beyond the wonted bounds doth ſwell,
                        As the next Canto dreadfully ſhal tell.
                     
                     The end of the firſt Canto.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        ❧ The ſecond Booke of the Barrons warres.
                     
                        The Argument.
                        
                           At Burton-bridge the puiſſant armies me
                                 •
                              ,
                           The forme and order of the doubtfull fight,
                           Whereas the King the victory doth get,
                           And the prowd Barrons laſtly forcde to flight;
                           How they againe towardes Burrough forward ſet,
                           Where then the Lords are vanquiſhed outright,
                           Lastly, the lawes doe execute their power,
                           On thoſe the ſword before did not deuoure.
                        
                     
                     
                        1
                        THis chance of warre, that dreadfully had ſwept
                        So large a ſhare from their full-reckned might,
                        Which their prowd hopes ſo carefully had kept
                        Whilſt yet their ſtate ſtoode equally vpright,
                        That could at firſt ſo cloſely intercept,
                        That ſhould haue ſeru'd them for a glorious fight,
                        Muſters ſupplies of footemen, and of horſe,
                        To giue a new ſtrength to their ruinde force.
                     
                     
                        
                        2
                        Th'inueterate griefe ſo deepe and firmely rooted,
                        Yet ſlightly curde by this ſhort ſtrengtheleſſe peace;
                        To aſſay t'remoue, ſince it but vainely booted,
                        That did with each diſtemprature increaſe,
                        And being by euery offerd cauſe promooted,
                        Th'effect too firmely ſetled to ſurceaſe:
                        When each euaſion ſunday paſſions brought,
                        Strange formes of feare in euery troubled thought.
                     
                     
                        3
                        And put in action for this publique cauſe,
                        Whilſt euery one a party firmely ſtoode,
                        Taxt by the letter of the cenſuring lawes,
                        In the ſharpe tainder of his honoured blood;
                        And he thats free'ſt, entangled by ſome clauſe,
                        Which to this miſchiefe giues continuall food;
                        For where confuſion gets ſo ſtrongly hold,
                        Till all conſumde, can hardly be controlde.
                     
                     
                        4
                        Where now by night, euen when pale leaden ſleepe,
                        Vpon their eie-lids heauily did dwell,
                        And, ſtep by ſtep, on euery ſence did creepe,
                        Miſchiefe (that blacke inhabitant of hell)
                        Which neuer failes continuall watch to keepe,
                        Fearefull to thinke, a horred thing to tell,
                        Entred the place where now theſe warlike Lordes
                        Lay maild in armour, girt with irefull ſwords.
                     
                     
                        
                        5
                        Miſchiefe with ſharpe ſight, and a meager looke,
                        And alwaies prying where ſhe may do ill,
                        In which the fiend continuall pleaſure tooke,
                        Her ſtarued body Plenty could not fill,
                        Searching in euery corner, euery nooke,
                        With winged feete, too ſwift to worke her will;
                        Hung full of deadly inſtruments ſhe went,
                        Of euery ſort to hurt where ere ſhe meant,
                     
                     
                        6
                        And with a viall fild with banefull wrath,
                        Brought from Cocytus by this curſed ſpright,
                        Which in her blacke hand readily ſhe hath,
                        And drops the poiſon vpon euery wight;
                        For to each one ſhe knew the readie path:
                        Now in the midſt and dead-time of the night,
                        Whoſe enuious force inuadeth euery Peere,
                        Striking with furie, and impulſiue feare.
                     
                     
                        7
                        The weeping morning breaking in the Eaſt,
                        When with a troubled and affrighted mind,
                        Each whom this venom lately did infeſt,
                        The ſtrong effect ſoone inwardly do find;
                        And lately troubled by vnquiet reſt,
                        To ſad deſtruction euery one inclind;
                        Rumours of ſpoile through euery eare doth flye,
                        And fury ſits in eu'ry threatning eye.
                     
                     
                        
                        8
                        This doone, in haſte vnto King Edward hies,
                        Which now growne proude vpon his faire ſucceſſe,
                        The time in feaſts and wantonneſſe implies
                        With crowned cups his ſorrowes to redreſſe,
                        That on his fortune wholy now relies,
                        And in the boſome of his Courtly preſſe
                        Vaunting the glory of this late wonne day,
                        Whilſt the ſick Land with ſorrow pines away.
                     
                     
                        9
                        Thether ſhe comes, and in a Minions ſhape
                        Shee creepeth neere the perſon of the King,
                        Warm'd with the verdure of the ſwelling grape,
                        In which, ſhe poyſon ſecretly doth wring,
                        Not the leaſt drop vntaynted doth eſcape,
                        To which intent ſhe all her ſtore did bring,
                        Whoſe rich commixtu
                              •
                           e making it more ſtrong,
                        Fills his hote veines with arrogance and wrong.
                     
                     
                        10
                        And hauing both ſuch courage, and ſuch might
                        As to ſo great a buſineſſe did belong,
                        Neuer conſidering their pretended right
                        Should be inducement to a trebled wrong,
                        When miſty error ſo deludes their ſight,
                        Which ſtill betwixt them, and cleere reaſon hong;
                        By which opinion falſly was abuſde,
                        As left all out of order, all confuſde.
                     
                     
                        
                        11
                        Now our Minerua tells of dreadfull Armes,
                        Inforc'd to ſing of worſe then ciuill warres,
                        Of Ambuſcades, ſtratagems, alarmes,
                        Vnkind diſcentions, fearfull maſſacars,
                        Of gloomy magiques, and benumming charmes,
                        Freſh-bleeding wounds, and neuer-healed skarrs,
                        And for the ſock wherein ſhe vſde to tread,
                        Marching in greaues, a helmet on her head.
                     
                     
                        12
                        Whilſt hate, and griefe, their weakned ſence delude,
                        The Barrons draw their forces to a head,
                        (Whome Edward ſpur'd with vengeance ſtill purſude)
                        By Lancaſter, and noble Herford led,
                        This long proceeding laſtly to conclude;
                        Whilſt now to meet, both Armies freſhly ſped
                        To Burton, both incamping for the day,
                        With expectation for a glorious pray.
                     
                     
                        13
                        Vpon the Eaſt, from Needwoods buſhy ſide,
                        There riſeth vp an eaſie clyming hill,
                        At whoſe faire foote the ſiluer Trent doth glide,
                        With a deep murmure permanent and ſtill,
                        With liberall ſtor
                              •
                            of many Brooks ſupplide,
                        Th'
                              •
                           n
                              •
                           atiate Meades continually doe fill,
                        Vpon whoſe ſtreame, a bridge of wondrous ſtrēgth
                        Doth ſtretch it ſelfe in forty arches length.
                     
                     
                        
                        14
                        Vppon this Mount the Kings pauillion fixt,
                        And in the towne, the foe intrench'd in ſight,
                        When now the flood is riſen ſo betwixt,
                        That yet a while prolong'd th'unturall fight,
                        With tributarie waters intermixt,
                        To ſtay the furie dooing all it might,
                        Things which preſage both good and ill there bee,
                        Which heauen fore-ſhewes, but mortals cannot ſee.
                     
                     
                        15
                        The heauen euen mourning o're our heads doth ſit,
                        As greeu'd to ſee the time ſo out of courſe,
                        Looking on them who neuer looke at it,
                        And in meere pittie melting with remorce,
                        Longer from teares that cannot ſtay a whit,
                        Whoſe confluence on euery lower ſourſe,
                        From the ſwolne fluxure of the clowdes doth ſhake
                        A ranke Impoſtume vpon euery lake.
                     
                     
                        16
                        O warlike Nation! hold thy conquering hand,
                        Euen ſenceleſſe things admoniſh thee to pawſe,
                        That Mother ſoyle on whom thou yet dooſt ſtand,
                        That would reſtraine thee by all naturall lawes.
                        Canſt thou (vnkinde) inuiolate that band,
                        When even the earth is angry with the cauſe?
                        Yet ſtay thy foote in miſchiefes vglie gate,
                        Ill comes too ſoone, repentance ſtill too late.
                     
                     
                        
                        17
                        And can the clowdes weepe ouer thy decay,
                        And not one drop fall from thy droughtie eyes?
                        See'ſt thou the ſnare, and wilt not ſhun the way,
                        Nor yet be warn'd by paſſed miſeries?
                        T'is yet but early in this fatall day;
                        Let late experience learne thee to be wiſe,
                        Miſchiefe foreſeene, may eaſly be preuented,
                        But hap'd, vnhelp'd, though nere enough lamented.
                     
                     
                        18
                        Cannot the Scot of your late ſlaughter boaſt?
                        And are you yet ſcarce healed of the ſore?
                        I'ſt not enough you haue alreadie loſt,
                        But your owne madneſſe needſly make it more?
                        Will you ſeeke ſafety in a forraine Coaſt?
                        Your wiues and children pittied you before;
                        But when your own blood your own ſwords imbrue,
                        Who pitties them which once did pittie you?
                     
                     
                        19
                        The neighbouring groues diſpoiled of their trees,
                        For boates, and timber to aſſay this flood,
                        Where men are laboring as the Summer bee,
                        Some hollowing truncks, ſom binding heaps of wood,
                        Some on their breaſts, ſome working on their knees,
                        To winne the bancke whereon the Barrons ſtood,
                        Which o're this current they by ſtrength muſt tew,
                        To ſhed that blood that many ages rew.
                     
                     
                        
                        20
                        Some ſharpen ſwords, ſome on their Murrians ſet
                        The Greaues, and pouldrons others riuet faſt,
                        The archers now their bearded arrowes whet,
                        Whilſt euery where the clamerous Drums are bra'ſt,
                        Some taking view where ſureſt ground to get,
                        And euery one advantage doth fore-caſt;
                        In ranks and fyles each plaine and meadow ſwarmes,
                        As though the land were clad in angry Armes.
                     
                     
                        21
                        The creſts and honours of the Engliſh name,
                        Againſt their owne oppoſed rudely ſtand,
                        As angry with th'atchieuements whence they came,
                        That to their vertues gaue the generous brand;
                        O you vnworthy of your ancient fame,
                        Againſt your ſelues to lift your conqu'ring hand!
                        Since forraine ſwords your height could not abate,
                        By your owne powre your ſelues to ruinate.
                     
                     
                        22
                        Vpon his ſurcoate valiant Neuell bore
                        A ſiluer ſaltoyre grac'd on martiall red;
                        A Ladies ſleeue hie-ſpirited Haſtings wore,
                        
                           Ferrer his Taberd with rich verry ſpred,
                        Wel knowne in many a warlike match before;
                        A Rauen ſate on Corbets warlike head,
                        Cou'ring his Helmet; Culpepper inrayld,
                        On maiden Armes, a bloodie bend engrayld,
                     
                     
                        
                        23
                        The noble Percy in this furious day,
                        With a bright Creſſant in his guide-home came,
                        In his faire Cornet Verdoon dooth diſplay
                        A Geuly fret, priz'd in this mortall game
                        That had beene taskt in many a doubtfull fray,
                        His launces pennons ſtained with the ſame;
                        The angry horſe chafde with the ſtubborne bit,
                        The ruinous earth with rage and horror ſmit.
                     
                     
                        24
                        I could the ſumme of Staffords arming ſhow,
                        What colours Courtney, Roſſe and Warren holde,
                        Each ſundry blazon I could let you know,
                        And all the glorious circumſtance haue tolde,
                        What all the Enſignes ſtanding in arow,
                        But wailing in a Muſe, (ah me) thou arte controlde,
                        When in remembrance of this horred deede,
                        My pen for inke euen drops of blood doth ſheede.
                     
                     
                        25
                        Th'imperiall ſtandard in this place is pitcht,
                        With all the hatchments of the Engliſh crowne,
                        Great Lancaster with all his power enricht,
                        Sets the ſame Leopards in his Colours downe;
                        O if with furie you be not bewitcht,
                        Haue but remembrance, on your ſelfe you frowne,
                        A little note, or difference is in all,
                        How can the ſame ſtand, when the ſame dooth fall?
                     
                     
                        
                        26
                        Behold the Eagles, Lyons, Talbots, Beares,
                        The badges of your famous anceſtries,
                        And ſhall they now by their inglorious heires,
                        Stand thus oppos'd againſt their families?
                        More honoured markes no Chriſtian nation weares,
                        Reliques vnworthie of their progenies;
                        Thoſe beaſts you beare, do in their kindes agree.
                        O that than beaſts more ſauage men ſhould bee!
                     
                     
                        27
                        But whilſt the king no courſe concluded yet,
                        In his directions variably doth houer,
                        See how misfortunes ſtill her time can fit,
                        Such as were ſent the Country to diſcouer;
                        As vp and downe, from place to place they flit,
                        Had found a foord to land their forces ouer:
                        Ill newes hath wings, and with the winde doth goe,
                        Comfort's a Cripple, and comes euer ſlow.
                     
                     
                        28
                        When Edward fearing Lancaſters ſupplies,
                        Prowd Richmond, Surry and great Penbrooke ſent,
                        On whoſe ſucceſſe his chiefeſt hope relies;
                        Vnder whoſe conduct halfe his Army went,
                        The neereſt way, conducted by theſpies;
                        And he himſelfe, and Edmond Earle of Kent,
                        Vpon the hill, in ſight of Burton lay,
                        Watching to take aduantage of the day.
                     
                     
                        
                        29
                        Stay, Surry ſtay, thou mai'ſt too ſoone be gone,
                        Pawſe till this rage be ſomewhat ouer paſt,
                        Why runn'ſt thou thus to thy deſtruction?
                        
                           Richmond and Penbrooke, whither doe you haſte?
                        You labour ſtill to bring more horror on;
                        Neuer ſeeke ſorrow, for it comes too faſt:
                        Why do you ſtriue to paſſe this fatall flood,
                        To fetch new wounds, and ſhed your natiue blood?
                     
                     
                        30
                        Great Lancaſter, ſheath vp thy angry ſword,
                        On Edwards armes whoſe edge thou ſhouldſt not whet,
                        Thy naturall kinſman, and thy ſoueraigne Lord;
                        Are you not one, both true Plantaginet?
                        
                        Call but to mind thy once-engaged word,
                        Canſt thou thy oath to Longſhankes thus forget?
                        Conſider well, before all other things
                        Our vowes be kept we make to Gods and Kings.
                     
                     
                        31
                        The windes are huſh'd no little breath doth blow,
                        Which ſeemes ſo ſtill as though it liſtning ſtood,
                        With trampling crouds the verie earth doth bow,
                        And through the ſmoke the ſunne appeares like blood;
                        What with the ſhout, and with the dreadfull ſhow,
                        The heirds and flockes runne bellowing to the wood.
                        When drums and trumpets giue the fearfull ſound,
                        As they would ſhake the clowds vnto the ground.
                     
                     
                        
                        32
                        The Earles then charging with their power of horſe,
                        Taking a ſignall when they ſhould beginne,
                        Being in view of the imperiall force,
                        Which at the time aſſay'd the bridge to winne;
                        That now the Barrons change th'intended courſe,
                        T'auoide the danger they were lately in;
                        Which on the ſuddaine had they not fore-caſt,
                        Of their blacke day this howre had beene the laſt.
                     
                     
                        33
                        When from the hill the Kings maine power comes downe,
                        Which had Aquarius to their valiant guide,
                        Braue Lancaſter and Herford from the towne
                        Now iſſue forth vpon the other ſide,
                        Peere againſt peere, the crowne againſt the crowne,
                        The one aſſailes, the other munifide,
                        Englands red croſſe vpon both ſides doth flie,
                        Saint George the king, S. George the Barrons crie.
                     
                     
                        34
                        Like as an exhalation hote and dry,
                        Amongſt the ayre-bred moiſtie vapors throwne,
                        Spetteth his lightning forth outragiouſly,
                        Rending the groſſe clowdes with the thunder-ſtone,
                        Whoſe fierie ſplinters through the thin ayre flie,
                        That with the terror heauen and earth doth grone;
                        With the like clamor and confuſed woe,
                        To the dread ſhocke theſe deſp'rate Armies goe.
                     
                     
                        
                        35
                        Now might you ſee the famous Engliſh Bowes
                        So fortunate in times we did ſubdue,
                        Shoote their ſharpe arrowes in the face of thoſe
                        which many a time victoriouſly them drew,
                        Shunning their aime, as troubled in the looſe;
                        The winged weapons mourning as they ſlew.
                        Cleaue to the ſtring, (now in potent and ſlacke)
                        As to the Archers they would faine turne backe.
                     
                     
                        36
                        Behold theremnant of Troyes auntient ſtocke,
                        Laying on blowes, as Smiths on Anuils ſtrike,
                        Grapling together in this fearefull ſhocke,
                        whereas the like incountreth with the like,
                        As firme and ruthleſſe as th'obdurate Rocke,
                        Deadly oppoſed at the puſh of pike;
                        Still as the wings, or battels brought together,
                        when Fortune yet giues vantage vnto neither.
                     
                     
                        37
                        From battred caskes with euery enuious blow,
                        The ſcattred plumes flie looſly heere and there,
                        which in the ayre dooth ſeeme as drifts of ſnow,
                        which euery light breath on his wings dooth beare,
                        As they had ſence and feeling of our woe;
                        And thus affrighted with the preſent feare,
                        Now backe, now forward ſuch ſtrange windings make,
                        As though vncertaine which way they ſhould take.
                     
                     
                        
                        38
                        Slaughter runnes wildely through th'afflicted hoſte
                        Whilſt yet the battaile ſtrongly dooth abide,
                        That in this ſtrange diſtemprature is loſt,
                        Where helliſh fury ſenſibly doth guide,
                        Neuer ſuffiſde, where tyrannizing moſt,
                        That now their woundes (with mouthes euen opend wide,)
                        Laſtly inforcde to call for preſent death,
                        That wants but tongues, your ſwords do give them breath.
                     
                     
                        39
                        Heere lies a heape halfe ſlaine, and halfly drownd,
                        Gaſping for breath among the watry ſegs,
                        And there a ſort falne in a deadly ſwownd,
                        Troade with the preſſe into the muddy dregs,
                        Other lie bleeding on the firmer ground,
                        Hurt in the bodies, maimde of armes and legs,
                        One kills a foe, his braine another cuts;
                        Ones feete intangled in anothers guts.
                     
                     
                        40
                        One his aſſayling enemie beguiles,
                        As from the bridge hee happily dooth fall,
                        Cruſht with his weight vpon the forced piles,
                        Some in their gore vpon the pauement ſpraule,
                        That euery place ſo loathſomely defiles,
                        The careaſſes lie heaped like a wall,
                        Such hideous ſhreekes yet ſtil the ſouldiers breathe,
                        As though the ſpirits had howled from beneathe.
                     
                     
                        
                        41
                        The faction ſtill defying Edwards might,
                        
                           Edmond of Woodstocke with the men of Kent,
                        
                        Charging afreſh, reuiues the doubtfull fight,
                        Vpon the Barrons languiſhing and ſpent,
                        New preparation for a tragicke fight;
                        when they againe ſupplies immediate ſent
                        A ſecond battaile prowdly to beginne;
                        The nobleſt ſpirits but newly entred in.
                     
                     
                        42
                        As at Troyes ſacke, faire Thetis godlike ſunne,
                        Couragious Talbot with his ſhield him bare,
                        
                           Clifford and Mowbray brauely following on,
                        
                           Awdley and Gifford thronging for a ſhare;
                        Theſe ſeconding, the former being gone,
                        
                           Elmſbridge and Baldſmere in the thickeſt are,
                        Pell mell together flie this furious powre,
                        when they perceiue that death will all deuoure.
                     
                     
                        43
                        
                           Mountfort and Teis, your woorth I faine would ſpeake,
                        But that your valu
                              •
                           e dooth ſo ill deſerue,
                        And Denuile heere from thee perforce muſt breake,
                        And from thy praiſes Willington muſt ſwerue,
                        Your deeds permit not I your wrongs ſhould wreake,
                        Prowd Damory, heere muſt thy glorie ſtarue:
                        Concealing many moſt deſeruing blame,
                        Becauſe your actions quench my ſacred flame.
                     
                     
                        
                        44
                        O had you faſhion'd your great deedes by them,
                        Who ſommond Acon with an Engliſh drumme,
                        Or marcht before that faire Ieruſalem,
                        With the vnited powres of Chriſtendome,
                        Eternall then had beene your Diadem,
                        And with Chriſts warriors ſlept about his toombe:
                        Then ages had immortalizde your name,
                        Where now my ſong can be but of your ſhame.
                     
                     
                        45
                        O age inglorious, armes vntimely borne,
                        When now this prooued and victorious ſhield
                        Muſt in this ciuill maſſacre be torne,
                        Which bare the markes of many a bloody field;
                        And laſtly, in their ouerthrowne forlorne,
                        When now to flight the Barrons baſely yeeld,
                        That ſince that time the ſtones for very dreed,
                        Againſt foule ſtorms ſmal drops of moiſture ſheed.
                     
                     
                        46
                        When now thoſe wretched and vnſtedfaſt frends,
                        Which all this while ſtoode doubtfully to pawſe,
                        When they perceiue what deſteny intends,
                        And his ſucceſſe dooth iuſtifie his cauſe,
                        Their faintneſſe now more comfort apprehends,
                        For victory both feare and friendſhip drawes,
                        T'an open ſmile, conuert a couered frowne,
                        All lend their hands to hew the conquered downe.
                     
                     
                        
                        47
                        That part of power th' emperiall ſeemde to lacke,
                        whilſt yet the aduerſe bare an vpright face,
                        when now conſtraind to giue a recreant backe,
                        Quickely returnes to proſecute the chaſe,
                        where now the Barrons wholy goe to wracke,
                        In the iuſt trial of ſo neere a caſe;
                        Inforede to prooue the fortune of the coaſt,
                        When they perceine the glorious goale is loſt.
                     
                     
                        48
                        And to the fortunes of the conqu'ring King,
                        Which well confirmde his long and tendred hope,
                        His faire ſucceſſe ſtill more incouraging,
                        which now had gote ſo large and ample ſcope,
                        The Earle of Carlell happily dooth bring
                        His light-armde bands the valiant Northerne troope,
                        Armed too lately, and with too much ſpeed,
                        To doe moſt harme, euen when we leaſt had need.
                     
                     
                        49
                        When now the Barrons making out their way,
                        Through partes for ſafety, and aduantage knowne,
                        Keeping their force ſtill bodied as they may,
                        Into the depth of this misfortune throwne;
                        And in purſuite, deuiſing day by day
                        T' offend th' aſſailant, and defend their owne,
                        In their laſt hope the vtmoſt to endure,
                        To deferre th' effect, although the end were ſure.
                     
                     
                        
                        50
                        And whilſt their fortune ſuting ſadly thus,
                        To Burrough-bridge conducted by their fate,
                        Bridges to Barrons euer ominous,
                        And to this place their fall preordinate,
                        That miniſtring ſuch cauſe of griefe to vs,
                        By the remembrance of their paſſed ſtate;
                        The very ſoile by deepe impreſſion yit,
                        Euen to this day doth ſtill remember it.
                     
                     
                        51
                        New courage now, new fights, new battells rangde,
                        New breath (but what might make deſtruction new)
                        They change the ground, but yet their fate vnchangde,
                        Which too directly doth their courſe purſue,
                        Nor from their former miſery eſtrangde,
                        Their ſtrength decayes, their dangers daily grew,
                        To ſhorten that which whilſt it did depend,
                        Gaue a long breathing to a fearefull end.
                     
                     
                        52
                        Like to a heird of weary heartleſſe deere,
                        whom hote-ſporrde huntſmen ſeriouſly doe chaſe,
                        In brakes and buſhes falling heere and there,
                        Proouing each couert, euery ſecret place,
                        Yet by the hounds recouered euery where,
                        with eager yearning in the ſented trace;
                        Hem'd on each ſide with hornes rechating blaſt,
                        Headlong themſelues into the toyles doe caſt.
                     
                     
                        
                        53
                        Enſigne beards enſign, ſword genſt ſword doth ſhake,
                        Wing againſt wing, and ranke doth ranke oppoſe,
                        In, on each other furiouſly they brake,
                        And death in earneſt to his bus'neſſe goes,
                        A generall hauocke as diſpoſde to make,
                        And with deſtruction dooth them all incloſe,
                        Dealing it ſelfe impartially to all,
                        Friend by his friend, and foe by foe doth fall.
                     
                     
                        54
                        This parte of life which yet they did reſpire,
                        In ſpite of Fortune, as they ſtood preparde,
                        With courage chargde, with comelineſſe retire,
                        Make good their ground, & then relieue their guarde,
                        Withſtand the entrer, then purſue the flier,
                        New forme their battell, ſhifting euery warde,
                        As your hie courage; but were your quarrell good,
                        O noble ſpirits, how deare had bin your blood?
                     
                     
                        55
                        The Northerne bands th' ambitious Herckley led
                        On the weake Barrons mangled ſo before,
                        That now towards Burrough make a puiſſant head,
                        Incouraging th' emperiall power the more;
                        O day ſo fatall, and ſo full of dread,
                        When ere ſhall time thy ruinous waſte reſtore,
                        Which to amend although thou ſhalt perſeuer,
                        Thou ſtill maiſt promiſe, but performe it neuer.
                     
                     
                        
                        56
                        Pale death beyond all wonted bounds doth ſwell,
                        Caruing prowd fleſh in cantells now at large,
                        As leaues in Autumne, ſo the bodies fell
                        Vnder rough ſteele at euery boyſtrous charge,
                        O what ſad pen can the deſtruction tell,
                        Where ſcalps lay beaten as the battred targe;
                        And euery one he claimeth as his right,
                        That not prouides t' eſcape away by flight.
                     
                     
                        57
                        Thoſe enſignes erſt, that in the glittring field
                        With their curld foreheads threat th' ambitious foe,
                        Like wetherd foule the drowping pinions yeeld,
                        Stouping their prowde heads to the duſt below,
                        There ſits a helmet, and there lies a ſhield,
                        O ill did fate theſe noble Armes beſtow,
                        Which as a quarry on the ſoilde earth lay,
                        Seizde on by conqueſt as a glorious pray.
                     
                     
                        58
                        Heere noble Bohune that braue, iſſued peere,
                        
                           Herford ſo hie in euery gracious heart,
                        Vnto his country ſo receiude, and deere,
                        Wounded by treaſon in the lower part.
                        (As o're the bridge his men returning were)
                        Through thoſe ill-ioynd planckes by an enuious dart:
                        But Lancaster, whoſe lot not yet to die,
                        Taken, reſeru'd to greater infamie.
                     
                     
                        
                        59
                        O ſubiect for ſome ſadder Muſe to ſing,
                        Of fiue great Earledomes happily poſſeſt,
                        Of the direct line of the Engliſh king,
                        with fauours friends, and earthly honours bleſt,
                        If ſo that all theſe happineſſe could bring,
                        Or could endow aſſurednes of reſt;
                        But what eſtate ſtands free from fortunes powre?
                        The Fates haue guidance of our time and howre.
                     
                     
                        60
                        Some few themſelues in ſanctuaries hide,
                        In mercie of that priuiledged place,
                        Yet are their bodies ſo vnſanctifide,
                        As ſcarce their ſoules can euer hope for grace;
                        Whereas they ſtill in want and feare abide,
                        A poore dead life this draweth out a ſpace,
                        Hate ſtands without, and horror ſits within,
                        Prolonging ſhame, but pard'ning not their ſinne.
                     
                     
                        61
                        Here is not death contented with the dead,
                        As though of ſome thing careleſly denide,
                        Till which might firmely be accompliſhed
                        His vtmoſt fully were not ſpecifide,
                        That all exactly might be perfected
                        A further torment vengeanec dooth prouide,
                        That dead men ſhould in miſery remaine,
                        To make the liuing die with greater paine.
                     
                     
                        
                        62
                        You ſoueraine Citties of th' afflicted Ile,
                        In Cipreſſe wreathes, and widowed attire,
                        Prepare yee now to build the funerall pile;
                        Lay your pale hands vnto this lateſt fire,
                        All mirth and comfort from your ſtreetes exile,
                        Till you be purgde of this infectious ite,
                        The nobleſt blood yet liuing to be ſhed,
                        That euer dropt from your rebellious dead.
                     
                     
                        63
                        When this braue Lord great Lancaster, who late
                        This pu
                              •
                           ſſant force had now thus long retainde,
                        As the firſt Agent in this ſtrange debate
                        At fatall Pomfret for thoſe facts arraignde;
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            whom of all things they articulate,
                        To whom theſe factions chiefly appertainde:
                        Whoſe proofes apparant ſo directly ſped,
                        As from his body reft a reuerent head.
                     
                     
                        64
                        Yet Lancaster, it is not thy deere breath
                        Can ranſome backe the ſafety of the Crowne,
                        Nor make a league of ſo great powre with death,
                        To warrant what is rightfully our owne,
                        But they muſt pay the forfait of their faith,
                        Which ſondly broke with their ambition,
                        when now reuenge vnto the vtmoſt rackt,
                        The Agents iuſtly ſuffer with the act.
                     
                     
                        
                        65
                        Euen in that place where he had lately led,
                        As this darke path vnto the reſt to ſhow,
                        It was not long ere many followed,
                        In the ſame ſteps that he before did goe;
                        
                           London, thy freedom is prohibited,
                        The firſt in place (O would the firſt in woe)
                        Others in blood did not excell thee farre,
                        That now deuoure the remnant of this warre.
                     
                     
                        66
                        O parents ruthfull, and hart-renting ſight,
                        To ſee that ſonne thy tender boſome fed,
                        A mothers ioy, a fathers ſole delight,
                        That with much coſt, yet with more care was bred;
                        A ſpectacle euen able to affright
                        Th' moſt ſenceleſſe thing, and terrifie the dead;
                        His blood ſo deere vpon the cold earth powr'd,
                        His quarter'd coarſe of birds and beaſts deuour'd.
                     
                     
                        67
                        But t'is not you that heere complaine alone,
                        Or to your ſelues this fearefull portion ſhare,
                        Heere's choice, and ſtrange variety of moane,
                        Poore childrens teares with widdowes mixed are;
                        Many a friends ſigh, many a maidens grone,
                        So innocent, ſo ſimply, pure, and rare;
                        As though euen Nature that long ſilent kept,
                        Burſt out in plaints, and bitterly had wept.
                     
                     
                        
                        68
                        O wretched age, had not theſe things beene done,
                        I had not now in theſe more calmer times
                        Into the ſearch of former troubles runne;
                        Nor had my virgine impolluted rimes,
                        Altred the courſe wherein they firſt begunne,
                        To ſing theſe bloodie and vnnaturall crimes,
                        My layes had ſtill beene to Ideas bowre,
                        Of my deere Ankor, or her loued Stoure.
                        
                     
                     
                        69
                        Or for our ſubiect your faire worth to chuſe,
                        Your birth, your vertue, and your hie reſpects,
                        That gently daine to patronize our Muſe,
                        Who our free ſoule ingeniouſly elects
                        To publiſh your deſerts, and all your dues
                        Maugre the Momiſts, and Satyricke ſects,
                        Whilſt my great verſe eternally is ſung,
                        You ſtill may liue with me in ſpight of wrong.
                     
                     
                        70
                        But greater things reſerued are in ſtore,
                        Vnto this taske my armed Muſe to keepe,
                        Still offering me occaſion as before,
                        Matter whereof my tragicke verſe may weepe;
                        And as a veſſell being neere the ſhore,
                        By aduerſe windes enforced to the deepe,
                        Am driuen backe from whence I came of late,
                        Vnto the bus'nes of a troubled ſtate.
                     
                     The end of the ſecond Canto.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        ❧ The third Booke of the Barrons warres.
                     
                        The Argument.
                        
                           By aſleepie potion that the Queene ordaines,
                           Lord Mortimen eſcapes out of the Tower,
                           And by falſe ſlights, and many ſubtile traines,
                           Shee gets to France to raiſe aforraigne power;
                           The French King leaues his ſiſter; neede conſtraines
                           The Queene to Henault in a happie hower:
                           
                              Edward her ſonne to Philip is affide,
                           And for inuaſion preſently prouide.
                        
                     
                     
                        1
                        SCarce had theſe paſſed miſeries their ends,
                        When other troubles inſtantly begunne,
                        As (ſtill) new matter miſchiefe apprehends,
                        By things that inconſid'rately were done;
                        And further yet this inſolence extends,
                        Whilſt all not yeelded that the ſword had wonne;
                        For ſome there were that ſecretly did lie,
                        That to this bus'nes had a watchfull eye.
                     
                     
                        
                        2
                        Whenas the King (whilſt things thus fairely went)
                        Who by this happy victory grew ſtrong,
                        Sommons at Yorke a preſent Parlement,
                        To plant his right, and helpe the Spenſers wrong,
                        By which he thinkes t'eſtabliſh his intent,
                        Whence (more & more) his Minions greatnes ſprong,
                        Whoſe counſells ſtill in all proceedings croſſde
                        Th'inraged Queene, whom all misfortunes toſſde.
                     
                     
                        3
                        When now the eldſt, a man extreamely hated,
                        Whom yet the King not aptly could preferre,
                        The edge of their ſharpe inſolence abated,
                        This Parlement makes Earle of Winchester,
                        
                        Where Herckley Earle of Carlell is created,
                        And Baldocke likewiſe is made Chancellor,
                        On whom the king had for his purpoſe wrought,
                        A man as ſubtile, ſo corrupt, and nought.
                     
                     
                        4
                        When now miſhaps that ſeldome come alone,
                        Thicke in the necks of one an other fell,
                        The Scot pretends a new inuaſion,
                        And France doth thence our vſe-full powre expell,
                        Treaſons ſuſpected to attend his throne,
                        The grieued Commons euery day rebell,
                        Miſchiefe on miſchiefe, curſe doth follow curſe,
                        One ill ſcarce paſt, when after comes a worſe.
                     
                     
                        
                        5
                        For Mortimer this winde yet fitly blew,
                        Troubling their eyes which elſe perhaps might ſee,
                        Whilſt the wiſe Queene, who all aduantage knew,
                        Is cloſly plotting his deliuery,
                        (Which now ſhe dooth with all her powres purſue)
                        Aptly continu'd by her deepe policie,
                        Againſt opinion, and the courſe of might,
                        To worke her will, euen through the jawes of ſpite.
                     
                     
                        6
                        A ſleepy drinke ſhe ſecretly hath made,
                        Whoſe operation had ſuch wondrous powre,
                        As with cold numneſſe could the ſenſe inuade,
                        And mortifie the patient by an houre,
                        The lifeleſſe coarſe in ſuch a ſlumber laide,
                        As though pale death did wholy it deuoure:
                        Nor for two dayes take benefite of eyes,
                        By all meanes Arte or Phyſicke could deuiſe.
                     
                     
                        7
                        For which ſhe Plantane and colde Lettice had,
                        The water Lilly from the marriſh ground,
                        with the wanne Poppy, and the Night-ſhade ſad,
                        And the ſhort moſſe that on the trees is found,
                        The poyſning Henbane, and the Mandrake drad,
                        With Cypreſſe flowers that with the reſt are pownd;
                        The braine of Cranes like purpoſely ſhe takes,
                        Mixt with the blood of Dormiſe, and of Snakes.
                     
                     
                        
                        8
                        Thus ſits the great Enchauntreſſe in her Cell,
                        Strongly engi
                              •
                           t with ceremonious charmes,
                        Her cleanſed body ſenſde with halowing ſmell,
                        With veſtall fire her potent liquor warmes,
                        Hauing full heate, vnto her buſnes fell,
                        When her with Magicke inſtruments ſhe armes:
                        And from the herbs the powrefull verdure wrong,
                        To make the medcine forcible and ſtrong.
                     
                     
                        9
                        The ſundry doubts that incident ariſe,
                        Might be ſuppoſde her trembling hand to ſtay,
                        If ſhe conſidred of the enterpriſe,
                        To thinke what perill in th'attempting lay,
                        The ſecret lurking of deceitfull ſpies,
                        That on her ſteps continually do pray:
                        But when they leaue off vertue to eſteeme,
                        Thoſe greatly erre which take them as they ſeeme.
                     
                     
                        10
                        Their plighted faith for liberty they leaue,
                        Their loue is colde, their luſt hote, hote their hate,
                        With ſmiles and teares they ſerpent-like deceaue,
                        In their deſires they be inſatiate,
                        There's no reſtraint their purpoſe can bereaue,
                        Their will no bound, nor their reuenge no date,
                        All feare exempt where they at ruine aime,
                        Couering their ſinne with their diſcouered ſhame.
                     
                     
                        
                        11
                        The elder of the Mortimers this ſpace,
                        (That many ſundry miſeries had paſt,)
                        So long reſtrainde within that healthleſſe place,
                        Redeemde by death, yet happily at laſt
                        That much auailes the other in this caſe,
                        And from this Lord that impoſition caſt:
                        Which the deare ſafety of his vncles breath
                        within the tower ſo ſtrictly limiteth.
                     
                     
                        12
                        Put there was more did on his death depend,
                        Than heauen was pleaſde the fooliſh worlde ſhoulde know,
                        And why the Fates thus haſted on his end,
                        Thereby intending greater things to ſhow;
                        Braue Lord, in vaine thy breath thou didſt not ſpend,
                        From thy corruption further matters grow,
                        And ſome beginning fruitfully to ſpring,
                        New formes of feare vpon the time to bring.
                     
                     
                        13
                        All things preparde in readineſſe, and fit,
                        The Queene attends her potions powre to proue,
                        Their ſtedfaſt friends, their beſt aſſiſting it,
                        Their ſeruan
                              •
                           s ſeale their ſecrets vp in loue;
                        And he expreſſe his valure and his wit,
                        Whome of the reſt it chiefly doth behoue,
                        Places reſolu'd where guide and horſes lay,
                        And where the ſhip him ſafely to conuay.
                     
                     
                        
                        14
                        As his large bounties liberally were heap't
                        To all deſeruing, or to thoſe that heede,
                        His ſolemne birth-dayes feſtiuall was kept
                        At his free charge, all in the Tower to feede,
                        which may ſuſpition cleerely intercept,
                        A ſtrong aſſiſtant in ſo great a neede,
                        VVhen midd'ſt their cates, their furious thirſt to quench,
                        Mixing their wine with this approoued drench.
                     
                     
                        15
                        Which ſoone each ſence, and eu'ry power doth ſeize,
                        when he that knew the ſtrength of euery warde,
                        And to the purpoſe ſorting all his keyes,
                        His corded ladders readily preparde;
                        And lurking foorth by the moſt ſecret wayes
                        Not now to learne his Compaſſe by the Carde,
                        To winne the walles couragiouſly doth goe,
                        which looke as ſcorning to be maiſtied ſo.
                     
                     
                        16
                        They ſoundly ſleepe whilſt his quicke ſpirites awake,
                        Oppoſde to perill, and the ſtern'ſt extreames,
                        
                           Alcydes labours new to vndertake,
                        Of walls, of gates, of watches, and of ſtreames,
                        Through which his paſſage he is now to make,
                        And let them tell king Edward of their dreames:
                        For ere they roſe out of the brainſicke fraunce,
                        He hopes to tell this noble jeaſt in Fraunce.
                     
                     
                        
                        17
                        The ſullen night hath her blacke curtaines ſpred,
                        Lowring the day had tarried vp ſo long,
                        Whoſe faire eyes cloſing ſoftly ſteales to bed,
                        When all the heauens with duskie clowdes are hung,
                        And Cynthia now pluckes in her horned head,
                        And to the Weſt incontinently flung;
                        As ſhe had long'd to certifie the ſunne,
                        What in his abſence in her Court was done.
                     
                     
                        18
                        The glimmering lights, like Sentinels in warre,
                        Behind the clowdes ſtand craftily to pry,
                        And through falſe loope-holes looking from afarre,
                        To ſee him skirmiſh with his deſteny;
                        Not any fix'd, nor any wandring ſtarre,
                        As they had held a counſell in the skie;
                        And had before concluded with the night,
                        It ſhould not looke for any cheerefull ſight.
                     
                     
                        19
                        In deadly ſilence all the ſhores are huſh'd,
                        Onely the Skreech-howle ſounds to the aſſault,
                        And Iſis with a troubled murmure ruſh'd,
                        As if conſenting, and would hide the fault;
                        And as his foote the ſand or grauell cruſh'd,
                        A little whiſp'ring mou'd within the vault,
                        Made by the treading ſoftly as he went,
                        Which ſeem'd to ſay, it furthred his intent.
                     
                     
                        
                        20
                        This wondrous Queene whom care yet reſtleſſe kept,
                        Now for his ſpeede to heauen holds vp her hands,
                        A thouſand ſtrange thoughts in her boſome heap't,
                        As in her cloſet liſtning ſtill ſhe ſtands,
                        That many a ſigh ſpent, many a warme teare wept,
                        And though diuided, as in ſundry ſtrands,
                        Moſt abſent, preſent in deſires they bee,
                        Our mindes diſcerne where eyes do ceaſe to ſee.
                     
                     
                        21
                        The ſmall clowdes iſſuing from his lips ſhe ſaith,
                        Labouring ſo faſt, as he the ladder clame,
                        Should purge the ayre of peſtilence and death;
                        And as ſometime that filch'd Promethian flame,
                        Euen ſo the power and vertue of his breath,
                        New creatures in the elements ſhould frame;
                        And to what part of heauen it happ'd to ſtray,
                        There ſhould path out another milkie way.
                     
                     
                        22
                        Attainde the top, halfe ſpent a while to blow,
                        Now round about he caſts his longing eyes,
                        The gentle earth ſalutes him from below,
                        And couered with the comfortable skies,
                        Viewing the way that he is now to goe,
                        Cheer'd with the beames of Iſabels faire eyes,
                        Downe from the turret deſperately doth ſlide,
                        Night be ſucceſſefull, fortune be his guide.
                     
                     
                        
                        23
                        With his deſcent, her eye ſo ſtill deſcends,
                        As feare had fix'd it to fore-warne his fall,
                        On whom her hope and fortune now depends,
                        When ſuddaine feare her ſences doth appall;
                        For preſent aide her god-like hand extends,
                        Forgets herſelfe, and ſpeedie aide doth call;
                        Silent againe, if ought but good ſhould hap,
                        She begs of heauen his graue may be her lap.
                     
                     
                        24
                        Now ſhe intreates the darke diſtempred ayre,
                        Then by ſtrong Magicks ſhe coniures the wind,
                        Then ſhe inuokes the gloomie night by prayre,
                        Then with her ſpells the mortall ſence to bind;
                        And fearing much leſt theſe yet fruſtrate are,
                        Now by the burning tapers ſhe diuin'd,
                        Intreating Thames to giue a friendly paſſe,
                        The deereſt fraught ere on her boſome was.
                     
                     
                        25
                        The ruſhing murmure ſtills her like a ſong,
                        But yet in feare the ſtreame ſhould fall in loue,
                        Suſpects the drops that on his treſſes hung,
                        And that the billowes for his beautie ſtroue,
                        To this faire body that ſo cloſely clong,
                        Which when in ſwimming with his breaſt he droue;
                        Palled with griefe ſhe turnes away her face,
                        Iealous that he the waters ſhould embrace.
                     
                     
                        
                        26
                        This angry Lyon hauing ſlipp'd his chaine,
                        As in a feuer makes King Edward quake,
                        Which knew (too well) ere he was caught againe,
                        Deere was the blood muſt ſerue his thirſt to ſtake,
                        Many the labours had beene ſpent in vaine,
                        And he inforc'd a longer courſe to take,
                        Saw further vengeance hanging in the wind,
                        That knew the pride and greatnes of his mind.
                     
                     
                        27
                        The faction working in this lingring jarr
                              •
                           ,
                        How for the Scot free paſſage might be made,
                        To lay the ground of a ſuccesfull warre,
                        That hope might breede freſh courage to inuade;
                        And whilſt our ſafetie ſtandeth out ſo farre,
                        More dangerous proiects eu'ry where are layd;
                        That ſome in hand home troubles to enure,
                        Others in France do forraigne broiles procure.
                     
                     
                        28
                        By theſe diſcentions that were lately ſowne,
                        Inciting Charles to open Armes againe,
                        Who ſeazing Guyne, pretended as his owne,
                        That Edward ſhould vnlawfully detaine,
                        Proceeds to make a further title knowne.
                        T'our Lands in Pontieu, and in Aquitaine,
                        
                        When wanted homage hath deſolu'd the truce,
                        Waking his wrongs by Iſabels abuſe.
                     
                     
                        
                        29
                        This plot concluded that was long in hand,
                        (Which to this iſſue proſperouſly had thriu'd)
                        The Baſe whereon a mightie frame muſt ſtand,
                        With mickle Art, yet with more fcare cont
                              •
                           iu'd;
                        So ſtrongly builded by this factious band,
                        As from the ſame their ſafetie is deriu'd,
                        Till their full-rooted and inueterate hate,
                        Getting more ſtrength might deepely penetrate.
                     
                     
                        30
                        When choiſe of ſuch to ſway this French affaire,
                        Which as a ſharpeleſſe and vnweldie maſſe,
                        Might well imploy the ſtrength of all their care;
                        So hard and perlous to be brought to paſſe,
                        Which it behooues them quickly to prepare,
                        That being now ſo ſetled as it was,
                        Craues a graue ſpirit, whoſe eminence and powre,
                        Might like a ſtiffe gale checke this threatning ſhowre.
                     
                     
                        31
                        This muſt a Seſſion ſeriouſly debate,
                        That depth of iudgement crau'd to be diſcuſt,
                        That ſo concernes the ſafetie of the ſtate,
                        And in a caſe ſo plauſible and iuſt,
                        As might haue quench'd all ſparckes of former hate,
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            
                           
                              〈…〉
                           ight be thought euen pollicie might truſt,
                        Could enuy maſter her diſtracted will,
                        Or apprehend ſacietie in ill.
                     
                     
                        
                        32
                        
                           Tarleton, whoſe tongue mens eares in chaines could tie,
                        And as a fearefull thunder-bolt could pierce,
                        In which there more authoritie did lie,
                        Then in the Sybils ſage propheticke verſe,
                        Whoſe ſentence was ſo abſolute and hie,
                        As had the power a iudgement to reuerſe;
                        On the Queenes part with all his might doth ſtand,
                        To lay this charge on her well-guiding hand.
                     
                     
                        33
                        What helpes her preſence to the cauſe might bring,
                        Being a wife, a ſiſter, and a mother,
                        And in ſo great and pertinent a thing,
                        To right her lonne, her husband, and her brother,
                        Her gratious helpe to all diſtributing,
                        To take of her what they ſhould holde of other;
                        Which colour ſerues t'effect in theſe extreames,
                        That which (God knowes) King Edward neuer dreames.
                     
                     
                        34
                        
                           Torleten, is this thy ſpirituall pretence?
                        Would God thy thoughts were more ſpirituall,
                        Or leſſe perſwaſiue were thy eloquence.
                        But O! thy actions are too temporall;
                        Opinion lends too great preheminence,
                        Thy reaſons ſubtile, and ſophiſticall;
                        Would all were true thy ſuppoſition ſaith,
                        Thy arguments leſſe force, or thou more faith.
                     
                     
                        
                        35
                        Theſe ſuddaine broiles that were begun of late,
                        Still kept in motion by their ſecret ſleight,
                        By falſe ſuggeſtions ſo interminate;
                        That as a ballaſt of ſome ſolide weight,
                        Betwixt theſe aduerſe currents of debate,
                        Kept their proceeding in a courſe ſo ſtreight,
                        As lends the Queene an ampler colour ſtill,
                        By generall meanes to worke a generall ill.
                     
                     
                        36
                        She which thus fitly found both wind and tyde,
                        And ſees her leiſure ſerue, the howre ſo neare,
                        All her endeuours mutually apply'd,
                        Whilſt for her purpoſe things ſo fitly were,
                        And thus aduantage quickly had eſpy'd,
                        As one whoſe fortunes taught the worſt to feare,
                        Seeing the times ſo variouſly inclinde,
                        And eu'ry toy ſoone altring Edwards minde.
                     
                     
                        37
                        Her followers ſuch as friendleſſe elſe had ſtood,
                        Suncke, and deiected by the Spenſers pride,
                        Who bare the brands of treaſon in their blood,
                        Which but with blood there was no way to hide;
                        Whoſe meane was weake, whoſe will was but too good,
                        Which to effect did but the howre abide,
                        And knew all meanes that miſchiefe could inuent,
                        That any way might further her intent.
                     
                     
                        
                        38
                        Whilſt Mortimer which now ſo long hath laine
                        From our iuſt courſe, by fortune lately croſſt,
                        In Fraunce now ſtrugling how he might regaine
                        That which before he had in England loſt,
                        All preſent meanes doth gladly entertaine,
                        No jote diſmaide in all theſe tempeſts toſſt:
                        Nor his great minde can thus be ouerthrowne,
                        All men his friends, all countries are his owne.
                     
                     
                        39
                        And Muſe, tranſported by thy former zeale,
                        Led in our progreſſe where his fortune lies,
                        To thy faire ayde I ſeriouſly appeale,
                        To ſing this great man his magnanimous guiſe,
                        The auntient Heroes vnto me reueale,
                        whoſe worths may raiſe our nobler faculties,
                        That in my verſe, tranſparent, nete, and cleere,
                        His character more liuely may appeere.
                     
                     
                        40
                        Such one he was, of him we boldely ſay,
                        In whoſe rich ſoule all ſoueraigne powres did ſute,
                        In whome in peace th'elements all lay
                        So mixt, as none could ſoueraignty impute;
                        As all did gouerne, yet all did obey,
                        His liuely temper was ſo abſolute,
                        That t'ſeemde when heauen his modell firſt began,
                        In him it ſhewd perfection in a man.
                     
                     
                        
                        41
                        So throughly ſeaſond, and ſo rightly ſet,
                        As in the leuell of cleere iudgements eye,
                        Time neuer tuch't him with deforming fret,
                        Nor had the powre to wrap him once awry,
                        Whoſe ſtedfaſt courſe no croſſe could euer let,
                        His eleuation was ſo heauenly hie,
                        Thoſe giddy tempeſts that the baſe world proue,
                        State vnder where he Planet like did moue.
                     
                     
                        42
                        Which this faire Queene that had a knowing ſpirite,
                        And ſawe the beauties reſting in his minde,
                        One that had throughly lookt into his merit,
                        Aboue the value of the vulgar kinde,
                        That rightly did his Grandſires deedes inherit,
                        When now the ages in their courſe declinde,
                        when the old world, being weake began to bow,
                        To th'effeminate baſenes that it reſts at now.
                     
                     
                        43
                        What weighs he wealth, or what his Wigmore left?
                        Let needleſſe heapes, things momentary ſtand,
                        He counts not his that can be rapde by theft,
                        Man is the ſole Lord both of ſea and land,
                        And ſtill is rich of theſe that is not reft,
                        Who of all creatures hath an vpright hand;
                        And by the ſtarres is onely taught to know,
                        That as they progreſſe heauen, he earth ſhould do.
                     
                     
                        
                        44
                        Wherefore wiſe Nature forcde this face of ground,
                        And through the deeps ſhewd him the ſecret way,
                        That in the flouds her iudgements might be found,
                        Where ſhe for ſafety did her treaſure lay;
                        Whoſe ſtore, that he might abſolutely ſound,
                        Shee gaue him courage for her onely kay,
                        That he alone of all her creatures free,
                        Her glory, and her wondrous works ſhould ſee.
                     
                     
                        45
                        Let wretched worldlings ſweate for mud and earth,
                        whoſe groueling boſomes licke the recreant ſtones,
                        And peſants carke for plenty, and for dearth,
                        Fame neuer lookes vpon theſe proſtrate drones,
                        Man is allotted at his princely birth,
                        To manage Empires, and to ſit on thrones,
                        Frighting coy Fortune when ſhe ſternſt appeares,
                        Which elſe ſcornes ſighes, and jeeteth at our teares.
                     
                     
                        46
                        When now Report with her fleet murmuring wing,
                        Tucht the ſtill entrance of his liſtning eare,
                        A fleete preparde this royall Queene to bring,
                        And her arriuall ſtill awaited neare,
                        When euery ſound a note of loue doth ſing,
                        The ioyfull thoughts that in his boſome were:
                        The ſoule in doubt to make her function leſſe,
                        Denies the vtterance fully to expreſſe.
                     
                     
                        
                        47
                        Quoth he, Slide billowes gently for her ſake,
                        Whoſe ſight can make your aged Nereus yong,
                        For her faire paſſage euen allies make,
                        On the ſleeke waters waſt her ſailes along;
                        And whilſt ſhe glides vpon the pleaſant lake,
                        Let the ſweete Syrens rocke her with a Song:
                        Though not Loues mother that dooth paſſe this way,
                        Fairer than ſhe thats borne vpon the ſea.
                     
                     
                        48
                        You Sea-bred creatures, gaze vpon her eie,
                        And neuer after with your kinde make warre;
                        O ſteale the accents from her lip that flie,
                        Which like the muſickes of the Angels are,
                        And them vnto your amorous thoughts apply,
                        Comparde with which, Aryons did but jarre:
                        Wrap them in aire, and when blacke tempeſts rage;
                        Vſe them as charmes the rough ſeas to aſſwage.
                     
                     
                        49
                        France, ſend to fetch her with full ſholes of oares,
                        With which her fleete may euery way be plide,
                        And being landed on thy happie ſhoares,
                        As the vaſt nauie dooth at anckor ride;
                        For her departure when the wilde ſea roares,
                        Ship mount to heauen, there brightly ſtellifide:
                        Next Iaſons Argo on the burniſht throne,
                        Aſſume thee there a conſtellation.
                     
                     
                        
                        50
                        Her perſon hence conuaide with that delight,
                        Which beſt the languiſh of her iournies eaſde,
                        That to her pleaſure dooth it ſelfe inuite,
                        Whereon her mind, and ſubtil fancie ſeaſde,
                        And that (moſt deare) her liking might excite,
                        Which then this Lorde, naught more her preſence pleaſd,
                        where, when with ſtate ſhe firſt her time could take,
                        Thus the faire Queene her Mortimer beſpake.
                     
                     
                        51
                        O Mortimer, great Mortimer, quoth ſhee,
                        What angry power did firſt this meane deuiſe,
                        To ſeperate Queene Iſabell and thee,
                        whome loues eternall vnion ſtrongly ties;
                        But if ſuppoſde this fault beganne by mee,
                        For a iuſt pennance to my longing eyes:
                        (Though guiltleſſe they) this puniſhment aſſignde,
                        To gaze vpon thee, till they leaue me blinde.
                     
                     
                        52
                        Tis ſtrange, ſweete friend, how thou arte altred thus,
                        Since firſt in Court thou didſt our fauours weare,
                        whoſe ſhape ſeemde then not mortall vnto vs,
                        when in our eye thy brow was beauties ſpheare,
                        In all perfection ſo harmonious,
                        A thouſand ſeuerall graces mooving there;
                        But what then couldſt thou be, not now thou arte,
                        An alien firſt, laſt home-borne in my heart.
                     
                     
                        
                        53
                        That powerfull fate thy ſafetie did inforce,
                        And from the worſt of danger did thee free,
                        Still regular, and conſtant in one courſe,
                        Wrought me a firme and euen path to thee,
                        Of our affections as it tooke remorce,
                        Our birth-fix't ſtarres ſo happily agree;
                        Whoſe reuolution ſeriouſly directs
                        Our like proceedings, to the like effects.
                     
                     
                        54
                        New forme of counſaile in the courſe of things,
                        To our diſſignement findes a neerer way,
                        That by a cleere and perfect managing,
                        Is that firme prop whereon we onely ſtay;
                        Which in it ſelfe th'authoritie doth bring,
                        That weake opinion hath no power to ſway;
                        Confuting ſuch, whoſe ſightleſſe iudgement ſit,
                        In the thicke ranke with euery vulgar wit.
                     
                     
                        55
                        Then ſince pleaſde Time our wiſh'd content aſſures,
                        Imbrace the bleſſings of our mutuall reſt;
                        And whilſt the day of our good hap endures,
                        And we as fauorites leane on Fortunes breaſt,
                        Which doth for vs this vacancie procure,
                        In choice make free election of the beſt;
                        Ne're feare the ſ
                              •
                           orme before thou feele the ſhower,
                        My ſonne a King, an Empire is my dower.
                     
                     
                        
                        56
                        Of wanton Edward when I firſt was woo'd,
                        Why cam'ſt thou not into the Court of France?
                        Thy ſelfe alone then in my grace hadſt ſtood;
                        Deere Mortimer, how good had beene thy chance?
                        My loue attempted in that youthfull mood,
                        I might haue beene thine owne inheritance;
                        Where entring now by force, thou hold'ſt thy might,
                        And art deſeiſor of anothers right.
                     
                     
                        57
                        Honour thou Idole women ſo adore,
                        How many plagues dooſt thou retaine to grieue vs,
                        When ſtill we finde there is remaining more,
                        Then that great word of Maieſty can giue vs;
                        Which takes more from vs then it can reſtore,
                        And of that comfort often doth depriue vs,
                        That with our owne ſelues ſets vs at debate,
                        And mak'ſt vs beggars vnder our eſtate.
                     
                     
                        58
                        Thoſe pleaſing raptures from her graces riſe,
                        Strongly inuading his impreſſiue breaſt,
                        That ſoone entranced all his faculties,
                        Of the prowd fulneſſe of their ioyes poſſeſt;
                        And hauing throughly wrought him in this wiſe,
                        Like tempting Syrens ſing him to his reſt,
                        When eu'ry power is paſſiue of ſome good,
                        Felt by the ſpirits of his high-rauiſht blood.
                     
                     
                        
                        59
                        Like as a Lute that's touch'd with curious skill,
                        In muſickes language ſweetely ſpeaking plaine,
                        When eu'ry ſtring his note with ſound doth fill,
                        Taking the tones, and giuing them againe,
                        And the eare bath's in harmony at will,
                        A diapaſon cloſing eu'ry ſtraine;
                        So their affections ſet in keyes ſo like,
                        Still fall in conſort as their humors ſtrike.
                     
                     
                        60
                        When now the path to their deſire appeares,
                        Of which before they had been long debar'd,
                        By deſolution of ſome threatning feares,
                        That for deſtruction ſeem'd to ſtand prepar'd,
                        Which the ſmooth face of better ſafetie beares,
                        And now protected by a ſtronger guard,
                        Giues the large ſcope of leiſure to fore-caſt
                        Euents to come, by things alreadie paſt,
                     
                     
                        61
                        Theſe great diſſignements ſetting eaſly out,
                        By due proportion meaſuring eu'ry pace,
                        T'auoide the cumbrance of each hindring doubt,
                        That might diſtort the comlineſſe and grace,
                        Comming with eu'ry circumſtance about,
                        Strictly obſeruing perſon, time and place;
                        All ornaments in faire diſcretions lawes,
                        Could giue attire to beautifie the cauſe.
                     
                     
                        
                        62
                        The Embaſſie in termes of equall height,
                        As well their ſtate and dignity might fit,
                        Apparelling a matter of that weight,
                        In ceremony well beſeeming it,
                        To carry things ſo ſteddy, and ſo right,
                        Where Wiſedome with cleare maieſty might ſit;
                        All things ſtill ſeeming ſtrictly to effect,
                        That Loue commaunds, and Greatneſſe ſhould reſpect.
                     
                     
                        63
                        Whoſe expedition by this faire ſucceſſe,
                        That doth againe this antient league combine,
                        when Edward ſhould by couenant releaſe,
                        And to the Prince the Prouinces reſigne,
                        With whome king Charles renues the happy peace,
                        Receiuing homage due to him for Guyne:
                        
                        And laſtly now to conſumate their ſpeede,
                        
                           Edwards owne perſon to confirme the deede.
                     
                     
                        64
                        Who whilſt he ſtands yet doubtfull what to do,
                        The Spenſers chiefely that his counſels guide,
                        Nor with their Soueraigne into Fraunce durſt goe,
                        Nor in his abſence durſt at home abide;
                        Now whilſt the weake king ſtands perplexed ſo,
                        His liſtning eares with ſuch perſwaſion plide,
                        As he at laſt to ſtay in England's wonne,
                        And in his place, to ſend the Prince his ſonne.
                     
                     
                        
                        65
                        Thus is the King encompaſſt by their skill,
                        A meane to worke what Herford doth deuiſe,
                        To thruſt him on, to draw them vp the hill,
                        That by his ſtrength they might get powre to riſe:
                        Thus they in all things are before him ſtill,
                        This perfect ſteerſman of their policies
                        Hath caſt to walke whilſt Edward beares the light,
                        And take that aime that muſt direct his ſight.
                     
                     
                        66
                        And by th'allowance of his liberall will,
                        Suppoſde his ſafety, furthering their intent,
                        Stands as a teſt to iuſtifie their ill,
                        Made ſound and currant by this late euent,
                        And what yet wanting laſtly to fulfill,
                        Things in their courſe to fall in true conſent,
                        Giues full aſſurance of that happy end,
                        On which they now laboriouſly attend.
                     
                     
                        67
                        Nor finding reaſon longer to protract,
                        Or in ſuſpence their home-left friends to holde,
                        By being now ſo abſolutely backt,
                        And thereby waxing confident and bold,
                        By their proceedings publiſhing their act,
                        whenas their powre was ripened as they would,
                        Now with an armed and erected hand,
                        To abet their faction abſolutely ſtand.
                     
                     
                        
                        68
                        When now the fearefull fainting Exceter,
                        
                        A man experiencde in their counſels long,
                        Whether himſelfe thought his way to preferre,
                        Or moou'd in conſcience with king Eawards wrong,
                        Or t'was his frailty forede him thus to erre,
                        Or other fatall accident among,
                        The onely firſt that backe to England flew,
                        And knowing all, diſcouered all he knew.
                     
                     
                        69
                        The plot of treaſon laſtly thus diſcloſde,
                        And Torletons drift by circumſtaunces found,
                        With what conueyance things had beene diſpoſde;
                        The cunning vſde in caſting of the ground,
                        The meanes and apt aduantages he choſde,
                        When better counſell coldely comes to ſound,
                        Awakes the King to ſee his owne eſtate,
                        When the preuention comes too vaine and late.
                     
                     
                        70
                        And whilſt the time ſhe daily dooth adjourne,
                        
                           Charles as a brother, by perſwaſions deales,
                        
                           Edward, with threates, to haſten her returne,
                        And Iohn of Rome with Papall curſe aſſaies,
                        Tis but in vaine againſt her will to ſpurne,
                        Perſwaſions, threats, nor curſes aught preuailes:
                        
                           Charles, Edward, Iohn, do th'vtmoſt of your worſt,
                        The Queene fares beſt when ſhe the moſt is curſt.
                     
                     
                        
                        71
                        The ſubtile Spenſers which French humors felt,
                        (And with their Soueraigne had deuiſde the draught)
                        with Prince and Peeres now vnder-hand had dealt,
                        with golden baites that craftily were caught,
                        whoſe flexed temper ſoone begins to melt,
                        On which they now by ſleights ſo throwly wrought,
                        As with great ſummes now laſtly ouer-waide,
                        The wretched Queene is deſperate of aide.
                     
                     
                        72
                        Nor can all this amaze this mighty Queene,
                        with all th'affliction neuer yet contrould,
                        Neuer ſuch courage in her ſex was ſeene,
                        Nor was ſhe caſt in other womens mould,
                        (Nor can rebate the edge of her hie ſpleene)
                        But can endure warre, trauell, want, and cold:
                        Strugling with Fortune, ne're with griefe oppreſt,
                        Moſt cheerefull ſtill, when ſhe was moſt diſtreſt.
                     
                     
                        73
                        And thus reſolu'd to leaue ingratefull France,
                        And in the world her fortune yet to trie,
                        Changing the ayre, hopes time may alter chance,
                        As one whoſe thoughts were eleuate more hie,
                        Her weakned ſtate ſtill ſeeking to aduance,
                        Her mighty minde ſo ſcorneth miſery;
                        Yet ere ſhe went, her grieued heart to eaſt,
                        Thus to the King this grieued Lady ſaies.
                     
                     
                        
                        74
                        Is this a King and brothers part, quoth ſhe?
                        And to this end did I my griefe vnfold?
                        Came I to heale my wounded heart to thee,
                        Where ſlaine outright I now the ſame behold?
                        Proue theſe thy vowes, thy promiſes to mee,
                        In all this heate, thy faith become ſo cold,
                        To leaue me thus forſaken at the worſt?
                        My ſtate more wretched than it was at firſt.
                     
                     
                        75
                        My frailty vrging what my want requires,
                        To thy deere mercy ſhould my teares haue tide,
                        Our bloods maintained by the ſelfe-ſame fires,
                        And by our fortunes as our birth alide;
                        My ſute ſupported by my iuſt deſires,
                        All arguments I ſhould not be denide.
                        The grieuous wrongs that in my boſome be,
                        Should be as neere thy care, as I to thee.
                     
                     
                        76
                        Nature that eaſly wrought vpon my ſex,
                        To thy vile pleaſure thus mine honour leaues,
                        And vnder colour of thy due reſpects,
                        My ſettled truſt diſloyally deceaues,
                        That me and mine thus careleſly neglects,
                        And of all comfort wholy me bereaues;
                        Twixt recreant baſenes, and diſord
                              •
                           nate will,
                        To expoſe my fortunes to the worſt of ill.
                     
                     
                        
                        77
                        But for my farewell this I prophecie,
                        That from my wombe that glorious fruit doth ſpring,
                        Which ſhall deiect thy neere poſteritie,
                        And leade a captiue thy ſucceeding King,
                        That ſhal reuenge this wretched iniury.
                        To fatall Fraunce I as a Sybel ſing,
                        Her citties ſackt, the ſlaughter of her men,
                        When of the Engliſh, one ſhall conquer ten.
                     
                     
                        78
                        
                           Bewmount in Fraunce that had this ſhuffling ſeene,
                        whoſe ſoule by kindnes Iſabel had wonne,
                        For Henault now perſwades the grieued Queene,
                        By full aſſurance what might there be done;
                        Now in the anguiſh of this tumerous ſpleene,
                        Offring his faire Neece to the Prince her ſonne:
                        The lureſt way to gaine his brothers might,
                        To backe yong Edward, and vphold her right.
                     
                     
                        79
                        This gallant Lord, whoſe name euen filld report,
                        To whom the ſouldiers of that time did throng,
                        A man that faſhiond others of his ſort,
                        As that knew all to honour did belong,
                        And in his youth traind vp with her in Court,
                        And fully now confirmed in her wrong,
                        Croſſt by the faction of th'emperiall part,
                        In things that ſat too neerely to his hart.
                     
                     
                        
                        80
                        Sufficient motiues to inuite diſtreſſe,
                        To apprehend the leaſt and pooreſt meane,
                        Againſt thoſe miſchiefes that ſo ſtrongly preſſe,
                        Whereon their lowe dejected ſtate to leaue,
                        And at this ſeaſon, though it were the leſſe,
                        That might a while their ſickely powre ſuſtaine;
                        Till proſprous times by milde and temprate dayes,
                        Their drooping hopes to former height might raiſe
                     
                     
                        81
                        Where finding cauſe to breathe their reſtleſſe ſtate,
                        where welcome lookt with a more milder face,
                        From thoſe diſhonours ſhe receiu'd of late,
                        Where now ſhe wants no due officious grace,
                        Vnder the guidance of a gentler fate,
                        Where bounteous offers mutually embrace:
                        And to conclude all ceremonies paſt,
                        The Prince affies faire Philip at the laſt.
                     
                     
                        82
                        All couenants ſignde with wedlockes ſacred ſeale,
                        A laſting league eternally to binde,
                        And all proceeding of religious zeale,
                        And ſuting right with Henaults mighty minde,
                        That to his thoughts much honour dooth reueale,
                        What eaſe the Queene is like thereby to finde,
                        The ſweete contentment of the louely Bride,
                        Yong Edward pleaſde, and ioy on euery ſide.
                     
                     The end of the third Canto.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        ❧ The fourth Booke of the Barrons warres.
                     
                        The Argument.
                        
                           The Queene in Henault mightie power doth winne,
                           In Harwich hauen ſafely is arriu'd,
                           Great troubles now in England new beginne,
                           The King of friends and ſafety is depriu'd,
                           Flieth to Wales, at Neath receiued in,
                           Many ſtrange acts and outrages contriu'd:
                           
                              Edward betrayde, deliu'red vp at Neath,
                           
                           The Spenſers, and his friends are put to death.
                        
                     
                     
                        1
                        NOw ſeauen times Phoebus had his welked waine,
                        Vpon the top of all the Tropike ſet,
                        And ſeauen times deſcending downe againe,
                        His firy wheeles had with the fiſhes wet;
                        In the occurrents of this hapleſſe raigne,
                        Since treaſon firſt theſe troubles did beget:
                        which through more ſtrange varieties had runne,
                        Than it that time celeſtiall ſignes hath done.
                     
                     
                        
                        2
                        Whilſt our ill thriuing in thoſe Scottiſh broiles,
                        Their ſtrength and courage greatly doth aduance,
                        That being made fat and wealthy by our ſpoiles.
                        When we ſtill weakned by the jarres in France,
                        And thus diſ-hartned by continuall foiles,
                        Yeeldes other cauſe, whereat our Muſe may glance;
                        And Herckleys treaſons laſtly brings to view,
                        Whoſe power of late the Barrons ouer-threw.
                     
                     
                        3
                        Now when the Scot with an inuaſiue hand,
                        By daily inroads on the borders made,
                        Had ſpoilde the Country of Northumberland,
                        whoſe buildings leuell with the ground were laide;
                        And finding none that dare his power withſtand,
                        Without controlement eu'ry where had praide,
                        Bearing with pride what was by pillage got,
                        As our laſt fall appointed to their lot.
                     
                     
                        4
                        For which falſe Herckley by his Soueraigne ſent,
                        T'intreate this needefull, though diſhonored peace,
                        Cloking his treaſons by this fain'd intent,
                        Kinling the warre which otherwiſe might ceaſe;
                        And with a Scot, new miſchiefes doth inuent,
                        T'intrap King Edward, and their feare releaſe;
                        For which, their faith they conſtantly haue plight,
                        In peace and warre, to ſtand for eithers right.
                     
                     
                        
                        5
                        For which the King his ſiſter doth beſtow,
                        Vpon this falſe Lord, which to him affy'd,
                        Maketh too plaine and euident a ſhow,
                        Of what before his truſt did cloſely hide;
                        But being found from whence this match ſhould grow
                        By ſuch as now into their actions pry'd,
                        Diſplaies the treaſons, which not quickly croſt,
                        Would ſhed more blood then all the wars had coſt.
                     
                     
                        6
                        Whether the Kings weake Counſells, cauſes are
                        That eu'ry thing ſo badly ſorteth out,
                        Or that the Earle did of our ſtate diſpaire,
                        when nothing proſperd that was gone about;
                        And therefore, careleſſe how theſe matters fare
                        (Ile not define, but leaue it as a doubt)
                        Or ſome vaine title his ambition lackt,
                        Hatch'd in his breaſt this treaſonable act.
                     
                     
                        7
                        Which now reueal'd vnto the jealous King,
                        For apprehenſion of this trait'rous Peere,
                        To the Lord Lucy leaues the managing,
                        One, whoſe knowne faith he euer held ſo deere;
                        By whoſe diſpatch, and trauell in this thing,
                        (He doth well worthy of his truſt appeare)
                        In his owne Caſtell careleſly deſended,
                        The trecherous Herckley cloſely apprehended.
                     
                     
                        
                        8
                        For which ere long vnto his triall led,
                        In all the roabes befitting his degree,
                        Where Scroope chiefe Iuſtice in King Edwards ſted,
                        was now prepar'd his lawfull Iudge to bee,
                        Vrging the proofes by his enditement read,
                        Where they his treaſons euidently ſee;
                        Which now themſelues ſo plainely do expreſſe,
                        As might at firſt declare his bad ſucceſſe.
                     
                     
                        9
                        His honor'd title backe againe reſtord,
                        Noted with termes of infamie and ſcorne,
                        And then diſarmed of his knightly ſword,
                        On which his faith and loyalty was ſworne,
                        And by a varlet of his ſpurres diſpur'd,
                        His coate of Armes in peeces hal'd and torne;
                        To taſte deſerued puniſhment is ſent,
                        T'a traitrous death that traitrouſly had meant.
                     
                     
                        10
                        When ſuch the fauorers of this fatall warre,
                        Whom this occaſion dóth more ſharpely whet,
                        Thoſe for this cauſe that yet impris'ned are,
                        Boldly attempt at libertie to ſet,
                        Whoſe purpoſe fruſtrate by the others care,
                        Doth greater wounds continually beget;
                        Warning the King more ſtrictly looke about,
                        Theſe ſecret fires ſtill daily breaking out.
                     
                     
                        
                        11
                        And Hereford in Parlement accuſde
                        Of treaſons, which apparantly were wrought,
                        That with the Queene, and Mortimers were vſde,
                        Whereby ſubuerſion of the Realme was ſought,
                        And both his calling and his truſt abuſde;
                        Which now to anſwer when he ſhould be brought,
                        Seizde by the Clergie in the Kings deſpight,
                        Vnder the colour of the Churches right.
                     
                     
                        12
                        Whilſt now the Queene from England day by day,
                        That of theſe troubles ſtill had certaine word,
                        Whoſe friends much blamde her tedious long delay,
                        When now the time occaſion doth afford,
                        With better haſte doth for her ſelfe puruay,
                        Bearing prouiſion preſently abord;
                        Ships of all vſes daily rigging are,
                        Fit'ſt for inuaſion to tranſport a warre.
                     
                     
                        13
                        The Earle of Kent by's ſoueraigne brother plac'd,
                        As the great Generall of his force in Gwine,
                        
                        Who in his abſence heere at home diſgrac'd,
                        And fruſtrated both of his men and coine,
                        By ſuch lewd perſons to mainetaine their waſte,
                        From the Kings treaſures ceas'd not to proloine;
                        Th'laſciuious Prince, though mou'd, regardleſſe ſtill,
                        Both of his owne loſſe, and his brothers ill.
                     
                     
                        
                        14
                        Whoſe diſcontentment being quickly found,
                        By ſuch as all aduantages await,
                        That ſtill apply'd ſtrong corſiues to the wound,
                        And by their ſharpe and intricate deceit,
                        Hindred all meanes might poſſibly redound,
                        This faſt-ariſing miſchiefe to defeate;
                        Vntill his wrongs were to that fulneſſe growne,
                        That they haue made him abſolute their owne.
                     
                     
                        15
                        Whoſe ſelfe-like followers in theſe faithleſſe warres,
                        Men moſt experienc'd, and of worthieſt parts,
                        Which for their pay receiued onely ſcarres,
                        Whilſt the inglorious reap'd their due deſarts,
                        And Mineons hate of other hope debarres,
                        With too much violence vrg'd their grieued harts,
                        On Iohn of Henault wholy doe rely,
                        Who led a great and valiant company.
                     
                     
                        16
                        That in this conqueſt do themſelues combine,
                        The Lords Pocelles, Sares, and Boyſeers,
                        
                        
                           Dambretticourt, the young and valiant Heyn.
                        
                        
                           Eſtoteuill, Comines, and Villeers,
                        
                        Others his Knights, Sir Michaell de la Lyne,
                        
                        Sir Robert Balioll, Boſwit, and Semeers,
                        
                        Men of great power, whom ſpoile & glory warmes,
                        Such as were wholy dedicate to Armes.
                     
                     
                        
                        17
                        Three thouſand ſouldiers muſtred men in pay,
                        Of French, Scotch, Almaine, Swiſer, and the Dutch,
                        Of natiue Engliſh, fled beyond the ſea,
                        Whoſe number neere amounted to aſmuch;
                        which long had look'd for this vnhappie day,
                        whom her reuenge did but too neerely tutch,
                        Her friends now ready to receiue her in,
                        And new commotions eu'ry day begin.
                     
                     
                        18
                        When ſhe for England fitly ſetting forth,
                        Spreading her prowd ſailes on the watry plaine,
                        Shaping her courſe directly to the North,
                        with her young Edward Duke of Aquitaine,
                        
                        with th'other three of ſpeciall name and worth,
                        (The deſtainde ſcourges of his lawleſſe raigne)
                        Her ſouldier Beumount, with the Earle of Kent,
                        And Mortimer, that mightie malconſent.
                     
                     
                        19
                        A fore-winde now for Harwich fitly blowes,
                        Blow not too faſt to kindle ſuch a fire,
                        whilſt with full ſaile, and fairer tide ſhegoes,
                        Turne gentle winde, and force her to retire;
                        The fleete thou driu'ſt is fraughted with our woes,
                        But windes and ſeas, do Edwards wracke conſpire;
                        For when iuſt heauen to chaſtice vs is bent,
                        All things conuert to our due puniſhment.
                     
                     
                        
                        20
                        Thy coaſts be kept with a continuall ward,
                        Thy Beacons watch'd her comming to diſcry;
                        O had the loue of ſubiects beene thy guard,
                        T'had beene t'effect that thou didſt fortifie;
                        But whilſt thou ſtandſt gainſt forraigne foes prepard,
                        Thou art betraide by thy home enemy;
                        Small helpe by this thou art but like to win,
                        Shutting death out, thou keep'ſt deſtruction in.
                     
                     
                        21
                        When Henry brother to that hapleſſe Prince,
                        The firſt great engine of this ciuill ſtrife,
                        (Deere Lancaſter) who law did late conuince,
                        And that at Pomfret left his wretched life;
                        This Henry, in whoſe great hart euer ſince
                        Reuenge lay couerd, ſmotherd vp in griefe,
                        Like fire in ſome fat minerall of the earth,
                        Finding the leaſt vent, giues it ſelfe a birth.
                     
                     
                        22
                        That being Earle Marſhall, great vpon the coaſt,
                        With bells and bon-fires welcomes her aſhore,
                        And by his office gath'ring vp an hoaſt,
                        Shewes the old malice in his breaſt he bore,
                        Nor of his helpe abaſh'd at all to boaſt,
                        The Clergies power in readineſſe before,
                        Vpon their friends a great taxation laide,
                        To raiſe munition for the preſent aide.
                     
                     
                        
                        23
                        And to confuſion all their power expoſe,
                        On the rent boſome of this Ile, where long
                        Warre did it ſelfe ſo ſtedfaſtly incloſe;
                        (warre from our owne lewd deſoluteneſſe ſprong)
                        Whom no inuaſion euer yet could loſe;
                        So old the malice, and ſo great the wrong,
                        Vrg'd with the force that forraigne fire doth bring,
                        A greater ſpoile, and horror menacing.
                     
                     
                        24
                        This inuouation by an altred ſtate,
                        Lent this new action ſuch a violent hand,
                        That it thus boldly dare inſinuate,
                        On the cold faintneſſe of the feebled Land;
                        And being arm'd with all the power of fate,
                        Finding a way ſo openly to ſtand
                        To their intendments, which endeuoured well,
                        Might get that height from whence at firſt they fel.
                     
                     
                        25
                        When all their ſtrength in order ſtrictly ſet,
                        All helps and doubts by warres beſt counſailes waid,
                        What well might further, what their courſe might let,
                        And their reliefes conueniently had laid,
                        A meane reſeru'd ſecuritie to get,
                        Whereon at worſt their fortune might be ſtayd,
                        And furniſh'd fully as themſelues deſir'd,
                        Of all this action needefully requir'd.
                     
                     
                        
                        26
                        And at Saint Edmonds doe a while repoſe,
                        To reſt themſelues, and their new welcom'd force,
                        Better to learne the manner of their foes,
                        To th'end, not vainely to direct their courſe;
                        And ſeeing daily how the Armie growes,
                        To take a full view both of foote and horſe;
                        With ſuch diſcretion managing the war,
                        Truly to ſhew them what indeede they are.
                     
                     
                        27
                        When now the King of theſe proceedings heard,
                        And of the troopes that to them daily runne,
                        And little ſtrength at London yet preparde,
                        Where he expected fauour to haue wonne,
                        He now commits the Cittie to the guard
                        Of his approu'd moſt-truſted Stapleton,
                        
                        To Iohn of Eltham (his faire ſonne) the Tower,
                        Himſelfe to Wales to raiſe a ſpeedy power.
                     
                     
                        28
                        Yet whilſt his name doth any hope admit,
                        Proclaimes in forfait both of goods and life,
                        All that enioyde a ſubiects benefit,
                        Should lend their power againſt his ſonne and wife,
                        And doth all ſlaughters generally acquite
                        Were done vpon the moouers of this ſtrife:
                        And who could bring in Mortimers prowd head,
                        Should freely take th'reuenewes of the dead.
                     
                     
                        
                        29
                        Which ſtrait encountred by the Queenes Edict,
                        who making knowne the iuſtnes of her cauſe,
                        That ſhe proceeded in a courſe ſo ſtrict,
                        T'vphold their antient liberties and lawes;
                        Nor that ſhe did this puniſhment inflict
                        For priuate hate, or popular applauſe,
                        Onely the Spenſers to account to bring,
                        Whoſe wicked counſells had abuſde the King.
                     
                     
                        30
                        Which ballaſing the multitude that ſtood
                        As a light barke thats toſſt twixt winde and tide,
                        Turnd in the mixture of th'oppoſed flood,
                        when yet opinion not their courſe could guide,
                        And wau'ring thus in their inconſtant moode,
                        Till by the weakenes of th'emperiall ſide,
                        Suffers the ſeiſure of it ſelfe at laſt,
                        which to the Queene all free aduantage caſt.
                     
                     
                        31
                        When friendleſſe Edward followed by his foes,
                        whom danger dooth to recreant flight debaſe,
                        As poore in hope, as he is rich in woes,
                        Depriu'd all princely ornament and grace,
                        whoſe force th'more weakened further that he goes,
                        His ſafety now ſuſpecting eu'ry place;
                        No helpe at home, no ſuccour ſeene abroade,
                        His minde ſmall reſt, his body leſſe abode.
                     
                     
                        
                        32
                        One ſcarce to him his ſad diſcourſe hath done
                        Of Henaults power, and what the Queene intends,
                        But whilſt he ſpeakes, another hath begunne,
                        A third dooth take it where the ſecond ends,
                        when now abroade theres other rumours runne,
                        Some of new foes, ſome of reuolting friends;
                        Theſe ſcarcely paſt when more reports are ſpred,
                        Of many that rebell, of many fled.
                     
                     
                        33
                        What plagues doth Edward for himſelfe prepare,
                        Forſaken king, O whither dooſt thou ſhe?
                        Men change their clime, but ſildome change their care,
                        Thou fli'ſt thy foes, but follow'ſt miſery,
                        The euill fates in number many are,
                        That to thy footſteps doe themſelues apply;
                        And ſtill thy conſcience prickt with inward griefe,
                        Thy ſelfe purſues thy ſelfe, both robd, and thiefe.
                     
                     
                        34
                        Accepting ſuccour offerd next at hand,
                        At laſt for Wales commits him to the ſeas;
                        And ſeeing Lundy that ſo faire dooth ſtand,
                        Puts in for ſuccour, (neede would faine haue eaſe)
                        This little modell of his baniſht land,
                        Which for a while his fancie ſeemes to pleaſe,
                        Faine would he be king of a little Ile,
                        Although his Empire bounded in a mile.
                     
                     
                        
                        35
                        And ready now to ſtrike his proſp'rous ſaile,
                        As vnder lee, paſt danger of the flood,
                        A ſuddaine ſtorme of mixed 
                              •
                           leet and haile,
                        Not ſuffers him to rule this peece of wood.
                        What doth thy labour, what thy toyle auaile,
                        When thou art ſtill with greater powers with-ſtood?
                        
                           Edward, thy hopes all vainely do delude,
                        By Gods and men, inceſſantly purſude.
                     
                     
                        36
                        In this blacke tempeſt long turmoild and toſt,
                        Quite from their courſe, & well they know not where,
                        Mongſt rockes and ſands, in danger to be loſt,
                        without in perrill, and within in feare,
                        At length perceiuing they are neere the coaſt,
                        And that the place more plainely doth appeare,
                        Knowes by the mountaines inſolently tall,
                        That part of Wales that we Glamorgan call.
                     
                     
                        37
                        To Neath, a Caſtell fortifi'd and ſtrong,
                        Commanding entrance with his baniſh'd crew,
                        The Earle of Gloſter, worker of much wrong,
                        The Chancelor Baldocke that much euill knew,
                        
                           Reding his Marſhall is the reſt among,
                        Heere hid from eyes, but not from enuies view;
                        where for a while committing them to dwell,
                        We muſt prepare more dreadfull things to tell,
                     
                     
                        
                        38
                        You lighter Muſes, leaue me, and be gone,
                        Your weake complaints are matters much too ſlight,
                        More horred plagues are heere approching on,
                        Yee ghaſtly ſpirits that haunt the gloomie night,
                        Lend me your ſhreeks t'expreſſe the depth of moane,
                        with ghaſtly howling all approach my ſight;
                        And round about with funerall tapers ſtand,
                        To giue a ſad light to my ſadder hand.
                     
                     
                        39
                        Each line ſhall leade to ſome dire point of wo,
                        And eu'ry cadence as a torturde cry,
                        Now muſt my teares in ſuch aboundance flow,
                        That they ſurround the circle of mine eye;
                        And whilſt theſe great calamities I ſhow,
                        All looſe affections ſtand you idely by,
                        Once more our cleere Muſe dips her wing in gore,
                        The dreereſt tale that pen did ere deplore.
                     
                     
                        40
                        New ſorts of vengeance threatned to the earth,
                        The raging Ocean paſt the bounds to riſe,
                        Strange apparitions, and prodigious birth,
                        Vnheard of ſickneſſe, and mortalities,
                        More inaccuſtom'd, and vnlook'd for dearth,
                        New ſorts of Meteors gazing from the skies;
                        As what before had ſmall or nothing bin,
                        And onely now our miſeries begin.
                     
                     
                        
                        41
                        And whilſt theſe diſcordes and diſſentions breede,
                        The land layd naked to all offered ill,
                        The lawleſſe exile now returnes with ſpeed,
                        Not to defend his countrey, but to kill,
                        And all the priſons diſſolutely freed,
                        Both field and towne with wretchednes to fill,
                        
                           London firſt author of our lateſt ſhame,
                        Soonſt that repentſt, moſt plagued for the ſame.
                     
                     
                        42
                        Whoſe giddy commons mercileſſe and rude,
                        Let looſe to miſchiefe in this curſed day,
                        Their hands in blood of Edwards friends imbrude,
                        Neuer content till they were made away;
                        Th'implacable and wicked multitude
                        On the Lieutenant Stapleton doe pray,
                        who dragg'd and torne by this tumultuous heape,
                        Cut off his head before the Croſſe in Cheape.
                     
                     
                        43
                        Reade wofull Citty on thy ruinde wall,
                        Thy ſad deſtruction which is drawing nie,
                        Where on thy gates is charactered thy fall,
                        In mangled bodies thine Anatomy,
                        Now thy lewd errours to a reckning call,
                        Which may exſtract teares from thy ruthleſſe eye:
                        And if the thicke ayre dim thy hatefull ſight,
                        Thy buildings are on fire to giue thee light.
                     
                     
                        
                        44
                        Thy chanels ſerue for incke, for paper, ſtones,
                        And on the ground write murther, inceſt, rape,
                        Aud for thy pennes, a heape of dead mens bones,
                        Let euery letter beſome monſtrous ſhape,
                        Thy poynts and accents be departing groanes,
                        And let no vile, nor deſperate act eſcape,
                        And when with pride thou arte againe ore'gon,
                        Then take this booke, and ſadly looke thereon.
                     
                     
                        45
                        Poore wretch diſpoilde of thy late Virgins name,
                        Now for thy ſinne what impious villaine ſhent,
                        Blacke is my incke, but blacker thy defame,
                        Who ſhall reuenge whilſt I thy ſtate lament,
                        What might be done to remedy thy ſhame,
                        When now too late theſe miſchieſes to preuent,
                        Againſt theſe horrors thou dooſt idely ſtriue,
                        Thou ſeeſt thy ſelfe deuoured, yet aliue.
                     
                     
                        46
                        Thou wantſt redreſſe, and tyrannie remorce,
                        To whom ſhouldſt thou thy helples woes complaine?
                        But yeelde thy ſelfe to the adulterers force,
                        Thy wordes vntimely, and returne in vaine,
                        The more thou grieu'ſt, thy fault is ſtill the worſe;
                        This remedy there onely dooth remaine,
                        Diſpoylde of fame, be prodigall of breath,
                        And make thy life cleere by a reſolute death.
                     
                     
                        
                        47
                        For worlds that were, the preſent times complaine,
                        when men might haue beene buride when they di'de,
                        And children ſafely in their cradles laine,
                        And when the husband might enioy his bride,
                        when in ſome bounds ill could it ſelfe containe,
                        The ſonne haue kneeld by's fathers death-bed ſide,
                        The liuing wrongde, the dead no right can haue,
                        The father ſees his ſonne to want a graue.
                     
                     
                        48
                        But tis too late thy head-ſtrong courſe t'recall,
                        Depriude all feeling of externall feare;
                        Theſe deadly ſounds by their continuall fall,
                        Settle confuſion in thy deafned eare,
                        This is the laſt, O would the worſt of all!
                        Shreekes be the muſicke thou delightſt to heare,
                        Armes thy attire, and wounds be all thy good,
                        Thy end conſiſts in rapine and in blood.
                     
                     
                        49
                        In glorious age of whom it ſhould be ſaid,
                        That all theſe miſchieues ſhould abound in thee,
                        That all theſe ſinnes ſhould to thy charge be laid,
                        From no calumnious nor vile action free,
                        O let not time vs with thy ills vpbrayd,
                        Leſt feare what hath beene, argue what may be;
                        And faſhioning ſo a habite in the minde,
                        Make vs alone the haters of our kinde.
                     
                     
                        
                        50
                        O powrefull heauen, in whoſe all-ſoueraigne raine,
                        Thoſe thy pure bodies mooue in harmony,
                        And by a ſtrong and euerlaſting chaine,
                        Together linckt in ſacred vnitie;
                        In which you doe continually remaine,
                        Stayd in one certaine courſe eternally,
                        Why his due motion keepeth eu'ry ſtar,
                        Yet what they gouerne ſo irregular?
                     
                     
                        51
                        Muſe, in the courſe of this vnnaturall warre,
                        Tell me from whence this height of miſchiefe grew,
                        That in ſo ſhort time ſpread it ſelfe ſo farre,
                        Whereon ſuch ſtrange calamities enſue;
                        The true occaſions faithfully declare:
                        O men religious, was the fault in you?
                        Which euen growne reſty by your powre, withdraw
                        Your ſtifned neckes, as free from ciuill awe.
                     
                     
                        52
                        What wonder then the people grow prophane,
                        When Church mens liues giue lay-men leaue to fall;
                        Their former Doue-like humbleneſſe diſdaine,
                        For coates of haire, now clad in coſtly pall,
                        The holy Ephod made a cloke for gaine,
                        And what moſt cunning, moſt cannonicall,
                        And blinde promotion ſhuns that dangerous road,
                        Which the old Prophets diligently troad.
                     
                     
                        
                        53
                        Hence iſt that God ſo ſlightly is ador'd,
                        The rocke remoou'd whereon our faith is gounded,
                        Conſcience eſteemde but as an idle word,
                        Which weake before, by vaine opinion wounded,
                        Profeſſors liues ſo little fruit affoord,
                        And in her ſects religion lies confounded;
                        The ſacred things a merchandize become,
                        None talks of texts, and prophecying dumbe.
                     
                     
                        54
                        And of the former being thus poſſeſt,
                        Like to the venome of infectious ayre,
                        That hauing got into the ſecret breaſt,
                        Is not preſcribde, nor long times ſtaies it there;
                        But from this ground to ſeize vpon the reſt,
                        The rancke contagion ſpreading eu'ry where;
                        That ere this euill hath the vtmoſt done,
                        The ſolide body laſtly ouer-runne.
                     
                     
                        55
                        Cauells breake forth to cancell wholeſome lawes,
                        And caching hold vpon the publique weale,
                        Where doubts ſhould ceaſe, they riſe in euery clawſe,
                        The ſword that wounds ordaind a ſalue to heale,
                        One miſcheefe ſtill another forward drawes,
                        Each ſtriuiug others vileneſſe to conceale,
                        By lewd corruptions in a needefull vſe,
                        Right cloakes all wrong, and couers all abuſe.
                     
                     
                        
                        56
                        When now the King late taken to this hold,
                        And in this poore impriſned libertie,
                        Liuing a death in hunger, want, and cold,
                        Euen in depth of woe and miſerie;
                        By hatefull treaſon ſecretly is ſold,
                        Before he could the trecherous drift eſpy;
                        For when oppreſſion's vp vnto the chin,
                        Who lends not hand to thruſt him boldly in?
                     
                     
                        57
                        In th'luckleſſe fortunes of this wretched King,
                        whoſe perſon's ſeiſed by th'inuading part,
                        Vnto his friends ſad matters menacing,
                        VVith bloodleſſe terror ſtriking eu'ry hart,
                        All expectation now diſcouraging,
                        VVhen no euaſion from the foe to ſtart;
                        And that the clowd which threatned greateſt feare,
                        Roſe whence their hopes moſt brighteſt did appeare.
                     
                     
                        58
                        Which breaking in now with a generall force,
                        On the two Spenſers, from whoſe onely hate
                        This warre firſt ſprung, diſtracted in their courſe,
                        Their lateſt power confined by their fate,
                        Of whom theres none takes pittie or remorce;
                        Which to avoide, as cankers of the ſtate,
                        The eldeſt firſt to death at Briſtow led,
                        Where hangde to death, his body quartered.
                     
                     
                        
                        59
                        Whenas the heire to Wincheſter late dead,
                        The bloody lot to th'Earle of Gloster fell,
                        
                           Reding the Marſhall, marſhald with the dead,
                        When ſoone ſucceedes the Earle of Arundell,
                        
                        To pay the forfait of a reuerent head,
                        Then Muchelden, and wofull Daniell,
                        
                        Who followed him in his laſciuious waies,
                        Muſt go before him to his fatall daies.
                     
                     
                        60
                        Euen like ſome pillar, on whoſe goodly height,
                        A pondrous building onely doth depend,
                        Which when not able to ſuſtaine the weight,
                        And that his ſtrong backe hath begun to bend,
                        As quite depriued of his former might,
                        The maſſy load vnto the ground doth ſend,
                        Cruſhing the leſſer props, and murdring all
                        That ſtand within the compaſſe of the fall.
                     
                     
                        61
                        That ſtate whereon the ſtrength of Princes leanes,
                        Whoſe hie aſcent we trembling do behold,
                        From whence by coyneſſe of their chaſte diſdaines,
                        Subiection is imperiouſly controld;
                        Their earthly weakneſſe euermore explaines,
                        Exalting whom they pleaſe, not whom they ſhould,
                        When their owne fall (ſhowes how they 
                              •
                           ondlyer'd)
                        Procur'd by thoſe vnworthily prefer'd.
                     
                     
                        
                        62
                        Merit goes vnregarded and vngrac'd,
                        When by his fauters ignorance held in,
                        And Paraſites in wiſe mens roomes are plac'd,
                        Onely to ſooth the great ones in their ſin,
                        From ſuch whoſe gifts, and knowledge is debac'd,
                        Theres many ſtrange enormities begin,
                        Forging great wits into moſt factious tooles,
                        When mightieſt men oft proue the mightieſt fooles.
                     
                     
                        63
                        But why ſo vainely doe I time beſtow,
                        The fowle abuſe of th'wretched world to childe,
                        Whoſe blinded iudgement eu'ry howre doth ſhow,
                        What follie weake mortalitie doth guide?
                        Wiſe was the man that laugh'd at all thy woe,
                        My ſubiect ſtill more ſorrow doth prouide,
                        And this late peace more matter ſtill doth breede,
                        To haſten that which quickly muſt ſucceede.
                     
                     The end of the fourth Canto.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        ❧ The fifth Booke of the Barrons warres.
                     
                        The Argument.
                        
                           Th'impriſoned King his gouernement for ſakes,
                           And to the Peeres his weakeneſſe ſo excuſed,
                           Who him ere long from Leiſters keeping takes,
                           That with much woe his ſoueraigne Lord refuſed,
                           His torturers of him a mockery makes,
                           And baſely, and reproachfully abuſed,
                           By ſecret waies to Berckley being led,
                           And cruelly in priſon murthered.
                        
                     
                     
                        1
                        THe wretched King vnnaturally betrayd,
                        By lewd coruption of his natiue Land,
                        From thence with ſpeede to Kennelworth conuayd,
                        By th'Earle of Leiſter with a mightie band,
                        Some few his fauorers quickely ouer-wayd,
                        And now a preſent Parlement in hand,
                        To ratifie the generall intent,
                        His reſignation of the gouernment.
                     
                     
                        
                        2
                        Falne through the frailtie of intemperate will,
                        That with his fortunes it ſo weakely farde,
                        To vndergoe that vnexpected ill,
                        For his deſerued puniſhment preparde,
                        The meaſure of that wretchedneſſe to fill,
                        To him alotted as a iuſt reward,
                        Armes all with malice, either leſſe or more,
                        To ſtrike at him that ſtrooke at all before.
                     
                     
                        3
                        And being a thing the commons daily craue,
                        To which the great are reſolutely bent,
                        Such forward helpes on eu'ry ſide to haue,
                        T'effect their ſtrong and forcible intent,
                        Which now that ſpeede vnto their action gaue,
                        That ratifi'd by generall conſent,
                        Still haſtned on to execute the thing,
                        Which for one ill, two worſe ſhould ſhortly bring.
                     
                     
                        4
                        Biſhops, Earles, Abbots, and the Barrons all,
                        Each in due order as becomes the ſtate,
                        Set by the Heraults in that goodly hall,
                        The Burgeſſes for places corporate,
                        Whom this great buſnes at this time doth call,
                        For the Cinque-ports the Barrons conuocate,
                        And other Knights, for the whole body ſent,
                        Both on the South, and on the North of Trent.
                     
                     
                        
                        5
                        From his impris'ning chamber clad in blacke,
                        Before th'aſſembly ſadly he is brought,
                        A dolefull hearſe vpon a dead mans backe,
                        whoſe heauy lookes might tell his heauier thought,
                        In which there doth no part of ſorrow lacke,
                        Nor fained action needes to grieue be taught:
                        His funerall ſolemniz'd in his cheere,
                        His eyes the mourners, and his legs the Beere.
                     
                     
                        6
                        
                           Torleton, as one ſelect to this intent,
                        The beſt experienc'd in this great affaire,
                        A man graue, ſubtile, ſtowt, and eloquent,
                        Firſt with faire ſpeech th'aſſembly doth prepare,
                        Then with a voyce auſtere and eminent,
                        Doth his abuſe effectually declare,
                        As winnes each ſad eye with a reuerent feare,
                        With due attention drawing eu'ry eare.
                     
                     
                        7
                        The great exactions raiſed by the King,
                        With whoſe full plenty he is Mineons fed,
                        Himſelfe and ſubiects ſo impou'riſhing,
                        And that deere blood he lauiſhly had ſhed,
                        Which deſolation to the land ſhould bring,
                        And the chiefe cauſe by his lewd riots bred;
                        The loſſe in warre ſuſtained through his blame,
                        The during ſcandall to the Engliſh name.
                     
                     
                        
                        8
                        Proceeding forward to the future good,
                        That their diſſignements happily intend,
                        And with what vpright policie it ſtoode,
                        No after hopes their for tunes to amend,
                        The reſignation to his proper blood,
                        That might the action lawfully defend,
                        The preſent neede that willd it ſtrictly ſo,
                        Whoſe impoſition they might not ſorſlowe.
                     
                     
                        9
                        Pardon me Art, that ſtriuing to be ſhort,
                        To this intent a ſpeech deliuering,
                        And that at full I doe not heere report
                        Matters that tuch depoſing of the King,
                        My faithfull Muſe, O doe not thou exhort
                        The after times to ſo abhorr'd a thing,
                        To ſhew the reaſons forcibly were laide,
                        Out of thy feelings what hee might haue ſaide.
                     
                     
                        10
                        The ſtrong deliu'ry of whoſe vehement ſpeech,
                        Borne with a dauntleſſe, and contracted brow,
                        That with ſuch ſteme ſeueritie did teach,
                        His reaſons more authentique to allow,
                        Which the more eaſly made the dang'rous breach,
                        By the remembrance of a generall vow:
                        To which they heere muſt openly conteſt,
                        When Edward comes to conſumate the reſt.
                     
                     
                        
                        11
                        His faire cheeke couerd in pale ſheets of ſhame,
                        And as a dumbe ſhew in a ſwowne began,
                        Where paſſion dooth ſuch ſundry habites frame,
                        As eu'ry ſence a right Tragedian,
                        Truely to ſhew from whence his ſorrow came,
                        Beyond the compaſſe of a common man,
                        where Nature ſeemes a practiſer in Art,
                        Teaching Diſpaire to act a liuely part.
                     
                     
                        12
                        Ah Pitty, doſt thou liue, or wert thou not,
                        Mortalls by ſuch ſights haue to flint bin turned,
                        Or what men haue beene, hath their ſeed forgot,
                        Or was it neuer knowne that any mourned,
                        In what ſo ſtrangely are we ouerſhot?
                        Againſt our owne ſelfe hath our frailtie ſpurned,
                        Or teares hence forth abandon humane eies,
                        And neuer-more to pit
                              •
                           y miſeries.
                     
                     
                        13
                        He takes the Crowne yet ſcornefully vnto him,
                        With ſlight regarde, as ſcarcely thinking on it,
                        As though not ſenceleſſe that it ſhould forgoe him,
                        And ſildome caſts a ſcornefull eie vpon it,
                        would ſeeme to leaue it, and would haue it woe him,
                        Then ſnatching it, as loath to haue forgone it,
                        Yet puts it from him, yet he will not ſo,
                        would faine retaine what faine he would forgoe.
                     
                     
                        
                        14
                        In this confuſed conflict of the minde,
                        Teares drowning ſighes, and ſighs confounding teares,
                        Yet whenas neither libertie could finde,
                        Oppreſſed with the multitude of 
                              •
                           eares,
                        Stands as a man affrighted from his kinde,
                        Griefe becomes ſenſleſſe when too much it beares,
                        whilſt ſpeech & ſilēce ſtriues which place ſhuld take
                        From his ful boſome thus his ſorrowee brake.
                     
                     
                        15
                        If that my title rightfully be planted,
                        Vpon a true indubitate ſucceſſion,
                        Confirmd by nations as by nature granted,
                        That freely hath deliuerd me poſſeſſion,
                        Impute to heauen ſufficiencie t'haue wanted,
                        which muſt deny it power, or you oppreſſion,
                        which into queſtion by due courſe may bring,
                        The grieued wrongs of an annointed King.
                     
                     
                        16
                        That halowed vnction by a ſacred hand,
                        which once was powrde on this emperious head,
                        which wrought th'iudument of a ſtrict command,
                        And round about me the rich verdure ſpred,
                        Either my right in greater ſtead muſt ſtand,
                        Or why in vaine was it ſo idely ſhed,
                        whoſe prophanation and vnreueret tuch,
                        Iuſt heauen hath often puniſht alwayes much.
                     
                     
                        
                        17
                        When from the bright beames of our ſoueraine due,
                        Deſcends the ſtrength of your enated right,
                        And proſperouſly deriues it ſelfe to you,
                        As from our fulnes taking borrowed light,
                        which to your ſafeties alwayes firme and true,
                        Why thus repugne you by prepoſtrous might?
                        But what heauen lent me vertuouſly t'haue vſed,
                        Leaues to your power what weaknes hath abuſed.
                     
                     
                        18
                        But heere I doe reſigne it to your King,
                        Pawſing heereat as though his tongue offended,
                        with griping throwes ſeemes forth that word to bring,
                        Sighing a full point as he there had ended,
                        O how that ſound his grieued heart doth wring,
                        Which he recalling gladly would haue mended:
                        Things of ſmall moment we can ſcarcely holde,
                        But griefes that touch the heart are hardly colde.
                     
                     
                        19
                        But being paſt, he proſecutes in teares,
                        Calming that tempeſt with a ſhower of raine,
                        As he had ſtroue to keepe it from his eares,
                        Quoth he, the liegeman to your Soueraigne?
                        O in his lippes how vile that word appeares,
                        Whereat aſhamde doth ſadly pawſe againe,
                        Yes, yes, euen ſay ſo vnto him you beare it,
                        Ift be yong Edward that you meane ſhall weare it.
                     
                     
                        
                        20
                        Let him account his bondage from that day
                        That he is with the Diademe inueſted,
                        A glittering Crowne hath made this haire ſo gray,
                        Within whoſe circle he is but arreſted,
                        To true content this not the certaine way,
                        With ſweeter cates a meane eſtate is feaſted,
                        And when his prowd feet ſcorne to tuch the mold,
                        His head a priſner in a gayle of golde.
                     
                     
                        21
                        His ſubiects numbred, numbring of his care,
                        And when with ſhowts the people doe beginne,
                        Let him ſuppoſe th'applauſe but prayers are
                        T'eſcape the danger that they ſee him in,
                        Wherein t'aduenture he ſo boldly dare;
                        The multitude hoth multitudes of ſinne,
                        And he thats firſt to cry, God ſaue the King,
                        Is the firſt man doth newes of ſorrow bring.
                     
                     
                        22
                        Appeaſing tumults hate cannot appeaſe,
                        Soothde with deceits, and fed with flatteries,
                        Thy ſelfe diſpleaſing, other ſought to pleaſe,
                        Obeyd as much as hee ſhall tyrannize,
                        The leaſt in ſafety being moſt at eaſe,
                        Feare forcing friends, inforcing enemies:
                        And when hee fitteth in his greatſt eſtate,
                        His foot-ſtoole danger, and his chaire is hate.
                     
                     
                        
                        23
                        Raigne he alone, whilſt he no King, was one
                        Diſarmde of power, and heere deiected is,
                        By whoſe depoſing he enioyes a throne,
                        Nor ſhould I ſuffer that, nor he doe this,
                        I muſt confeſſe th'inheritance his owne,
                        But whilſt I liue it ſhould be none of his,
                        The ſonne climes vp to thruſt the father downe,
                        And thus the crowned left without a Crowne.
                     
                     
                        24
                        Hauing performd this hard conſtrained part,
                        His ſpeech, his raigne, the day all ioyntly ended,
                        Strangely transformd, not being what thou art,
                        Carde for of none, vnlookt on, vnattended,
                        Sadly departing with a heauy heart,
                        To his ſtrong lodging ſtraightly recommended,
                        Left to bemoane his miſerable plight,
                        To the rude walls, and ſolitarie night.
                     
                     
                        25
                        Whilſt things are thus diſaſtrouſly decreed,
                        Seditious libels euery day are ſpred,
                        By ſuch as like not of their violent deede,
                        That he by force ſhould be deliuered,
                        Whether his wrong remorce in ſome did breede,
                        That him at laſt vntimely pittied,
                        Or elſe deuiſde in pollicie by ſome,
                        To cloake that miſchiefe afterward to come.
                     
                     
                        
                        26
                        And hate that each where hearkning ſtil doth lurke,
                        And yet ſuſpitions Edward is not ſure,
                        Thinking what blood with Leiceſter might wurke,
                        Or elſe, what friends his name might him procure,
                        Which yet their thoughts continually doth yrke
                        The time he ſhould at Kenelworth endure:
                        Fore thinke ſome place t'which ſecretly conuaide,
                        Vnknowne his being, be ſecurde from aide.
                     
                     
                        27
                        And though the great to hide their cloſe intent,
                        (Seeme ne're ſo cleare from knowing thoſe know ill)
                        Not vnprouided of the inſtrument,
                        Which they keepe ready to performe their will,
                        Such haue th'in ſtore to their damnation bent,
                        In villanie notorious for their skill,
                        Diſhoneſt, deſperate, mercileſſe, and rude,
                        To all vile actions ready to intrude.
                     
                     
                        28
                        
                           Matreuers and baſe Gurney are the men
                        In this lewd act that muſt confedered be,
                        Whoſe hatefull names pollute our maiden pen,
                        But I intreate you, be not grieu'd with mee
                        To whome the ſame doe worthily pertaine,
                        Some bought grow crooked from the ſtreighteſt tree:
                        Nor ſhall you be partakers of their ſhame,
                        The fault lies in their deede, not in your name.
                     
                     
                        
                        29
                        Theſe ſecretly to Killingworth diſpatcht,
                        Fitted of all things that their hearts deſire,
                        At ſuch a time as few their purpoſe watcht,
                        After whoſe buſnes none is to enquire,
                        Which by their warrant ſubtilly was matcht,
                        Onely to them knowne whither to retire:
                        Taking the King, his guardian to acquit,
                        And to beſtow him where they thought moſt fit.
                     
                     
                        30
                        With a crew of ribalds, villainous, and nought,
                        As their coagents in this hatefull thing,
                        To th'earle of Leiſter their commiſſion brought,
                        Commaunding the deliu'ry of the King
                        which (with much griefe) they laſtly frō him wrought,
                        About the Caſtell cloſely houering,
                        watching a time till ſilence, and the night,
                        Might with conuenience priuiledge their flight.
                     
                     
                        31
                        With ſhamefull ſcoffes, and barbarous diſgrace,
                        Him on a leane ill fauord jade they ſet,
                        In a vile garment, beggarly, and baſe,
                        Which, it ſhould ſeeme, they purpoſely did get,
                        And in a wretched miſerable caſe,
                        B
                              •
                           numd and beaten with the colde, and wet,
                        Depriu'd of all repoſe and naturall reſt,
                        with thirſt and hunger grieuouſly oppreſt.
                     
                     
                        
                        32
                        Yet ſtill ſuſpitious that he ſhould be knowne,
                        They ſhaue away his ornament of haire,
                        The laſt thing his that he could call his owne,
                        Neuer left Fortune any wight ſo bare;
                        Such tyranny on king was neuer ſhowne,
                        Thus voide of comfort, were he voide of care:
                        No, no, our ioyes are ſhadowes, and deceiue vs,
                        But till our death our ſorrowes neuer leaue vs.
                     
                     
                        33
                        To which intent, when fartheſt from reſort,
                        Forcing him light from his poore wearie beaſt,
                        Vpon a mole-hill (O moſt ſad report)
                        With puddle-water him they lewdly dreſt,
                        Whilſt at his woes and miſeries they ſport,
                        An yron skull the Baſon, like the reſt,
                        VVhoſe lothing eyes in this more lothed glaſſe,
                        Well may diſcerne how much deformd he was.
                     
                     
                        34
                        Th'abundant drops that from his eyes do fall,
                        A poole of teares ſtill riſing by this raine,
                        VVhich wraſtling with the water, and withall,
                        A troubled circle makes it to retaine,
                        His endleſſe griefes vnto his minde might call,
                        Billowde with ſighes like to a little maine,
                        water with teares contending whether ſhould
                        Make water warme, or make the warme tears cold.
                     
                     
                        
                        35
                        Vile traitors, hold off your vnhalowed hands,
                        His brow the ſtate of maieſtie ſtill beares,
                        Dare you thus keepe your ſoueraigne Lord in bands,
                        How can your eyes behold th'annointeds teares?
                        Or if your ſight thus all remorce with-ſtands,
                        Are not your harts euen pierced through your eares?
                        The minde is free, what ere afflict the man,
                        Hee's yet a King, do Fortune what ſhe can.
                     
                     
                        36
                        Who's he ſhould take what God himſelfe hath giuen,
                        Or ſpill that life his holy ſpirit infuſed,
                        All powers be ſubiect to the power of heauen,
                        Wrongs paſſe not vnreueng'd how ere excuſed,
                        If of all ſenſe griefe hath thee not bereauen,
                        Riſe maieſtie when thou art thus abuſed,
                        O whither ſhall authoritie betake,
                        When in this ſort it doth it ſelfe forſake.
                     
                     
                        37
                        And in deſpight and mockery of a Crowne,
                        A wreathe of graſſe they for his temples make,
                        Which when he felt, as comming from a ſwoune,
                        And that his powers a little gan awake,
                        Fortune (quoth he) thou dooſt not alwaies frowne,
                        I ſee thou giu'ſt aſwell as thou dooſt take,
                        That wanting naturall couert for, my braine,
                        For that defect, thou lend'ſt me this againe.
                     
                     
                        
                        38
                        To whom, O heauen, ſhould I my griefes complaine
                        Since thou art iuſt and prouident in all?
                        How ſhould this body naturall ſtrength retaine,
                        To ſuffer things ſo much innaturall?
                        My cogitations labour but in vaine,
                        Except thou be partaker in my fall;
                        And when at once ſo many miſchiefes meete,
                        By change of ſorrow mak'ſt my torment ſweete.
                     
                     
                        39
                        Wherefore my fate I ſhould but fondly grutch,
                        Tis vaine contention when with heauen we ſtriue,
                        Which preordaines my miſeries for ſuch,
                        That by one woe another ſhould ſuruiue,
                        To ſhew how it mortalitie can tutch,
                        My wretchedneſſe ſo ſtrangely to contriue,
                        That all my comfort in miſhaps ſhould reſt,
                        And elſe in nothing but misfortune bleſt.
                     
                     
                        40
                        To Berckley thus they led this wretched King,
                        The place of horror that was long fore-thought,
                        What power ſhould ſuffer ſo defilde a thing,
                        Or can behold this murther to be wrought,
                        That might the Nation into queſtion bring,
                        But that your waies with iudgement ſtill are fraught;
                        Thus art thou hap'd into thy earthly hell,
                        Now take thy leaue, and bid the world farewell.
                     
                     
                        
                        41
                        
                           Berekley, whoſe faire ſeate hath beene famous long,
                        Let thy faire buildings ſhreeke a deadly ſound,
                        And to the ayre complaine thy greeuous wrong,
                        Keeping the figure of King Edwards wound,
                        That as thou waxeſt old, their ſhame ſtill yong,
                        Their wretched foote-ſteps printed on the ground,
                        That when report ſhall lend their vile act breath,
                        All tongues may adde damnation to their death.
                     
                     
                        42
                        The omenous Rauen with a diſmall cheere,
                        Through his hoarſe beake, of following horror tells,
                        Begetting ſtrange imaginarie feare,
                        With heauie ecchoes like to paſſing-bells;
                        The howling dogge a dolefull part doth beare,
                        As though they chimde his lateſt burying knells,
                        Vnder his caue the buzzing ſhreech-owle ſings,
                        Beating his windowes with her fatall wings.
                     
                     
                        43
                        And ſtill affrighted in his fearefull dreames,
                        With raging fiends and goblins that he meetes,
                        Of falling downe from ſteepe Rockes into ſtreames,
                        Of toombes, of burialls, and of winding-ſheetes,
                        Of wandring helpeleſſe in far forraigne Realmes,
                        Of ſtrong temptations by ſeducing ſprites,
                        Wherewith awakde, and calling out for aide,
                        His hollow voyce doth make himſelfe afraide.
                     
                     
                        
                        44
                        Next comes the viſion of his bloody raine,
                        Masking along with Lancaſters ſterne ghoſt,
                        Of Barrons twenty eight or hangd, or ſlaine,
                        Attended with the ruefull mangled hoſt,
                        That vnreuengde yet all this while remaine,
                        At Borough battell, and at Burton loſt,
                        Threatning with frownes, and trembling eu'ry lim,
                        As though in peeces they would torture him.
                     
                     
                        45
                        And if it chance that from the troubled skies,
                        The leaſt ſmall ſtarre through any chincke giue light,
                        Straitwaies on heapes the thronging cloudes ariſe,
                        As though the heauen were angry with the night,
                        That it ſhould lend that comfort to his eies,
                        Deformed ſhadowes, glimpſing in his ſight
                        As darkenes, for it would more darkened be,
                        Through thoſe poore crannies for
                              •
                           de it ſelfe to ſee.
                     
                     
                        46
                        When all th'affliction that they could impoſe,
                        Euen to the full, and vtmoſt of their hate,
                        Aboue his torment yet his ſtrength aroſe,
                        As Nature made a couenant with Fate,
                        When now his watchfull and two wary foes,
                        That ceaſe not ſtill his woes to aggrauate,
                        All further helps ſuſpected to preuent,
                        To take his life to Berckley cloſely ſent.
                     
                     
                        
                        47
                        And ſubtilly a letter faſhioning,
                        Which in the wordes a double ſence doth beare,
                        Which ſeemes to bid them, not to touch the King,
                        Shewing withall how, vile a thing it were,
                        But by falſe poynting, is another thing,
                        And to diſpatch him, bids them not to feare,
                        which taught to find, theſe murderers need no more,
                        For which they ſtood too ready long before.
                     
                     
                        48
                        Whereas he haps a Chronicle to find
                        Of former kings, their raignes, their deaths, and deedes,
                        which ſome their lodgde forgotten had behind,
                        On which to paſſe the houres he falls to reede,
                        Thinking thereby to recreate his mind,
                        But in his breaſt this greater woe doth breede,
                        For when deepe ſorrow on the fancie ſeaſeth,
                        What ere we ſee, our miſery increaſeth.
                     
                     
                        49
                        Firſt of great William, Conquerour of this Ile,
                        (From whom hee's tenth that in ſucceſſion lies)
                        Whoſe power inforcde the Saxon to exile,
                        Planting new lawes, and forraine ſubtilties,
                        Force and ſubiection, ſo to reconcile
                        The puniſhment of Harolds tyrannies,
                        which he applies with arguments ſo ſtrong,
                        To the due courſe of his iuſt puniſht wrong.
                     
                     
                        
                        50
                        
                           Rufus his ſonne, duke Robert farre abroade,
                        Receiues the rule in weake infeebled ſtate,
                        His fathers ſteps that euidently troade,
                        Depreſſing thoſe who had beene conquerd late,
                        Wiſhing releaſe of this their gricuous loade,
                        Vnder the guidance of their former fate,
                        The place for men that did to beaſts intend,
                        A beſtiall life had laſt a beaſtly end.
                     
                     
                        51
                        
                           Henry the yongſt, his brother William dead,
                        Taketh the Crowne from his vſurpfull hand,
                        Due to the eldeſt good duke Roberts head,
                        Bearing our Red Croſſe in the Holy Land,
                        whoſe force farre off ſo much diminiſhed,
                        That his returne diſabled to withſtand,
                        when thoſe for whom th'unnaturall war was done,
                        The ſea deuours, he left without a ſonne.
                     
                     
                        52
                        To Mawd the Empreſſe he the Scepter leaues,
                        His onely daughter, which by falſe pretext
                        
                           Stephen Earle of Bolloine forcibly bereaues,
                        
                           Henries falſe nephew in ſucceſſion next,
                        By which the Land a ſtranger warre receaues,
                        wherewith it grew ſo miſerably vext:
                        Till Stephen failing, and his iſſue reft,
                        T'the heires of Mawd the regall Scepter left.
                     
                     
                        
                        53
                        The ſecond Henry, Mawd the Empreſſe ſonne,
                        Of th'Engliſh line Plantagenet the firſt,
                        By Stephens death a glorious raigne begunne,
                        whoſe youth prolongd to make his age accurſt,
                        By his ſonne Henries coronation,
                        Which to his dayes much woe and ſorrow nurſt,
                        when thoſe for whom he conquerd, to make great,
                        Abroad his townes, at home vſurpde his ſeate.
                     
                     
                        54
                        
                           Richard his ſonne that after him ſucceedes,
                        Who not content with what was ſafely ours,
                        A man lift vp to great and glorious deedes,
                        Into the Eaſt tranſportes our valiant powres,
                        Where with his ſworde whilſt many a Pagan bleedes,
                        Relentleſſe Fate haſtes on vntimely howres,
                        And makes a period to this hopefull ſtory,
                        Euen in the ſpring and bloſſome of his glory.
                     
                     
                        55
                        When him ſucceedes his faithleſſe brother Iohn,
                        
                        Murthring yong Arthur by oppreſſefull might,
                        Climing by ſorce to his vſurped throne,
                        Iuſtly with poyſon was repayde his ſpight,
                        His life to all men is ſo hatefull growne,
                        Who grieues his wrongs that ne're did any right?
                        That on the Cleargie ryrannouſly fed,
                        Was by the Cleargie iuſtly puniſhed.
                     
                     
                        
                        56
                        
                           Henry his ſonne now crowned very yong,
                        Who for the hate they to his father bare,
                        His ſtate of raigning ſtoode in queſtion long,
                        Or to be left vnto a ſtrangers care;
                        With whom the Barrons, inſolent and ſtrong,
                        For the old Charter in commotion are,
                        Which his long raine ſo carefully attends
                        Granting, his daies in peace ſecurely ends.
                     
                     
                        57
                        From him proceedes a Prince, iuſt, wiſe, and ſage,
                        (In all things happy but in him his ſonne)
                        For whom euen nature did herſelfe engage,
                        More then in man, in this Prince to haue done,
                        Whoſe happy raigne, recur'd the former rage,
                        By the large bounds he to his Empire wonne,
                        As the firſt Edward had the ſecond beene,
                        O what a flow of glory had we ſeene!
                     
                     
                        58
                        Turning the leafe as finding vnawares,
                        What day yong Edward Prince of Wales was borne,
                        Which letters ſeeme like Magique Characters,
                        Or to deſpight him they were made in ſcorne,
                        Marking the paper like diſ-figuring ſtars,
                        O let that name (quoth he) from bookes be torne,
                        Leſt in that place the ſad diſpleaſed earth,
                        Doe loath it ſelfe as ſlaundered with my birth.
                     
                     
                        
                        59
                        From thence heereafter humane birth exil'd,
                        By th'earth deuour'd, or ſwallowed by the ſea,
                        And fame enquiring for that luckleſſe child,
                        Say twas abortiue, or elſe ſtolne away;
                        And leſt, O Time, thou be therewith defil'd,
                        In thy vnnumbred courſe deuoure that day;
                        Let all be done that power can bring to paſſe,
                        Onely forget that ſuch there euer was.
                     
                     
                        60
                        The troubled teares now ſtanding in his eyes,
                        Through which as glaſſes he is forc'd to looke,
                        Make letters ſeeme as rondlets that ariſe,
                        By a ſtone caſt into a ſtanding brooke,
                        Appearing to him in ſuch various wiſe,
                        And at one time ſuch ſundry faſhions tooke,
                        Which like deluding monſters do affright,
                        And with their fowle ſhapes terrifie his ſight.
                     
                     
                        61
                        When on his ſaint bed falling downe at laſt,
                        His troubled ſpirit fore-telling danger nie,
                        When (forth) the doores a fearefull howling caſt,
                        To let thoſe in by whom a King ſhould die;
                        Whereat he ſtarts, amaz
                              •
                           d and agaſt,
                        Theſe ruthleſſe villaines all vpon him flie,
                        Sweete Prince, alas in vaine thou call'ſt for aide,
                        By theſe accurſed homicides betraide.
                     
                     
                        
                        62
                        O be not authors of ſo vile an act,
                        My blood on your poſteritie to bring,
                        Which after times with horror ſhall diſtract,
                        When Fame euen hoarce with age your ſhame ſhall ring,
                        And by recounting of ſo vile a fact,
                        Mortalitie ſo much aſtoniſhing,
                        That they ſhal count their wickedneſſe ſcarce ſinne,
                        To that which long before their time hath bin.
                     
                     
                        63
                        And if your hate be deadly, let me liue,
                        For that aduantage angry heauen hath left,
                        That except life, takes all that it could giue,
                        But for iuſt vengeance ſhould not quite bereft;
                        Me yet with greater miſery to grieue,
                        Reſerue a while this remnant of their theft,
                        That that which ſpent frō th'reſt ſhould interdict me,
                        Alone remaining, doth withall afflict me.
                     
                     
                        64
                        Thus ſpake this wofull and diſtreſſed Lord,
                        As yet his breath found paſſage to and fro,
                        With many a ſhort pant, many a broken word,
                        Many a ſore grone, many a grieuous throw,
                        whilſt yet his ſpirit could any ſtrength affoord,
                        Though with much paine disburdning of his woe,
                        Till laſtly gaſping by their maiſt
                              •
                           ring ſtrength,
                        His kingly heart ſubiects it ſelfe at length.
                     
                     
                        
                        65
                        When twixt two beds they cloſe his wearied corſe,
                        Baſely vncou'ring of his ſecret part,
                        Without all humane pittie and remorce,
                        With burning yron thruſt him to the hart,
                        O that my Muſe had but ſufficient force,
                        T'explaine the torment in the which thou art,
                        Which whilſt with words we coldy do expreſſe,
                        Thy paine made greater that we make it leſſe.
                     
                     
                        66
                        When thoſe in dead and depth of all the night,
                        Good ſimple people that are dwelling neare,
                        From quiet ſleepe whom care did now affright,
                        That his laſt ſhreeke and wofull cry do heare,
                        Euen pittying that miſerable wight,
                        As twixt compaſſion, and obedient feare,
                        Lift their ſad eyes with heauy ſleepe oppreſt,
                        Praying to heauen to giue the ſoule good reſt.
                     
                     
                        67
                        Still let the buildings ſigh his bitter grones,
                        And euermore his ſad complaints repeate,
                        And let the dull walls and the ſenceleſſe ſtones,
                        By the impreſſion of his torment, ſweate,
                        As wanting ſounds wherewith to ſhew his mones,
                        With all ſharpe paine and agony repleate,
                        That all may thether come that ſhall be told it,
                        As in a mirror cleerely to behold it.
                     
                     
                        
                        68
                        When now the Genius of this wofull place,
                        Beeing the guide to his affrightfull ghoſt,
                        With haire diſ
                              •
                           eued, and a gaſtly face,
                        Shall haunt the priſon where his life was loſt;
                        And as the denne of horror and diſgrace,
                        Let it be fearefull vnto all the coaſt,
                        That thoſe heereafter that do trauell neere,
                        Neuer behold it but with heauy cheere.
                     
                     The end of the fifth Canto.
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        ❧ The ſixth Booke of the Barrons warres.
                     
                        The Argument.
                        
                           Lord Mortimer made Earle of March; when he
                           And the faire Queene rule all things by their might,
                           The pompe wherin at Nottingham they be,
                           The coſt wherewith their amorous Court is dight,
                           Enuide by thoſe their hatefull pride that ſee,
                           The King attempts the dreadfull caue by night,
                           Entring the Castell, taketh him from thence,
                           And March at London dies for the offence.
                        
                     
                     
                        1
                        INforc'd of other accidents to ſing,
                        (Bearing faire ſhowes of promiſed delight,
                        Somewhat to ſlacke this melancholie ſtring,)
                        That new occaſions to our Muſe excite,
                        To our conceit ſtrange obiects faſhioning,
                        Doth our free numbers liberally inuite,
                        Matter of moment much to be reſpected,
                        Muſt by our pen be ſeriouſly directed.
                     
                     
                        
                        2
                        And now the time more cuuningly redeeming,
                        Theſe fraudfull courſes fitly to contriue,
                        How ill ſo e're, to beare the faireſt ſeeming,
                        For which they now muſt diligently ſtriue,
                        Caſting all waies to gaine the ſame eſteeming,
                        That to the world it proſprouſly might thriue,
                        This farre gone on, now with the hand of might,
                        Vpon this wrong to build a laſting right.
                     
                     
                        3
                        The pompous Synod of theſe earthly Gods;
                        At Salsbury ſelected by their King,
                        To ſet all euen that had beene atods,
                        And into faſhion their diſſignes to bring,
                        And ſtrongly now to ſettle their abodes,
                        That peace might after from their actions ſpring;
                        Firmely t'eſtabliſh what was well begunne,
                        Vnder which colour mighty things were done.
                     
                     
                        4
                        When Mortimer purſuing his deſire,
                        Whilſt eu'ry engine had his temperate heate,
                        To b'Earle of March doth ſuddainely aſpire,
                        T'increaſe the honor of his antient ſeate,
                        That his command might be the more entire;
                        Who now but onely Mortimer is great?
                        Who knew a kingdome as her lot was throwne,
                        Which hauing all, would neuer ſtarue her owne.
                     
                     
                        
                        5
                        Now ſtand they firme as thoſe celeſtiall Poles,
                        Twixt which the ſtarres in all their courſe do moue,
                        Whoſe ſtrength this frame of gouernement vpholds,
                        An argument their wiſedomes to approue.
                        Which way ſoe're the time in motion roles,
                        So perfect is the vnion of their loue;
                        For right is ſtill moſt abſolute alone,
                        Where power and fortune kindely meete in one.
                     
                     
                        6
                        Whilſt Edwards non-age giues a further ſpeede,
                        To th'antient foe-man to renew the warre,
                        Which to preuent they muſt haue ſpeciall heede,
                        Matters ſo ſtrangely manag'd as they are,
                        Which otherwiſe, if their neglect ſhould breede,
                        Nothing yet made, it might not eaſily marre,
                        Which with the moſt, reſeruing their eſtate,
                        Inforc'd to purchaſe at the deereſt rate.
                     
                     
                        7
                        So much t'releaſe the homage as ſuffic'd,
                        Mongſt which that deed namde Ragman, of renown,
                        By which the kings of Scotland had deuiſde,
                        Their fealty vnto the Engliſh crowne,
                        With other Reliques that were highly prizde,
                        As that which forc'd the greateſt part to frowne;
                        Th'blacke Croſſe of Scotland (men did omenous deeme)
                        Being a Relique of ſo hie eſteeme.
                     
                     
                        
                        8
                        To colour which, and to confirme the peace,
                        They make a marrige twixt the Scot and vs,
                        To giue more ſtrength vnto this ſtrange releaſe,
                        Which vnto all men ſeemd ſo dangerous
                        Whilſt Roberts raigne, and after his deceaſe,
                        The league might euer be continued thus,
                        
                           Dauid the Prince the Lady Iane ſhould take,
                        which twixt the Realms a laſting bond ſhuld make.
                     
                     
                        9
                        When th'Earle of Kent that being one of thoſe,
                        Which in their actions had a powerfull hand,
                        Perceiuing them of matters to diſpoſe,
                        To the ſubiection of ſo great a land,
                        Finding the inconuenience that growes
                        Vnder the guidance of their wilfull hand,
                        To ſhake their power whilſt he ſtrangely doth caſt,
                        His fatall end too violently doth haſte.
                     
                     
                        10
                        Which giuing out his brother yet to liue,
                        (Long now ſuppoſed the deceaſed King)
                        Vnto his nephew might that ſcandall giue,
                        As into queſtion might his title bring:
                        Ill this report beganne, and worſe it thriue,
                        Being ſo foule and dangerous a thing,
                        Which being the motiue of inteſtine ſtrife,
                        The time not long ere it bereft his life.
                     
                     
                        
                        11
                        Whilſt Edward takes what late their power did giue,
                        Whoſe non-age craues their bountifull protection,
                        Which know to rule whilſt he muſt learne to liue,
                        From their experience taking his direction,
                        Which more and more their doubtfull hopes reuiue,
                        When borne to raigne, yet crownd by their election,
                        Th'allegiance duely dooth to him belong,
                        Now makes their faction abſolutely ſtrong.
                     
                     
                        12
                        Prouiding for protection of the king,
                        Men of moſt power, and nobleſt of the Pecres,
                        That no diſtaſte vnto the realme might bring,
                        For ripened iudgement, or well ſeaſoned yeeres,
                        With comelines all matters managing,
                        Yet whilſt they row, tis Mortimer that ſteeres,
                        wel might we think the man were worſe than blind,
                        That wanted ſea-roome, and could rule the wind.
                     
                     
                        13
                        To ſmoothe the path wherein this courſe was gone,
                        Which as a teſt might to their actions ſtand,
                        And giue more full poſſeſſion of their owne,
                        In being receiued from a ſoucraine band,
                        Into their boſomes abſolutely throwne,
                        Both for the good, and ſafety of the land:
                        When their proceedings colourd with this care,
                        To the worlds eye ſo faire an out-ſide bare.
                     
                     
                        
                        14
                        All complement that appertainde to ſtate,
                        By giuing greatnes eu'ry honored rite,
                        To feed thoſe eies that did their houres avvaite;
                        And by all meanes to nouriſh their delight,
                        That entertaining loue, they welcome hate,
                        And vvith free bounty equally inuite,
                        A Princes wealth in ſpending ſtill doth ſpred,
                        Like to a brooke with many fountaines fed.
                     
                     
                        15
                        To Nottingham the Norths emperious eye,
                        Which as a Pharus guardes the goodly ſoile,
                        And armd by Nature danger to defie,
                        There to repoſe him ſafely after toile,
                        Where treaſon leaſt aduantage might eſpie,
                        Cloſely conuaies this great in-valued ſpoile:
                        That by reſiding from the publique ſight,
                        He might more freely reliſh his delight.
                     
                     
                        16
                        Nine ſcore in checke attending in their court,
                        Whom honored Knighthood knitts in mutuall bands,
                        Men moſt ſelect, of ſpeciall worth and ſort,
                        Much might they doe that haue ſo many hands,
                        Who payes not tribute to this lordly port?
                        This hie-rearde Caſtell eu'ry way commands;
                        Thus like thoſe Giants gainſt great heauen they riſe,
                        Which darted Rockes at the emperiall skies.
                     
                     
                        
                        17
                        It ſeemes in him Fame meanes hir power to ſhow,
                        And twixt her wings to beare him through the skies,
                        He might more eaſly ſee the things below,
                        Hauing aboue them mounted him ſo hie,
                        Vnto whoſe will they meckely ſeeme to bow,
                        Vnder whoſe greatnes meaner powers doe 
                              •
                           e:
                        All things concurre with faire ſucceſlefull chance,
                        To raiſe that man whom Fortune will aduance.
                     
                     
                        18
                        Heere all along the flower enameld vales,
                        The ſiluer. Trent on pearly ſand
                              •
                            dooth ſlide,
                        And to the medowes telling wanton tales,
                        Her Criſtall limbs laſciuiouſly in pride,
                        (As rauiſhed with the enamored gales,)
                        with often turnings caſts from ſide to ſide,
                        As loath ſhe were the ſweete ſoyle to for ſake,
                        And caſt her ſelfe into the German lake.
                     
                     
                        19
                        Neare whom; faire Sherwood wildely bent to roue,
                        Twines her looſe armes about the flattering Towers,
                        By the milde ſhadowes of her ſcattered groue,
                        Lends winter ſhelter, and giues' ſummer bowers,
                        As with the flood in curteſie it ſtroue,
                        And by repulſing the ſharpe Northerne ſhowers:
                        Courts the prowd Caſtell, who by turning to her,
                        Smiles to behold th'laſciuious wod-nymph wo hir.
                     
                     
                        
                        20
                        Who being retirde ſo ſtrictly to this place,
                        To this faire ſted the Princes perſon drawes,
                        When Fortune ſeemes their greatnes to embrace,
                        That as a working and eſpeciall cauſe,
                        Effects each formall ceremonious grace,
                        As by her iuſt and neceſſary lawes,
                        That in the towne retaines his kingly ſeate,
                        With Marches Court the Caſtle is repleate.
                     
                     
                        21
                        Occaſiond where, in counſels to debate,
                        And by the king conueniently is met,
                        So ſoueraigne and magnificent in ſtate,
                        As might all eies vpon his greatneſſe ſet,
                        Prizing his honour at that coſtly rate,
                        As to the ſame due reuerence might beget,
                        which as the obiect ſundry paſſions wrought,
                        Stirring ſtrange forms in many a wandring thoght.
                     
                     
                        22
                        Could blind ambition find the meaneſt ſtay
                        His diſproportiond and vaine courſe to guide,
                        Taſſure ſome ſafety in that ſlippery way,
                        Where the moſt worldly prouident doe ſlide,
                        Feeling the ſteep fall threatning ſure decay,
                        Beſotted in the wantonneſſe of pride,
                        The minde aſſuming abſoluter powres,
                        Might checke the fraile mortality of ours.
                     
                     
                        
                        23
                        But ſtill in pleaſure ſitting with exceſſe,
                        His ſauory junkett taſted with delight,
                        Ne're can that glutton appetite ſuppreſſe,
                        Where eu'ry diſh inuites a licoriſh ſight,
                        Nor hauing much, is his deſire the leſle,
                        Till tempted paſt the compaſſe of his might,
                        The pampered ſtomacke more than well ſuffizde,
                        Caſts vp the ſurfet lately gurmundizde.
                     
                     
                        24
                        And when ſom brook from th'ouer moiſtned ground
                        By ſwelling waters prowdly ouer ſlowd,
                        Stoppeth his 
                              ••
                           rrent, ſhouldrrth downe his mownd,
                        And from his courſe dooth quite himſelfe vnloade,
                        The bordring meddowes eu'ry where ſurrownd,
                        Diſperſing his owne riches all abroade,
                        Spending the ſtore he was maintained by,
                        Leaues his firſt channell deſolate and dry.
                     
                     
                        25
                        When now thoſe few that many teares had ſpent,
                        And long had wept on murthered Edwards graue,
                        Muttring in corners, grieud, and diſcontent,
                        And finding ſome a willing care that gaue,
                        Sti
                              •
                            as they durſt, bewraying what they meant,
                        Tending his pride and greatnes to depraue,
                        Vrging withall, what ſome might iuſtly do,
                        If things thus borne, were rightly lookt into,
                     
                     
                        
                        26
                        Some giue it out, that March by blood to riſe,
                        Had cut off Kent, the man might next ſucceed,
                        And his late treaſons falſly did ſurmiſe,
                        As a meere colour to this lawleſſe deede,
                        That his ambition onely did deuiſe,
                        In time the royall family to weede,
                        When in account there was but only one,
                        That kept him off from ſtepping to the throne.
                     
                     
                        27
                        And thoſe much buſied in the former times,
                        Then credulous that honour was his end,
                        And by the hate they bare to others crimes,
                        Did not his faults ſo carefully attend,
                        Perceiuing how he deſolutely climes,
                        (Hauing thus brought his purpoſe to an end)
                        With a ſeuere eye now more ſtrictly looke
                        Into the courſe that his ambition tooke.
                     
                     
                        28
                        All fence the tree that ſerueth for a ſhade,
                        Whoſe large growne body doth repulſe the winde,
                        Vntill his waſtefull branches do inuade,
                        The ſtraighter plants, and them in priſon binde,
                        And as a tyrant to the weaker made;
                        When like a foule deuourer of his kinde,
                        Vnto his roote all put their hands to hew,
                        Whoſe romth but hinders others that would grow.
                     
                     
                        
                        29
                        Thus at his eaſe whilſt he ſecurely ſate,
                        And to his will theſe things aſſured were,
                        With a wel gouernd and contented fate,
                        Neuer ſo much freed from ſuſpitious feare,
                        Wel fortifide, and in ſo good eſtate,
                        As not admits of danger to be neare,
                        But ſtill we ſee before a ſodaine ſhower,
                        The ſunne ſhines hotſt, and hath the greateſt power.
                     
                     
                        30
                        Within the Caſtle hath the Queene deuiſde
                        A chamber with choice rarities ſo frought,
                        As in the ſame ſhe had imparadizde
                        Almoſt what man by induſtrie hath ſought,
                        where, with the curious penſill was comprizde,
                        what could with colours by the Arte be wrought,
                        In the moſt ſure place of the Caſtle there,
                        which ſhe had namde the Tower of Mortimer.
                        
                     
                     
                        31
                        An orball forme with pillers ſmall compoſde,
                        Which to the top like paralels doe beare,
                        Arching the compaſſe where they vvere incloſde,
                        Faſhioning the faire roofe like the hemiſphere,
                        In whoſe partitions by the lines diſpoſde,
                        All the cleere Northerne Aſteriſmes were
                        In their corporeall ſhapes with ſtarres inchaſed,
                        As by th'old Poets they in heauen were placed.
                     
                     
                        
                        32
                        About which lodgings, towards the vpper face,
                        Ran a fine bordure circularly led,
                        As equall twixt the hi'ſt point and the baſe,
                        That as a Zone the waſte ingirdled,
                        That lends the ſight a breathing or a ſpace,
                        Twixt things neere view, and thoſe farre ouer head;
                        Vnder the which the Painters curious skill,
                        In liuely formes the goodly roome did fill.
                     
                     
                        33
                        Heere Phoebus clipping Haycinthus ſtood,
                        whoſe liues laſt drops his ſnowie breaſt imbrew,
                        The ones teares mixed with the others blood,
                        That ſhoul't be blood or teares, no ſight could view,
                        So mix'd together in a little flood,
                        Yet heere and there they ſeu'rally with-drew,
                        The pretty wood-nimphs chafing him with balme,
                        To bring the ſweete boy from his deadly qualme.
                     
                     
                        34
                        With the Gods Lire, his quiuer and his bow,
                        His golden mantle caſt vpon the ground,
                        T'expreſſe whoſe geiefe, Art euen her beſt did ſhow,
                        The ſledge ſo ſhadowed ſtill ſeem'd to rebound,
                        To counterfet the vigor of the blow,
                        As ſtill to giue new anguiſh to the wound,
                        The purple flowre ſprung from the blood that run,
                        That opneth ſince, and cloſeth with the Sun.
                     
                     
                        
                        35
                        By which the heyfer Io, Ioues faire rape,
                        Gazing her new tane figure in a brooke,
                        The water ſhadow'd to obſerue the ſhape,
                        In the ſame forme that ſhe on it doth looke:
                        So cunningly to clowde the wanton ſcape,
                        That gazing eyes, the portrature miſtooke,
                        By proſpectiue deuiſde beholding now,
                        This way a maiden, that way 
                              •
                           t ſeemde a Cow.
                     
                     
                        36
                        Swiſt Mercury like to a Sheepheards boy,
                        Sporting with Hebe by a fountaine brim,
                        with many a ſweete glance, many an amorous toy,
                        He ſprinckling drops at her, and ſhe at him;
                        wherein the Painter ſo explainde their ioy,
                        As though his skill the perfect life could lim;
                        Vpon whoſe browes the water hung ſo cleere,
                        As throgh the drops the faire skin might appeare.
                     
                     
                        37
                        And Ciffy Cynthus with a thouſand birds,
                        whoſe freckled plumes adorne his buſhy crowne,
                        Vnder whoſe ſhadow graze the ſtragling heards,
                        Out of whoſe top the freſh ſprings trembling downe,
                        Dropping like fine pearle through his ſhaggy beards,
                        With moſſe and climing Ivie ouer-growne,
                        The Rocke ſo liuely done in eu'ry part,
                        As Nature could be paterned by Art.
                     
                     
                        
                        38
                        The naked Nimphs ſome vp and downe deſcending,
                        Small ſcattering flowers at one another flung,
                        With nimble turnes their limber bodies bending,
                        Cropping the blooming branches lately ſprung,
                        (Vpon the briers their coloured mantles rending)
                        Which on the Rockes grew heere and there among;
                        Some combe their haire, ſome making garlands by,
                        As with delight might ſatisfie the eye.
                     
                     
                        39
                        There comes prowde Phaeton tumbling through the clowdes,
                        Caſt by his Palfraies that their raines had broke,
                        And ſetting fire vpon the welked ſhrowdes,
                        Now through the heauen run madding from the yoke,
                        The elements together thruſt in crowdes,
                        Both Land and Sea hid in a reeking ſmoke,
                        Drawne with ſuch life, as ſome did much deſire,
                        To warme themſelues, ſome frighted with the fire.
                     
                     
                        40
                        The riuer Po, that him receiuing burnde,
                        His ſeauen ſiſters ſtanding in degrees,
                        Trees vnto women ſeeming to be turnde,
                        As the gods turnde the women into trees,
                        Both which at once ſo mutually that mournde,
                        Drops from their boughs, or tears fell from their eyes,
                        The fire ſeemde to be water, water flame,
                        Such excellence in ſhewing of the ſame.
                     
                     
                        
                        41
                        And to this lodging did the light inuent,
                        That it ſhould firſt a naturall courſe reflect,
                        Through a ſhort roome into the window ſent,
                        Whence it ſhould come expreſſiuely direct,
                        Holding iuſt diſtance to the lineament,
                        And ſhould the beames proport onably proiect;
                        And being thereby condenſated and graue,
                        To eu'ry figure a ſure colour gaue.
                     
                     
                        42
                        In part of which, vnder a golden Vine,
                        Whoſe broad leau'd brauches cou'ting ouer all,
                        Stood a rich bed, ſpred with this wanton twine,
                        Doubling themſelues in their laſciuious fall,
                        Whoſe rip'ned cluſ
                              •
                           ers ſeeming to decline,
                        VVhereas among the naked Cupids ſprawle,
                        Some at the ſundry coloured birds do ſhute,
                        Some ſwaruing vp to plucke the purple fruite.
                     
                     
                        43
                        On which a Tiſſue counterpoint was caſt,
                        
                           Arachnes web the ſame did not ſurpaſſe,
                        Wherein the ſtory of his fortunes paſt,
                        In liuely pictures neatly handled was;
                        How he eſcap'd the Tower, in France how grac'd,
                        with ſtones embroyd'red of a wondrous maſſe;
                        About the border in a curious fret,
                        Emblems, Empreſas, H
                              ••
                           oglifiques ſet.
                     
                     
                        
                        44
                        This flattering calme, congeales that thickned ſhower,
                        Which the full clowdes of poiſnous enuy fed,
                        whoſe deſolution waits th vnhappy hower,
                        To let the fury on his hatefull head,
                        which now was of that violence and power,
                        As his delights yet not imagined,
                        when men ſuppoſe in ſafety moſt to ſtand,
                        Then greateſt dangers are the neer'ſt at hand.
                     
                     
                        45
                        Yet finding the neceſſitie is ſuch,
                        To execute what he doth vndertake,
                        And that his crowne it did ſo neerely tuch,
                        If they too ſoone his ſleeping power awake;
                        Th'attempt was great, the danger was as much,
                        Muſt ſecretly prouide ſome courſe to take,
                        By which he might th'enterpriſe effect,
                        And moſt offend, where he might leaſt ſuſpect.
                     
                     
                        46
                        A deepe blacke caue low in the earth is found,
                        whoſe duskie entrance like pale Morpheus Cell,
                        with ſtrange Meanders windeth vnder ground,
                        where ſooty darkenes euermore doth dwell;
                        That with ſuch dread and horror doth abound,
                        As might be deemde an entrance into hell;
                        which Architects to ſerue the Caſtell made,
                        Whenas the Dane this Iland did inuade.
                     
                     
                        
                        47
                        Now on along this cranckling path doth keepe,
                        Then by a rocke turnes vp another way,
                        Now riſing vp, now falling towards the deepe,
                        As the ground leuell, or vnlevell lay;
                        And now direct, now angular doth creepe,
                        Nor in the courſe keepes any certaine ſtay,
                        Till in the Caſtell in a ſecret place,
                        He caſts the fowle maske from his clowdy face.
                     
                     
                        48
                        By which the King with a ſelected crew,
                        Of ſuch as he with his intent acquainted,
                        And well affected to this action knew,
                        That in reuenge of Edward neuer fainted,
                        And to their vtmoſt zealouſly purſue,
                        Such, whoſe cleere blood no time had euer tainted;
                        Aduentures now this labirinth t'aſſay,
                        To rowze the beaſt which kept them all at bay.
                     
                     
                        49
                        What time the Sunne with this day-laboring teames,
                        Is driuing downe vnto the Weſt apace,
                        T'refreſh his cauples in the Ocean ſtreames,
                        And coole the feruor glowing in his face,
                        Which now appeares by his hic-coloured beames,
                        To reſt him from our Hemiſphere a ſpace,
                        Leauing fowle darkeneſſe to poſſeſſe the skies,
                        The fitteſt times for bloody tragedies.
                     
                     
                        
                        50
                        With torches now attempting the ſad caue,
                        Which at their entrance ſeemeth in a fright,
                        At the reflection that the brightneſſe gaue,
                        As till that time it neuer ſaw the light;
                        Where light and darkneſſe with the power they haue,
                        Strongly for the preheminence do fight,
                        And each confounding other, both appeare,
                        As to their owne ſelues they contrary were.
                     
                     
                        51
                        The craggy cleeues which croſſe them as they go,
                        Make as their paſſage they would haue denide,
                        And threatning them their iourney to forſlow,
                        As angry with the path that was their guide,
                        As they their griefe and diſcontent would ſhow,
                        Curſing the hand that did them firſt diuide;
                        The combrous falls and riſings ſeeme to ſay,
                        This wicked action could not brooke the day.
                     
                     
                        52
                        The gloomy lamps this troope ſtill forward led,
                        Forcing ſhadowes follow on their backe,
                        Are like the mourners waiting on the dead,
                        And as the deede, ſo are they vgly blacke;
                        Hate goes before, confuſion followed,
                        The ſad portents of blood-ſhed, and of wracke;
                        Theſe faint dim-burning lights as all amazed,
                        At thoſe deformed ſhades whereon they gazed.
                     
                     
                        
                        53
                        The clattering armes their maiſters ſeeme to chide,
                        As they would reaſon wherefore they ſhould wound,
                        And ſtriking with the points from ſide to ſide,
                        As though euen angry with the hallow ground,
                        That it this vile and ruthleſſe act ſhould hide,
                        whoſe ſtony roofe lock'd in their dolefull ſound,
                        And hanging in the creekes, draw backe againe,
                        As willing them from murther to refraine.
                     
                     
                        54
                        Now waxing late, and after all theſe things,
                        Vnto her chamber is the Queene withdrawne,
                        To whom a choice Muſitian plaies and ſings,
                        Repoſing her vpon a ſtate of Lawne,
                        In night attire diuinely glittering,
                        As th'approaching of the cheerefull dawne,
                        Leaning vpon the breaſt of Mortimer,
                        
                        Whoſe voice more then the muſick pleas'd her eare.
                     
                     
                        55
                        Where her faire breaſts at liberty are let,
                        where violent veines in curious branches flow,
                        where Venus Swans and milkie Doues are ſet,
                        Vpon the ſwelling mounts of driuen ſnow,
                        where Loue whilſt he to ſport himſelfe doth get,
                        Hath loſt his courſe nor findes which way to goe,
                        Incloſed in this Labyrinth about,
                        Where let him wander ſtill, yet ne're get out.
                     
                     
                        
                        56
                        Her looſe golde haire, O gold, thou arte too baſe,
                        were it not ſinne to name thoſe ſilke threeds haire,
                        Declining downe to kiſſe her fairer face,
                        But no word faire enough for thing ſo faire,
                        O what hie wondrous epethite can grace,
                        Or giue the due praiſe to a thing ſo rare!
                        But where the pen failes, penſill cannot ſhow it,
                        Nor can be knowne vnleſſe the mind do know it.
                     
                     
                        57
                        She laies thoſe fingers on his manly cheeke,
                        The gods pure Scepters, and the dartes of loue,
                        which with a touch might make a tygre meeke,
                        Or the maine Atlas from his place remoue,
                        So ſo
                              •
                           t, ſo feeling, delicate, and ſleeke,
                        As Nature ware the lillies for a gloue,
                        As might beget life where was neuer none,
                        And put a ſpirite into the flinty ſtone.
                     
                     
                        58
                        The fire of precious wood the lights perfume,
                        vvhoſe perfect cleereneſſe on the painting ſhone,
                        As eu'ry thing to ſweetnes did conſume,
                        Or eu'ry thing had ſweetnes of it owne,
                        And to it ſelfe this portrayed did reſume,
                        The ſmell wherewith his naturall is growne,
                        That light gaue colour on each thing it fell,
                        And to the colour the perfume gaue ſmell.
                     
                     
                        
                        59
                        Vpon the ſundry pictures they deuiſe,
                        And from one thing they to another runne,
                        Now they commend that body, then thoſe eyes,
                        How well that bird, how well that flowre was done,
                        Now this part ſhadowed, and how that doth riſe,
                        This top is clouded, and that traile is ſpunne,
                        The landskip mixtures, and delineatings,
                        And in that Arte a thouſand curious things.
                     
                     
                        60
                        Looking vpon prowde Phaeton wrapt in fire,
                        The gentle Queene doth much bewaile his fall,
                        But Mortimer more praiſing his deſire,
                        To looſe a poore life, or to gouerne all;
                        And though he did ambitiouſly aſpire,
                        And by his minde is made prowde Fortunes thrall,
                        Yet in deſpight when ſhe her worſt hath done,
                        He periſht in the chariot of the Sunne.
                     
                     
                        61
                        The Queene ſaith Phoebus is much forcde by Arte,
                        Nor can ſhe find how his embraces be,
                        But Mortimer now takes the Painters part,
                        Why thus great Empreſſe, thus, and thus, quoth he,
                        Thus holdes the boy, thus clips his fainting hart,
                        Thus twine their armes, and thus their lips you ſec:
                        You ſhalbe Phoebus, Hyacinthus I,
                        It were a life thus eu'ry houre to die.
                     
                     
                        
                        62
                        By this time neere, into the vpper hall,
                        Is rudely entred this diſordered rowt,
                        When they within ſuſpecting leaſt of all,
                        Diſchargde the guard that ſhould haue watcht without
                        O ſee how miſchiefe ſodainely doth fall,
                        And ſteales vpon vs, being freeſt from doubt.
                        How ere the life, the end is euer ſure,
                        And oft in death fond man is moſt ſecure.
                     
                     
                        63
                        Whilſt his lou'd Neuill, and deere Turrington,
                        
                        Amongſt the Ladies that attended there,
                        Relating things that antiently were done,
                        With ſuch diſcourſe as women loue to heare,
                        Staying delight, whilſt time ſo faſt doth runne,
                        Thus in the Lobby as they freely were,
                        Chargde on the ſodaine by this armed traine,
                        Both in the entrance miſerably ſlaine.
                     
                     
                        64
                        As from the ſnow-crownd Skidos lofty cleeues,
                        Som fleet wingd haggard towards the euening houre,
                        Stooping amongſt the More-bred Mallard driues,
                        And th'aire of all her featherd flockes doth skowre,
                        when backe vnto her former pitch ſhe ſtriues,
                        The feely fowle all proſtrate to her powre:
                        Such a ſharp ſhreek doth ring through all the vault,
                        Made by the Ladies at the firſt aſſault.
                     
                     
                        
                        65
                        
                           March now vnarmde (ſhe onely in his armes,
                        Too faire a ſhield, not made for fouler blowes)
                        That leaſt of all exſpected theſe alarmes,
                        And to be thus intrapped by his foes,
                        When he is moſt improuident of harmes,
                        O, had he had but weapons like his woes,
                        Either his valure had his breath redeemde,
                        Or in her ſight dide happily eſteemde.
                     
                     
                        66
                        Amongſt the others looking for the king,
                        In this blacke ſhew that (he aſſures him) is,
                        Though much diſguiſde, yet him imagining
                        By the moſt perfect lineaments of his,
                        Quoth he, the man thee to the Crowne did bring,
                        Might at thy hands the leaſt haue lookt for this,
                        And in this place, vnſeeming of the reſt,
                        Where onely ſacred ſolitude is bleſt.
                     
                     
                        67
                        Her preſence frees th'offender of his ill,
                        And as the eſſence makes the place diuine,
                        What ſtrong Decree can countermaund the will,
                        That gaue to thee the power that now is thine,
                        And in her armes preſeru'd in ſafety ſtill,
                        As the moſt pure inuiolable ſhrine,
                        Though thou thus irreligiouſly deſpiſe,
                        And dar'ſt profane theſe halowed liberties.
                     
                     
                        
                        68
                        But as when Illion fatally ſurpriſde
                        The Grecians iſſuing from the woodden horſe,
                        Their rage and fury prowdly exerciſde,
                        Opening the wide gates, letting in their force,
                        Putting in act what was before deuiſde,
                        Without all ſence of pitty or remorce,
                        With cries, ſhreekes, rumors in confuſed ſound,
                        words are broken off, complaints abruptly drownd.
                     
                     
                        69
                        Diſſolu'd to drops ſhe followes him, O teares,
                        Elixar like turne all to pearle you touch,
                        To weepe with her the building ſcarce forbeares,
                        The ſorrowes that ſhe vttereth are ſuch,
                        Able to wound th'impenitrabl'ſt eares,
                        Her plaints ſo piercing, and her woes ſo much,
                        when with th'abundance words wold hardly come,
                        Her eyes in ſilence ſpake when lips were dumbe.
                     
                     
                        70
                        Sweete ſonne (quoth ſhe) let not that blood be ſpilt,
                        Once prizd ſo deere as did redeeme thy Crowne,
                        Whoſe purity if 
                              •
                           ainted now with guilt,
                        The cauſe thereof efficiently thine owne,
                        That from the ruines of thy country built,
                        (Razde with diſſentions) thy ſubſtantiall throne,
                        And broke thoſe bounds thy kingdomes once confinde,
                        Into large France, to exerciſe thy minde.
                     
                     
                        
                        71
                        For the deere portion of that naturall blood,
                        Which lends thee heate, and nutriment of life,
                        Be not a nigg
                              •
                           rd of ſo ſmall a good,
                        Where bounty ſhould be plentifully rife,
                        Begg'd on thoſe knees at which thou oft haſt ſtood,
                        In thoſe armes circles might co
                              〈…〉
                           re this ſtrife,
                        O God! that breath from ſuch a boſome ſent,
                        Should thus in vaine be prodigally ſpent.
                     
                     
                        72
                        When in this vproare with the ſodaine fright,
                        Whilſt eu'ry one for 
                              •
                           afety ſeekes about,
                        And none regarding 
                              •
                           o preſerue the light,
                        Which being waſted ſadly goeth out,
                        Now in the midſt and terrour of the night,
                        At the departure of this armed rowt,
                        The Queene alone (at leaſt if any neare)
                        Her wretched women, yet halfe dead with feare.
                     
                     
                        73
                        When horror, darkenes, and her preſent woe,
                        Begin to worke on her afflicted minde,
                        And eu'ry one his tyranny doth ſhow,
                        Euen in the fulnes of his proper kinde,
                        In ſuch 
                              •
                           x
                              〈…〉
                           ſſe her accuſations flow,
                        This liberty vnto their power aſſignde,
                        Racking her conſcience by this torture due,
                        It ſelfe t'accuſe with whatſoere it knew.
                     
                     
                        
                        74
                        O God, to thinke (that not an houre yet paſt)
                        Her greatnes, freedome, and her hopes ſo hie,
                        The ſweet content wherein her thoughts were placde,
                        Her great reſpect in eu'ry humbled eye,
                        How now ſhe is abuſed how diſgracde,
                        Her preſent ſhame, her after miſery,
                        When eu'ry woe could by deſpaire be brought,
                        Preſents his forme to her diſtracted thought.
                     
                     
                        75
                        To London now a wretched priſner led,
                        
                           London where oft he triumpht with the Queene;
                        And but for ſpite of no man followed,
                        Scarcely thought on, who had for many beene,
                        Of all regard and ſtate impou'riſhed,
                        Where in exceſſe he often had bin ſeene:
                        Which at his fall doth make them wonder more,
                        Who ſawe the pompe wherein he liu'd before.
                     
                     
                        76
                        O miſery! where 
                              •
                           nce thou dooſt infeſt,
                        How ſoone thy vile contagion alters kinde,
                        That like a Circe metamorphiſeſt
                        The former habite of the humane minde,
                        That euen from vs dooſt ſeeme our ſelues to wreſt,
                        Striking our fraile and fading glories blinde,
                        And with thy vicious preſence in a breath,
                        Chain'ſt vs as ſlaues vnto pale fainting Death.
                     
                     
                        
                        77
                        At Weſtminſter a Parliment decreed,
                        To th'eſtabliſhing the ſafetie of the Crowne,
                        Where to his end they finally proceede,
                        All laying hand to dig this mountaine downe,
                        To which Time wills they haue eſpeciall heede,
                        Now whilſt the Fates thus angerly doe frowne,
                        The blood of Edward, and the Spenſers fall,
                        For their iuſt vengeance haſtily doe call.
                     
                     
                        78
                        The death of Kent that foule and loathſome blot,
                        Th'aſſuming of the Wardes and Liueries,
                        With Ione the Princeſſe married to the Scot,
                        he ſummes oft ſeized to his treaſuries,
                        And that by this might well haue beene forgot,
                        The ſigne at Stanhope to the enemies,
                        Or what elſe ript from the records of Time,
                        That any way might aggrauate his crime.
                     
                     
                        79
                        O dire Reuenge, when thou in time arte rakde,
                        From the r
                              •
                           de aſhes which preſeru'd thee long,
                        In the dry cindars where it ſeemde as ſlakde,
                        Matter to feed it forcde with breath of wrong,
                        How ſoone his hideous fury is awakde,
                        From the ſmall ſparks what flames are quickly ſprong,
                        And to that top dooth naturally aſpire,
                        Whoſe weight and greatnes once repreſt his fire.
                     
                     
                        
                        80
                        And what auailes his anſwer in this caſe,
                        Which now the time doth generally diſtaſt?
                        Where iudgement lookes with ſo ſeuere a face,
                        And all his actions vtterly diſgrac'd,
                        What fainting boſome giues him any place,
                        From out the faire ſeate of opinion caſt?
                        With pen and incke his ſorrowes to deceiue,
                        Thus of the faire Queene takes his lateſt leaue.
                     
                     
                        81
                        Moſt mighty Empreſſe s'daine not to peruſe,
                        The Swan like dirges of a dying man,
                        Vnlike thoſe raptures of the fluent Muſe,
                        In that ſweete ſeaſon when our ioyes began,
                        That did my youth with glorious fire infuſe,
                        When for thy gloue at Tilt I prowdly ran;
                        Whereas my ſtart
                              •
                           ing Courſer ſtrongly ſet,
                        Made fire to flie from Hartfords Burgone
                              •
                           .
                     
                     
                        82
                        The King your ſonne, which haſtneth on my death,
                        (Madam) you know I tendred as mine owne,
                        And when I might haue graſped out his breath,
                        I ſet him gently on his fathers throne,
                        Which now his power too quickly witneſſeth,
                        Which to this height and maieſty is growne;
                        But our deſert forgot, and he forgiuen,
                        As after death we wiſh to liue in heauen.
                     
                     
                        
                        83
                        And for the ſole rule whereon thus he ſtands,
                        Came baſtard William but himſelfe on ſhore,
                        Or borrowed not our fathers conqu'ring hands,
                        Which in the field our ancient enſignes bore,
                        (Guarded about with our well ordred bands)
                        Which his prowd Leopards for their ſafety wore,
                        Raging at Hastings like that ominous Lake,
                        From whoſe dread waues our glorious name we take
                     
                     
                        84
                        Had I beene chargde vpon mine armed horſe,
                        As when I came vnto the walles of Gaunt,
                        
                        Before the Belgike and Burgonian force,
                        There challenging, my Countries Combattant,
                        Borne from my ſeate in ſome robuſtious courſe,
                        That of my ſpoiles the enemy might vaunt,
                        Or had I falne vnder my battered ſhield,
                        And lent mine honour to ſome conquered field.
                     
                     
                        85
                        I haue not followed Fortun like a ſlaue,
                        To make her bounty any whit the leſſe,
                        By my deſert her iudgement to depraue,
                        Nor lent me aught I freely not confeſſe,
                        And haue returnd with intreſt what ſhe gaue,
                        A minde that ſuted with her mightineſſe,
                        He twice offends which ſinne in flattry beares,
                        Yet eu'ry houre he dies that euer feares.
                     
                     
                        
                        86
                        I cannot feare what forceth others quake,
                        The times and I haue tuggd together ſo,
                        Wonting my way through ſword and fire to make,
                        So oft conſtraind againſt the ſtreame to rowe,
                        To doubt with Death a couenant to make,
                        When I am growne familiar with my woe:
                        And nothing can th'afflicted conſcience grieue,
                        But he can pardon, that doth all forgiue.
                     
                     
                        87
                        And thus thou moſt adored in my heart,
                        Whoſe thoghts in death my humbled ſprite doth raiſe
                        Lady moſt faire, moſt deere, of moſt deſart,
                        Worthy of more than any mortall praiſe,
                        Condemned March, thus laſtly doth depart
                        From her, the greateſt Empreſſe of her dayes:
                        Nor in the duſt mine honor I interre,
                        Thus Caeſar dide, and thus dies Mortimer.
                        
                     
                     
                        88
                        To Nottingham this Letter brought vnto her,
                        Which is ſubſcribde with her Emperious ſtile,
                        Puts her in minde how once that hand did wooe her,
                        With this ſhort thought to pleaſe herſelfe a while,
                        Thus ſorrow can ſo ſubtilly vndooe her,
                        That with ſuch flattery doth her ſence beguile.
                        To giue a ſharper feeling to that paine,
                        Which her grieu'd heart was ſhortly to ſuſtaine.
                     
                     
                        
                        89
                        Putting her fingers to vnrip the ſeale,
                        Cleaning to keepe thoſe ſorrowes from her eyes,
                        As it were loth the tidings to reueale,
                        Whence griefe ſhould ſpring in ſuch varieties;
                        But ſtrongly vrg'd doth to her will appeale,
                        When the ſoft waxe vnto her touch implies,
                        Sticking vnto her fingers bloody red,
                        To ſhew the bad newes quickly followed.
                     
                     
                        90
                        Thus by degrees ſhe eaſly doth begin,
                        As the ſmall fiſh plaies with the baited hooke,
                        Then more and more to ſwallow ſorrow in,
                        As threatning death at eu'ry little looke;
                        Where now ſhe reades th'expences of her ſin,
                        Sadly ſet downe in this blacke dreadfull booke,
                        And thoſe deere ſummes were like to be deſray'd,
                        Before the ſame were abſolutely pay'd.
                     
                     
                        91
                        An hoaſt of woes her ſuddainely aſſaile,
                        As eu'ry letter wounded like a dart,
                        As though contending which ſhould moſt preuaile,
                        Yet eu'ry one doth pierce her to the hart,
                        As eu'ry word did others caſe bewaile,
                        And with his neighbour ſeemde to beare a part,
                        Reaſon of griefe each ſentence is to her,
                        And eu'ry line a true remembrancer.
                     
                     
                        
                        92
                        Greefe makes her reade, yet ſtraitwaies bids her leaue,
                        With which ore-charg'd ſhe neither ſees nor heares,
                        Her ſences now their Miſtris ſo deceiue,
                        The words do wound her eyes, the ſound her eares,
                        And eu'ry organe of the vſe bereaues,
                        When for a feſcue ſhe doth vſe her teares;
                        That when ſome line ſhe looſely ouer-paſt,
                        The drops do tell her where ſhe left the laſt.
                     
                     
                        93
                        O now ſhe ſees, was neuer ſuch a ſight,
                        And ſeeing, curs'd her ſorrow-ſeeing eye,
                        Yet thinkes ſhe is deluded by the light,
                        Or is abuſde by the orthography;
                        And by ſome other t'is deuiſde for ſpight,
                        Or pointed falſe, her ſchollerſhip to try;
                        Thus when we fondly ſooth our owne deſires,
                        Our beſt conceits oft proue the greateſt liers.
                     
                     
                        94
                        Her trembling hand as in a feauer ſhakes,
                        Wherewith the paper doth a little ſtirre,
                        Which ſhe imagines at her ſorrow ſhakes,
                        And pitties it, who ſhe thinkes pitties her,
                        Each ſmall thing ſomwhat to the greater makes,
                        And to the humor ſomething doth infer;
                        Which when ſo ſoone as ſhe her tongue could free,
                        O worthy Earle, deere loued Lord quoth ſhee.
                     
                     
                        
                        95
                        I will reſerue thy aſhes in ſome Vrne,
                        Which as a relique I will onely ſaue,
                        Mixt with the teares that I for thee ſhall mourne,
                        Which in my deere breaſt ſhall their buriall haue,
                        From whence againe they neuer ſhall returne,
                        Nor giue the honor to another graue,
                        But in that Temple euer be preſerued,
                        Where thou a Saint religiouſly art ſerued.
                     
                     
                        96
                        When ſhe breakes out to curſing of her ſonne,
                        But March ſo much ſtill runneth in her mind,
                        That ſhe abruptly ends what ſhe begunne,
                        Forgets her ſelfe, and leaues the reſt behind,
                        From this ſhe to another courſe doth runne,
                        To be reuengde in ſome notorious kind:
                        To which ſhe deepely doth ingage her troth,
                        Bound by a ſtrong vow and a ſolemne oth.
                     
                     
                        97
                        For pen and incke ſhe calles her maides without,
                        And the kings dealings will in griefe diſcouer,
                        But ſoone forgetting what ſhe went about,
                        She now begins to write vnto her louer,
                        Heere ſhe ſets downe, and there ſhe blotteth out.
                        Her griefe and paſſion doe ſo ſtrongly moue her:
                        When turning backe to reade what ſhe had writ,
                        She teares the paper, and condemnes her wit.
                     
                     
                        
                        98
                        And thus with contrarieties araiſed,
                        As waters chilneſſe wakeneth from a ſwownd,
                        Comes to her ſelfe, the agony appeaſed,
                        When colder blood more ſharpely feeles the wound,
                        And griefe her ſo incurably hath ſeized,
                        That for the ſame no remedie is found,
                        As the poore refuge to her reſtleſſe woes,
                        This of her griefe ſhe laſtly doth diſpoſe.
                     
                     
                        99
                        That now vnkinde King as thou art my ſonne,
                        Leauing the world, ſome legacie muſt giue thee,
                        My harts true loue the dying March hath wonne,
                        Yet that of all I will not quite bereaue thee;
                        The wrong and miſchiefe to thy mother done,
                        I thee bequeathe, ſo bound that they out liue thee,
                        That as my breaſt it hourely doth torment,
                        Thou maiſt enjoy it by my Teſtament.
                     
                     
                        100
                        Henceforth within this ſolitary place,
                        Abandoning for euer generall ſight,
                        A priuate life I willingly embrace,
                        No more rejoycing in the obuious light,
                        To conſumate the weary lingering ſpace,
                        Till death incloſe me with continuall night:
                        Each ſmall remembrance of delight to flie,
                        A conuertite and penitently die.
                     
                  
                  Finis.
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  To the Reader.
                  
                     SEing theſe Epiſtles are now to the world made publike, it is imagined that I ought to be accountable of my priuate meaning, chiefely for mine owne diſcharge, leſt being miſtaken, I fall in hazard of a inst and vniuerſall reprehenſion, for:
                     
                        Hae nugae ſeria ducent
                        In mala deriſum ſemel exceptumque ſiniſtre.
                     
                  
                  
                     Three points are eſpecially therefore to bee explained. Firſt, why I entitle this worke Englands Heroicall Epiſtles; then, why I obſerue not the perſons dignitie in the dedication; laſtly, why I haue annexed notes to euery Epiſtles end. For the firſt, the title I hope carrieth reaſon in it ſelfe, for that the most and greateſt perſons heere in, were Engliſh, or elſe, that their loues were obtained in England. And though (heroicall) bee properly vnderſtood of demi-gods, as of Hercules and Aeneas, whoſe parents were ſaid to be, the one celestall, the other mortall, yet is it alſo transferred to them, who for the greatneſſe of minde come neere to Gods. For to bee borne of a celeſtiall Incubus, is nothing elſe but to haue a great and mightie ſpirit, farre aboue the earthly weakneſſe of men; in which ſence, Ouid (whoſe imitator I partly profeſſe to bee) doth alſo vſe Heroicall. For the ſecond, ſeeing none to whom I haue dedicated any two Epiſtles, but haue their ſtates ouer-matched by them, who are made to ſpeake in the Epiſtles, howeuer the order is in dedication, yet in reſpect of their degrees in my deuotion, and

the cauſe before recited, I hope they ſuffer no diſparagement, ſeeing euery one is the first in their particular intereſt, hauing in ſome ſort, ſorted the complexion of the Epiſtles to the character of their iudgements to whom I dedicate them, excepting onely the blamefulnes of the perſons paſſion, in thoſe poynts wherin the paſſion is blamefull. Laſtly, ſuch manifeſt diffrence being betwixt euery one of them, where, or howſoeuer they be marſhalled, how can I be iuſtly appeached of vnaduiſement. For the third, becauſe the worke might in trueth be iudged brainiſh, if nothing but amorous humor were handled therein, I haue enter-wouen matters historicall, which vnexplaned, might defraude the minde of much content, as for example, in Queene Margarites Epiſtle to William de la Poole,

                        My Daizie flower, which once perfumde the aire,
                     
                  
                  Margarite in French ſignifies a Daizie, which for the alluſion to her name, this Queene did giue for her deuiſe; and this as others more, haue ſeemed to me not worthy the explaning.
                  
                  
                     Now, though no doubt I hadde neede to excuſe other things beſide, yet theſe moſt especially, the reſt I ouerpaſſe to eſchue tedious recitall, or to ſpeake as malicious enuy may, for that in trueth I ouerſee them. If they be as harmeleſly taken, as I meant them, it ſhall ſuffice to haue only touched the cauſe of the title of the Dedications, and of the Notes, whereby emboldned to publiſh the reſidue, (theſe not being accounted in mens opinions reliſhleſſe) I ſhall not laſtly be afraide to beleeue and acknowledge thee a gentle Reader.
                  
                  
                     M. D.
                  
               
               
                  
                  To M. Michaell Drayton.
                  
                     HOw can he write that broken hath his penne;
                     Hath rent his paper, throwne his incke away;
                     Deteſts the world, and company of men,
                     Becauſe they growe more hatefull day by day?
                     Yet with theſe broken reliques, mated mind,
                     And what a iuſtly-grieued thought can ſay:
                     I giue the world to know, I ne're could find,
                     A worke more like to liue a longer day.
                     Goe Verſe, an object for the prowdeſt eye;
                     Diſdaine thoſe which diſdaine to reade thee ouer,
                     Tell them they know not how they ſhould deſcry,
                     The ſecret paſſions of a wirty louer.
                     For they are ſuch, as none but thoſe ſhall know,
                     Whom Beauty ſchooles to hold the blind Boies bow.
                  
                  
                     Once I had vowd, (O who can all vowes keep?)
                     Henceforth to ſmother my vnlucky Muſe;
                     Yet for thy ſake ſhe ſtarted out of ſleepe,
                     Yet now ſhe dies: Then doe as kinsfolkes vſe;
                     Cloſe vp the eyes of my new-dying ſtile,
                     As I haue op'ned thy ſweeet babes ere-while.
                  
                  
                     E. St. Gent.
Duris decus omen:
               
               
                  
                  To M. Michaell Drayton.
                  
                     LOng haue I wiſht and hopde my weaker Muſe,
                     (In nothing ſtrong but my vnhappy loue)
                     Would giue me leaue my fortune to approue,
                     And view the world, as named, Poets vſe;
                     But ſtill her fruitleſſe boſome doth refuſe
                     To bleſſe me with indifferencie of praiſe,
                     Not daring (like to many) to abuſe
                     That title which true worth ſhould onely raiſe;
                     Thus bankerout, and deſpairing of mine owne,
                     I ſet my wiſh and hope (kind friend) on thee,
                     Whoſe fruite approu'd, and better fortune knowne,
                     Tells me thy Muſe my loues ſole heire muſt be,
                     So barren wombs embrace their neighbors yong,
                     So dumbe men ſpeake by them that haue a tong.
                     
                        Thomas Haſſall, Gent.
                     
                  
               
               
                  To M. Michaell Drayton.
                  
                     NOw I perceiue Pithagoras diuinde,
                     When he that mocked Maxim did maintaine,
                     That ſpirits once ſpoilde, reueſted were againe,
                     Though changde in ſhape, remaining one in mind;
                     Theſe loue ſicke Princes paſſionate eſtates;
                     Who feeling reades, he cannot but allow,
                     That Ouids ſoule reuines in Drayton now,
                     Still learnd in loue ſtill rich in rare conceits,
                     This pregnant ſpirit affecting further skill,
                     Oft altring forme, from vulgar wits retirde,
                     In diuers Ideoms mightily admirde,
                     Did proſecute that ſacred ſtudy ſtill;
                     While to a full perfection now attainde,
                     He ſings ſo ſweetly that himſelfe is ſtainde.
                     
                        William Alexander-Scotus.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  ¶ To the excellent Lady Lucie Counteſſe of Bedford.
                  
                     
                        MAdam, after all the admired wittes of this excellent age, which haue labored in the ſad complaints of faire and unfortunate Roſamond, and by the excellencie of inuention, haue ſounded the depth of her ſundry paſſions; I preſent to your Ladiſhip this Epiſtle of hers to King Henry, whome I may rather call her louer than beloued. Heere muſt your Ladiſhip behold variablenes in reſolution; woes conſtantly grounded; laments abruptly broken off; much confidence, no certainty, words begetting teares, teares confounding matter, large complaint
                           •
                         in little papers; and many deformed cares, in one vniformed Epiſtle. I ſtriue not to effect ſingularitie, yet would faine flie imitation, & proſtrate mine owne wants to other mens perfections. Your iudiciall eye muſt model forth what my pen hath layd together, much would ſhee ſay to a King, much would I ſay to a Counteſſe, but that the method of my Epiſtle muſt conclude the modeſtie of hers, which I wiſh may recommend my euer vowed ſeruice to your Honour.
                  
                  
                     Michaell Drayton.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                  The Epiſtle of Roſamond to King Henry the ſecond.
                  
                  
                     The Argument.
                     Henry the ſecond of that name, King of England, the ſon of Geffrey Plantaginet, Earle of Anlow, and Mawd the Empreſſe, hauing by long ſute and Princely gifts, won (to his vnlawfull deſire) faire Roſamond, the daughter of the Lord Walter Clyfford and to auoyde the danger of Ellinor his iealous Queene, had cauſed a Labyrinth to be made within his Pallace at Woodſtocke, in the centre wherof he had lodged his beauteous paramour. Whileſt the king is abſent in his warres in Normandie, this poore diſtreſſed Lady, incloſed in this ſolitary place, toucht with remorce of conſcience, writes to the king of her diſtreſſe and miſerable eſtate, vrging him by all meanes and perſwaſions, to cleere himſelfe of this infamie, and her of the griefe of minde, by taking away her wretched life.
                  
                  
                     IF yet thine eies (great Henry) may endure
                     Theſe tainted lines, drawne with a hand impure,
                     Which fain would bluſh, but feare keeps bluſhes back,
                     And therefore ſuted in diſpairing black,
                     This in loues name, O that theſe lips might craue,
                     But that ſweete name (vile I) prophaned haue,
                     
                        
Puniſh my fault, or pittie mine eſtate,
                     Reade 
                           〈◊〉
                         for loue, if not for loue, for hate.
                     If with my ſhame thine eies thou faine wouldſt feed,
                     Heere let them ſu
                           •
                        feit, on my ſhame to reede;
                     This ſcribled paper which 
                           〈◊〉
                         ſend to thee,
                     If noted rightly, doth reſemble mee;
                     As this pure ground, whereon th
                           •
                        ſe letters ſtand,
                     So pure was I, er
                           •
                        ſtained by thy hand;
                     Ere I was blotted with this foule offence,
                     So cleere and ſpotleſſe was mine innocence,
                     Now like theſe marks which taint this hatefull ſcroule,
                     Such the blacke ſinnes which ſpot my l
                           •
                        prous ſoule.
                     O Henry, why by loſſe thus ſhouldſt thou win?
                     To get by conqueſt? to enrich with ſinne?
                     Why on my name this ſlaunder dooſt thou bring,
                     To make my fault renowmed by a King?
                     Fame neuer ſtoopes to things but meane and poore,
                     The more our greatnes, makes our fault the more.
                     Lights on the ground, themſelues doe leſſ
                           •
                        n farre,
                     But in the ayre, each ſmall ſparke ſeemes a ſtarre.
                     Why on a womans frailtie wouldſt thou lay
                     This ſubtile plot, mine honour to betray?
                     Or thy vnlawfull pleaſure ſhouldſt thou buy
                     With vile expence of kingly maieſ
                           •
                        ie?
                     T'was not my minde conſented to this ill,
                     Then had I beene tranſported by my will:
                     For what my body was inforcde to doe,
                     (Heauen knowes) my ſoule did not conſent vnto;
                     For through mine eyes had ſhe her liking ſeene,
                     Such as my loue, ſuch had my louer beene.
                     True loue is ſimple, like his mother Truth,
                     
                        
Kindly affection, youth to loue with youth;
                     No ſharper corſiue to our blooming yeeres,
                     Then the colde badge of winter-blaſted haires.
                     Thy kingly power makes to withſtand thy foes,
                     But canſt not keepe backe age, with Time it growes,
                     Though honour our ambitious ſex doth pleaſe,
                     Yet in that honour, age a foule diſeaſe,
                     Nature hath her free courſe in all, and then,
                     Age is alike in Kings, and other men,
                     Which all the world will to my ſhame impute,
                     That I my ſelfe did baſely proſtitute;
                     And ſay that gold was fuell to the fire,
                     Gray haires in youth not kindling greene deſire.
                     O no; that wicked woman wrought by thee,
                     My tempter was to that forbidden tree,
                     That ſubtile Serpent, that ſeducing deuill,
                     Which bade me taſte the fruit of good and euill;
                     That Circe, by whoſe magicke I was charmd,
                     And to this monſtrous ſhape am thus transform'd,
                     That viperous hag, the foe to her owne kinde,
                     That wicked ſpirite vnto the weaker minde;
                     Our frailtes plague, our natures only curſe,
                     Hels deepſt damnation, the worſt euills worſe.
                     But Henry, how canſt thou affect me thus,
                     T'whom thy remembrance now is odious?
                     My hapleſſe name, with Henries name I found,
                     Cut in the glaſſe with Henries Diamond,
                     That glaſſe from thence faine would I take away;
                     But then I feare the aire would me betray;
                     Then doe I ſtriue to waſh it out with teares,
                     But then the ſame more euident appeares.
                     
                        
Then doe I couer it with my guilty hand,
                     Which that names witnes doth againſt me ſtand;
                     Once did I ſinne, which memory doth cherriſh,
                     Once I offended, but I euer perriſh.
                     What griefe can be, but time doth make it leſſe?
                     But infamie time neuer can ſuppreſſe.
                     Sometimes to paſſe the tedious irkeſome houres,
                     I climbe the toppe of Woodſtockes mounting towres,
                     Where in a Turret ſecretly I lie,
                     To view from farre ſuch as doe trauell by,
                     Whether (me thinkes) all caſt their eies at mee,
                     As through the ſtones my ſhame did make them ſee,
                     And with ſuch hate the harmeleſſe walls doe view,
                     As vnto death their eies would me purſue.
                     The married women curſe my hatefull life,
                     Which wrong a lawfull bed, a Queene, a wife;
                     The maidens wiſh I buried quicke may die,
                     The loathſome ſtaine to their virginitie.
                     Well knewſt thou what a monſter I vvould be
                     When thou didſt build this Labyrinth for me,
                     Whoſe ſtrange Meanders turning euery way,
                     Be like the courſe wherein my youth did ſtray;
                     Onely a Clue to guide me out and in,
                     But yet ſtill walke I circular in ſin.
                     As in the Ta
                           •
                        ras heere this other day,
                     My maide and I did paſſe the time away,
                     Mongſt many pictures which we paſſed by,
                     Theſeely gerle at length hapt to eſpie
                     Chaſte Lucrece picture, and deſires to knowe,
                     What ſhe ſhould be herſelfe that murdred ſo?
                     Why getle (quoth I) this is that Roman Dame,
                     
                        
Not able then to tell the reſt for ſhame,
                     My tongue doth mine owne guiltineſſe betray;
                     With that I ſend the pratling girle away,
                     Leſt when my liſping guilty tongue ſhould hault,
                     My lookes ſhould be the index to my fault.
                     As that life blood which from the heart is ſent,
                     In beauties field pitching his crimſon Tent,
                     In lonely ſanguine ſutes the Lillie cheeke,
                     Whilſt it but for a reſting place doth ſeeke;
                     And changing often-times with ſweete delight,
                     Conuerts the white to red, the red to white.
                     The louely bluſh the paleneſſe doth diſtaine;
                     The paleneſſe makes the bluſh more faire againe;
                     Thus in my breaſt a thouſand thoughts I carry,
                     Which in my paſſion diuerſly do vary.
                     Whenas the Sunne hales towards the Weſterne ſlade,
                     And the trees ſhadowes three times greater made,
                     Forth goe I to a little current neere,
                     Which like a wanton traile creepes heere and there,
                     Wherewith mine angle caſting in my baite,
                     The little fiſhes (dreading the deceit)
                     With fearefull nibbling flie th'inticing gin,
                     By nature taught what danger lies therein.
                     Things reaſonleſſe thus warnde by nature be,
                     Yet I deuour'd the baite was laid for me;
                     Thinking thereon, and breaking into grones,
                     The bubling ſpring which trips vpon the ſtones,
                     Chides me away, leſt ſitting but too nie,
                     
                        I ſhould pollute that natiue puritie.
                     
                        Roſe of the world, ſo doth import my name,
                     
                        Shame of the world, my life hath made the ſame.
                     
                        
And to th'vnchaſte this name ſhall giuen be,
                     Of Roſamond, deriu'd from ſinne and me.
                     The Cliffords take from me that name of theirs,
                     Famous for vertue many hundred yeeres.
                     They blot my birth with hatefull baſtardie,
                     That I ſprang not from their nobilitie;
                     They my alliance vtterly refuſe,
                     Nor will a ſtrumpet ſhall their name abuſe.
                     Heere in the garden wrought by curious hands,
                     Naked Diana in the fountaine ſtands,
                     With all her Nimphes got round about to hide her,
                     As when Acteon had by chance eſpide her;
                     This ſacred Image I no ſooner view'd,
                     But as that metamorphoſde man purſu'd
                     By his owne hounds; ſo by my thoughts am I,
                     Which chaſe me ſtill, which way ſo ere I flie.
                     Touching the graſſe, the honny-dropping dew,
                     Which falls in teares before my limber ſhue,
                     Vpon my foote conſumes in weeping ſtill,
                     As it would ſay, why wentſt thou vnto ill?
                     Thus to no place in ſafetie can I goe.
                     But euery thing doth giue me cauſe of woe.
                     In that faire Casket of ſuch wondrous coſt,
                     Thou ſentſt the night before mine honor loſt
                     
                        Amimone was wrought, a harmeleſſe maide,
                     By Neptune that adult'rous God betraide;
                     She proſtrate at his feete begging with praiers,
                     Wringing her hands, her eyes ſwolne vp with teares;
                     This was not the entrapping baite of men,
                     But by thy vertue gentle warning then;
                     To ſhew to me for what intent it came,
                     
                        
Leſt I therein ſhould euer keepe my ſhame.
                     And in this Casket (ill I ſee it now)
                     What Ioues loue I-o, turnde into a Cow.
                     Yet was ſhe kept with Argus hundred eyes,
                     So wakefull ſtil
                           •
                         be Iunoes jealouſies:
                     By this I well might haue forewarned beene,
                     T'haue cleerde my ſelfe to thy ſuſpecting Queene,
                     Who with more hundred eyes at endeth mee,
                     Then had poore Argus ſingle eyes to ſee.
                     In this thou rightly imitateſt Ioue,
                     
                     Into a beaſt thou haſt transformde thy loue.
                     Nay, worſer farre, (degenerate from kinde)
                     A monſter, both in body and in minde.
                     The waxen taper which I burne by night,
                     With his dull vapory dimneſſe mocks my ſight,
                     As though the dampe which hinders his cleere flame,
                     Came from my breath, in that night of my ſhame,
                     When it did burne as darkneſſe vgly eye,
                     When ſhot the ſtarre of my v
                           •
                        ginitie,
                     And if a ſtarre but by the glaſſe appeare,
                     
                        I ſtrait intreat it not to looke in heere;
                     
                        I am already hatefull to the light,
                     It is enough betray me not to night.
                     Then ſith my ſhame ſo much belongs to thee,
                     Rid me of that by onely murdering mee;
                     And let it iuſtly to my charge be laide,
                     Thy royall perſon I would haue betraide;
                     Thou ſhalt not neede by circumſtance t'accuſe me,
                     If I deny it, let the heauens refuſe me.
                     My life's a blemiſh which doth clowd thy name,
                     Take it away, and cleere ſhall ſhine thy fame.
                     
                        
Yeelde to my ſute, if euer pittie moou'd thee,
                     In this ſhew mercy, as I euer lou'd thee.
                  
                  
                     ¶ Notes of the Chronicle Hiſtorie.
                     
                        Well knewſt thou what a monſter I would bee,
                        When thou didſt build this Labyrinth for mee.
                     
                     IN the Cretean Labyrinth a monſter was incloſed, called a Minotaur, the hiſtory whereof is well knowne, but the Labyrinth was framed by Daedalus, with ſo many 
                           〈…〉
                        icate waies, that being entred, one could either hardly or neuer return, being in maner of a maze, ſaue that it was larger, the waies being walld in on euery ſide, out of the which Theſeus by Ariadnes helpe (lending him a clu
                           •
                         of thrid) eſcaped. Some report that it was a houſe, hauing one halfe bene
                           •
                        th the ground, another aboue, the chamber doores therin ſo deceitfully enwrapped, and made to open ſo many wais, that it was held a matter almoſt impoſſible to return.
                     Some haue held it to haue beene an Allegory of mans life, true it is that the compariſon wil hold, for what liker to a Labyrinth then the maze of life? But it is affirmed by antiquity, that there was indeede ſuch a building, though Daedalus being a 
                           〈◊〉
                         applied to the workmans excellencie, make it ſuſpected: for Daedalus is nothing elſe but engenious, or artificiall. Heereupon it is vſed among the antient Poets, for any thing curiouſly wrought.
                     
                        Roſamonds Labyrinth, whoſe ruins together with her well being paued with ſquare ſtone in the bottome, & alſo her Tower from which the Labirinth did run, (are yet remaining) was altogether vnder ground, being vaults arched & walld with brick & ſtone, almoſt inextricably wound one within another, by which if at any time her lodging were laid about by the Queene, ſhe might eaſly auoid perill imminent, & if need be, by ſecret iſſues take the aire abroad, many furlongs round about Woodſtock in Oxfordſhire, wherin it was ſituated. Thus much for Roſamonds labirinth.

                           Whoſe ſtrange Meanders turned euery way.
                        
                     
                     
                        Meander is a riuer in Lycia, a prouince of Natolia, or Aſia minor, famous for the ſinuoſity & often turning thereof, riſing from certaine

hills in Maeonia, heerevpon are intricate turnings by a tranſumtiue & metonimicall kind of ſpeech, called Meanders, for this Riuer did ſo ſtrangely path it ſelfe, that the foote ſeemed to touch the head.

                           Roſe of the world, ſo doth import my name,
                           Shame of the world, my liſe hath made the ſame.
                        
                     
                     It might be reported, how at Godſtow, where this Roſe of the world was ſumptuouſly interted, a certaine Biſhop in the viſitation of his Dioceſſe, cauſed the monument which had bin erected to her honour, vtterly to be demoliſhed, but be that ſeuere chaſtiſement of Roſamond then dead, at this time alſo ouer-paſſed, leſt ſhe ſhould ſeeme to be the Shame of the world.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Henry to Roſamond.
                  
                     WHen firſt the Poſt arriued at my Tent,
                     And brought the letters Roſamond had ſent,
                     Thinke from his lips but what ſweete comfort came,
                     When in mine eare he ſoftly breath'd thy name,
                     Straight I enioyne him of thy health to tell,
                     Longing to heare my Roſamond did well;
                     With new enqui
                           •
                        ies then I cut him ſhort,
                     When of the ſame he gladly would report,
                     That with the earneſt haſte my tongue oft trips,
                     Catching the words halfe ſpoke out of his lips:
                     This told, yet more I vrge him to reueale,
                     To looſe no time while I vn
                           •
                        ipt the ſeale.
                     The more I reade, ſtill do I erre the more,
                     As though miſtaking ſomewhat ſaid before.
                     Miſſing the point, the doubtfull ſence is broken,
                     Speaking againe, what I before had ſpoken,
                     Still in a ſwound, my heart reuiues and faints,
                     Twixt hopes, diſpaires, twixt ſmiles and deepe complaints.
                     
                        
As theſe ſad accents ſort in my deſires,
                     Smoothe calmes, rough ſtorms, ſharp froſts, & raging 
                           〈…〉
                        es,
                     Put on with boldnes, and put back with feares,
                     My tongue with curſes, when mine eyes with teares.
                     O how my hart at that blacke line did tremble!
                     That blotted paper ſhould thy ſelfe reſemble;
                     O were there paper but neere halfe ſo white!
                     The Gods thereon their ſacred lawes would write
                     With pens of Angells wings, and for their 
                           ••
                        ke,
                     That heauenly Nactar, their immortall drinke.
                     Maieſticke courage ſtriues to haue ſuppreſt
                     This fearefull paſſion ſtird vp in my breaſt;
                     But ſtill in vaine the ſame I go about,
                     My hart muſt breake within, or woe breakes out,
                     Am I at home purſu'd with priuate hate,
                     And war comes raging to my pallace gate?
                     Is meager 
                           •
                        nuie ſtabbing at my throne,
                     Treaſon attending when I walke alone?
                     And am I branded with the curſe of Rome,
                     And ſtand condemn'd by dreadfull counſels dombe?
                     And by the pride of my rebellious ſonne,
                     Rich Normandie with Armies ouer-runne?
                     Fatall my birth, vnfortunate my life,
                     Vnkinde my children, moſt vnkind my wife.
                     Griefe, cares, old age, ſuſpition to torment me,
                     Nothing on earth to quiet or content me,
                     So many woes, ſo many plagues to finde,
                     Sicknes of body, diſcontent of minde;
                     Hopes left, helpes reft, life wrong'd, ioy interdicted,
                     Baniſh'd, diſtreſs'd, forſaken and afflicted,
                     Of all reliefe hath fortune quite bereft me?
                     
                        
Onely my loue vnto my comfort left me,
                     And is one beautie thought ſo great a thing,
                     To mittigate the ſorrowes of a King?
                     Barr'd of that choiſe the vulgar often proue,
                     Haue we (then they) leſſe priuiledge in loue?
                     Is it a King, the wofull widdow heares?
                     Is it a King dries vp the Orphans teares?
                     Is it a King regards the Clyants cry?
                     Giues life to him by law condemnd to die?
                     Is it his care the Common-wealth that keepes,
                     As doth the Nurſe her babie whilſt it ſleepes?
                     And that poore king, of all thoſe hopes preuented,
                     Vnheard, vnhelp'd, vnpittied, vnlamented,
                     Yet let me be with pouertie oppreſt,
                     Of earthly bleſſings rob'd, and diſpoſſeſt,
                     Let me be ſcornde, reiected and reuilde,
                     From Kingdome, Country, and from Court exilde;
                     Let the worlds curſe vpon me ſtill remaine,
                     And let the laſt bring on the firſt againe:
                     All miſeries that wretched man may wound,
                     Leaue for my comfort, onely Roſamond;
                     
                     For thee ſwift Time her ſpeedie courſe doth ſtay,
                     At thy command the Deſtinies obay;
                     Pittie is dead that comes not from thine eyes,
                     And at thy feete, euen mercy proſtrate lies:
                     If I were feeble, rheumatike, or cold,
                     Theſe were true ſignes that I were waxed old;
                     But I can march all day in maſſie ſteele,
                     Nor yet my armes vnweldy weight do feele,
                     Nor wak'd by night with bruiſe or bloody wound,
                     The tent my bed, no pillow but the ground:
                     
                        
For very age had I laine bedred long,
                     One ſmile of thine againe could make me yong.
                     Were there in Art a power but ſo diuine,
                     As is in that ſweete Angel-tongue of thine,
                     That great Enchantreſſe which once tooke ſuch pains,
                     To force young blood in Aeſons witherd veines,
                     And from groues, mountaines, and the mooriſh Fen,
                     Vs'd all the hearbes ordainde to vſe of men,
                     And in the powerfull potion that ſhe makes,
                     Puts blood of men of birds, of beaſts, of ſnakes,
                     Neuer had needed to haue gone ſo farre,
                     To ſeeke the ſoiles where all thoſe ſimples are,
                     One accent from thy lips, the blood more warmes,
                     Then all her philters, exorciſmes and charmes.
                     Thy preſence hath repaired in one day,
                     What many yeeres and ſorrowes did decay,
                     And made freſh beauties faireſt branches ſpring,
                     From wrinkled furrowes of times ruining.
                     Euen as the hungry winter-ſtarued earth,
                     When ſhe by nature labours towards her birth,
                     Still as the day vpon the darke world creepes,
                     One bloſſome forth after another peepes,
                     Till the ſmall flower whoſe roote is now vnbound,
                     Gets from the froſtie priſon of the ground,
                     Spreading the leaues vnto the powerfull noone,
                     Deck'd in freſh colours, ſmiles vpon the ſunne.
                     Neuer vnquiet care lodg'd in that breaſt,
                     Where but one thought of Roſamond did reſt;
                     Nor thirſt, nor trauaile, which on warre attend,
                     E're brought the long day to deſired end;
                     Nor yet did pale Feare, or leane Famine liue,
                     
                        
Where hope of thee did any comfort giue,
                     Ah what iniuſtice then is this of thee
                     That thus the guiltleſſe dooſt condemne for me?
                     When onely ſhe (by meanes of my offence)
                     Redeemes thy pureneſſe, and thy innocence,
                     When to our wills perforce obey they muſt,
                     That iuſt in them, what e're in vs vniuſt,
                     Of what we doe, not them account we make,
                     The fault craues pardon for th'offenders ſake,
                     And what to worke a Princes will may merit,
                     Hath deepſt impreſſion in the gentleſt ſpirite;
                     Ift be my name that dooth thee ſo offend,
                     No more my ſelfe ſhall be mine owne names friend,
                     And 
                           •
                        ft be that which thou dooſt onely hate,
                     That name, in my name, laſtly hath his date.
                     Say tis accu
                           •
                        ſt, and fatall, and diſpraiſe it,
                     If written, blot it, if engrauen, raze it.
                     Say that of all names tis a name of woe,
                     Once a Kings name, but now tis not ſo.
                     And when all this is done, I know 
                           •
                        vvill grieue thee,
                     And therfore (ſvveet) whie ſhould I now belieue thee?
                     Nor ſhouldſt thou thinke thoſe eies with enuie lower,
                     Which paſſing by thee, gaze vp to thy tower;
                     But rather praiſe thine owne which be ſo cleere,
                     Which from the Turret like tvvo ſtaires appeare;
                     Aboue the ſunne dooth ſhine, beneath thine eie,
                     Mocking the heauen to make another skie,
                     The little ſtreame which by thy tovver dooth glide,
                     Where oft thou ſpendſt the wearie euening tide,
                     To view thee vvell his courſe would gladly ſtay,
                     As loath from thee to part ſo ſoone away;
                     
                        
And with ſalutes thy ſelfe would gladly greete,
                     And offer vp thoſe ſmall drops at thy feete,
                     But finding that the enuious banks reſtraine it,
                     T'excuſe it ſelfe, doth in this ſort complaine it,
                     And therefore this ſad bubling murmure keepes,
                     And in this ſort within the channell weepes.
                     And as thou dooſt into the water looke,
                     The fiſh which ſee thy ſhadow in the brooke,
                     Forget to feede, and all amazed lie,
                     So daunted with the luſtre of thine eie.
                     And that ſweet name which thou ſo much doſt wrong
                     In time ſhalbe ſome famous Poets ſong;
                     And with the very ſweetnes of that name,
                     Lions and tygers men ſhall learne to tame.
                     The carefull mother from her penſiue breaſt,
                     With Roſamond ſhall bring her babe to reſt;
                     The little birds, (by mens continuall ſound)
                     Shall learne to ſpeake, and pr
                           〈…〉
                        le Roſamond.
                     
                     And when in Aprill they beginne to ſing,
                     Wi
                           •
                        h Roſamond ſhall welcome in the ſpring;
                     And ſhe in whom all ra
                           •
                        ities are found,
                     Shall ſtill be ſaid to be a Roſamond.
                     
                     The little flowers which dropping honied dew,
                     Which (as thou writſt) doe weepe vpon thy ſhue,
                     Not for thy fault (ſweet Roſamond) doe moane,
                     But weepe for griefe that thou ſo ſoone art gone,
                     For if thy foote 
                           •
                        uch Hemlocke as it goes,
                     That Hemlocke's made more ſweeter than the Roſe,
                     Of Ioue or Neptune how they did betray,
                     Nor ſpeake of I
                              •
                           o, or Amimone,
                     
                     when ſhe for whome Ioue once became a Bull,
                     
                        
Comparde with thee, had beene a tawny trull;
                     He a white Bull, and ſhe a whiter Cow,
                     Yet he, nor ſhe, neere halfe ſo white as thou.
                     Long ſince (thou knowſt) my care prouided for
                     To lodge thee ſafe from iealous Ellenor,
                     
                     The labyrinths conueyance guides thee ſo,
                     (Which only Vaghan, thou, and I doe know)
                     If ſhe doe guard thee with a hundred eies,
                     I haue an hundred ſub
                           •
                        ile Mercuries,
                     
                     To watch that Argus which my loue doth keepe,
                     Vntill eie, after eie, fall all to ſleepe.
                     Thoſe ſtarres looke in by night, looke in to ſee,
                     Wondring what ſtarre heere on the earth ſhould be.
                     As oft the Moone amidſt the ſilent night,
                     Hath come to ioy vs with her friendly light,
                     And by the curtaine helpt mine eie to ſee
                     What 
                           〈◊〉
                         night and darkenes hid from mee;
                     When I haue wiſht that ſhe might euer ſta
                           •
                        ,
                     And other worl
                           〈…〉
                         might ſtill enioy the day:
                     What ſhould I ſay? words, 
                           •
                        eares, and ſighs be ſpent,
                     And want of 
                           〈◊〉
                         doth further helps preuent:
                     My campe r
                           •
                        ſounds with fearefull ſhockes of warre,
                     Yet in my breaſt the worſer conflicts are;
                     Yet is my ſignall to the battels ſound,
                     The bleſſed name of beauteous Roſamond.
                     
                     Accurſed be that heart, that tongue, that breath,
                     Should thinke, ſhould ſpeake, or whiſper of thy death.
                     For in one ſmile, or lower from thy ſweete eie,
                     Conſiſts my life, my hope, my victorie.
                     Sweet Woodſtocke, where my Roſamond doth reſt,
                     Bleſſed in her, in whom thy King is bleſt;
                     
                        
For though in France a while my body be,
                     (Sweete Paradice) my heart remaines in thee.
                  
                  
                     Notes of the Chronicle Hiſtorie.
                     
                        Am I at home purſued with priuate hate,
                        And warre comes raging to my Pallace gate?
                     
                     RObert erle of Leiceſter, who took part with yong king Henry, entred into England with an armie of 3000. Flemmings, and ſpoild the countries of Norſfolk and Suſfolke, being ſuccored by many of the Kings priuate enimies.

                           And am I branded with the curſe of Rome?
                        
                     
                     King Henry the ſecond, the firſt Plantaginet, accuſed for the death of Tho. Becket, archbiſhop of Canterbury, ſtaine in the cathedrall church, was accurſed by Pope Alexander, although hee vrgde ſufficient proofe of his innocencie in the ſame, and offered to take vpon him any penance, ſo he might eſcape the curſe and interdiction of the Realme.

                           And by the pride of my rebellious ſonne,
                           Rich Normandie with armies ouer-runne.
                        
                     
                     Henry the yong K. whom king Henry had cauſed to be crowned in his life (as he hoped) both for his owne good and the good of his Subiects, which indeed turned to his owne ſorow, and the trouble of the Realme, for he rebelled againſt him, and raiſing a power, by the meanes of Lewes king of France, and William K: of Scots, who tooke part with him, inuaded Normandie.

                           Vnkinde my children, moſt vnkinde my wiſe:
                        
                     
                     Neuer king more vnfortunate then K: Henry, in the diſobedience of his children: firſt Henry, then G
                           •
                        ſſrey, then Richard, then Iohn, all at one time or other, firſt or laſt, vnnaturally rebelled againſt him; then the iealouſie of Elinor his Qu. who ſuſpected his loue to Roſamond, which grieuous troubles the deuout of thoſe times attributed to happen to him iuſtly, for refuſin: to take on him the gouernment of Ieruſalem, offred to him by the patriarke there; which country was mightily afflicted by the Souldane.

                           
                           Which onely Vaghan, thou, and I doe know.
                        
                     
                     This Vaghan was a Knight whom the King exceedingly loued, who kept the Pallace at Woodſtocke, and much of the Kings iewels and treaſure, to whom the King committed many of his ſecretes, and in whom he repoſed ſuch truſt, that he durſt commit his loue vnto his charge.
                  
               
               
                  King Iohn to Matilda.
                  
                     The Argument.
                     After that King Iohn had aſſayed by all meanes poſſible, to win the faire and chaſte Matilda, to his vnchaſte and vnlawful bed and by vniuſt courſes & falſe accuſation had baniſhed the Lord Robert Fitzwater her noble Father, and many other of his alies, who iuſtly withſtood the deſire of this wanton King, ſeeking the diſhonour of his faire and vertuous daughter; this chaſte Lady, ſtill ſolicited by this laſciuious King, flies vnto Dunmow in Eſſex, where in a Nunnery ſhe becomes a Nunne, whether the King (ſtil perſiſting in his ſute) ſolicites her by his Epiſtle; her reply confirmes her vowed and inuincible chaſtitie, making knowne to the King her pure vnspotted thoughts.
                  
                  
                     WHen theſe my Letters come vnto thy view,
                     Think them not forcde, or faind, or ſtrange, or new,
                     Thou knowſt no way, no means, no courſe exempted,
                     Left now vnſought, vnproou'd, or vnattempted,
                     All rules, regardes, all ſecret helps of Art,
                     What knowledge, wit, experience can impart;
                     And in the olde worlds Ceremonies doted,
                     Good daies for loue, times, houres and minutes noted;
                     
                        
And where Arte left, loue teacheth more to finde,
                     By ſignes in preſence to expreſſe the minde.
                     Oft hath mine eie tolde thine eie, beauty grieu'd it,
                     And begd but for one looke to haue relieu'd it,
                     And ſtill with thine eies motion, mine eie mou'd,
                     Labouring for mercy, telling how it lou'd.
                     If bluſht, I bluſht, thy cheeke pale, pale was mine,
                     My red, thy red, my whiteneſſe anſwered thine;
                     If ſigh'd, I ſigh'd, alike both paſſion proue,
                     But thy ſigh is for griefe, my ſigh for loue;
                     If a word paſt, that inſufficient were.
                     To help that word, mine eies let forth a teare,
                     And if that teare did dull or ſenſleſſe proue,
                     My heart would fetch a ſigh, to make it moue.
                     Oft in thy face, one fauour from the reſt
                     I ſingled forth, that likes my fancie beſt;
                     This likes me moſt, another likes me more,
                     A third exceeding both thoſe likde before;
                     Then one that doth deriue all wonder thence,
                     Then one whoſe rarenes paſſeth excellence.
                     Whilſt I behold thy Globe like rowling eie,
                     Thy louely cheeke (me thinks) ſtands ſmiling by
                     And tells me, thoſe but ſhadowes and ſuppoſes,
                     And bids me thether come and gather Roſes;
                     Looking on that, thy brow dooth call to mee
                     To come to it, if wonders I will ſee:
                     Now haue I done, and now thy dimpled chinne
                     Againe doth tell me I but new beginne,
                     And bids me yet to looke vpon thy lip,
                     Leſt wondring leaſt, the greatſt I ouerſlip;
                     My gazing eie, on this and this doth ſeaſe,
                     
                        
Which ſurffets, yet cannot deſire appeaſe.
                     Then like I browne, (O louely browne thy haire)
                     Onely in browneneſſe, beauty dwelleth there.
                     Then loue I blacke, thine eye, ball blacke as jet,
                     Then cleere, that ball is there in criſtall ſet,
                     Then white, but ſnow, nor ſwan, nor yuorie pleaſe,
                     Then are thy teeth more whiter then all theſe;
                     In browne, in blacke, in purenes, and in white,
                     All loue, all ſweetes, all rarenes, all delight;
                     Thus thou vile thiefe, my ſtolne hart hence dooſt carry,
                     And now thou flieſt into a Sanctuary;
                     Fie peeuiſh gerle, ingratefull vnto Nature,
                     Did ſhe to this end frame thee ſuch a creature,
                     That thou her glory ſhouldſt increaſe thereby,
                     And thou aloue dooſt ſcorne ſocietie?
                     Why, heauen made beauty like herſelfe to view,
                     Not to be lockt vp in a ſmoaky mew,
                     A roſie-tainted feature is heauens gold,
                     Which all men ioy to touch, all to behold.
                     It was enacted when the world begunne,
                     That ſo rare beauty ſhould not liue a Nunne.
                     But if this vow thou needes wilt vndertake,
                     O were mine armes a Cloiſter for thy ſake,
                     Still may his paines for euer be augmented,
                     This ſuperſtition that at firſt inuented,
                     I
                           •
                        l might he thriue, that brought this cuſtome hether,
                     That holy people might not liue together.
                     A happy time, a good world was it then,
                     When holy women liu'd with holy men;
                     But kings in this yet priuiledgde may be,
                     Ile be a Monke, ſo I may liue with thee.
                     
                        
Who would no
                           〈…〉
                        ſe to ring the mornings knell,
                     When thy ſweet lips might be the ſacring bell?
                     Or what is he not willingly would faſt,
                     That on thoſe lips might feaſt his lips at laſt?
                     Who vnto Mattens early would not riſe,
                     That might reade by the light of thy faire eies?
                     On worldly pleaſures who would euer looke,
                     That had thy curles his beades, thy browes his booke?
                     Wert thou the croſſe, to thee who would not creepe?
                     And wiſh the croſſe, ſtill in his armes to keepe.
                     Sweet gerle, Ile take this holy habite on mee,
                     Of meere deuotion that is come vpon me,
                     Holy Matilda, thou the Saint of mine,
                     Ile be thy ſeruant, and my bed thy ſhrine.
                     When I doe offer, be thy breaſt the Altare,
                     And when I pray thy 
                           〈◊◊〉
                         ſhall be my Pſalter.
                     The beades that we will bid ſhalbe ſweet kiſſes,
                     Which we will number, if one pleaſure miſſes,
                     And when an Auie comes to ſay Amen,
                     We will beginne, and tell them o're againe,
                     Now all good fortune giue me happy thrift,
                     As I ſhould ioy t'abſol
                           •
                        e thee after ſhrift.
                     But ſee how much I doe my ſelfe beguile,
                     And doe miſtake thy meaning all this while,
                     Thou tookſt this vow to equall my deſire
                     Becauſe thou wouldſt haue me to be a Frier,
                     And that we two ſhould comfort one another,
                     A holy ſiſter, and a holy brother,
                     Thou as a Votreſſe vnto me alone,
                     Shee is moſt chaſte thats but enioyd of one,
                     Yea, now thy true deuotion doe I finde,
                     
                        
And ſure in this I much commend thy minde,
                     Elſe heere thou dooſt but ill enſample giue,
                     And in a Nunry thus thou ſhouldſt not liue.
                     Iſt poſſible the houſe that thou art in
                     Should not be tucht, (though with a veniall ſin)
                     When ſuch a ſhe-prieſt comes her maſſe to ſay,
                     Twenty to one they all forget to pray?
                     Well may we wiſh they would their hearts amend,
                     When we be witneſſe that their eyes offend,
                     All creatures haue deſires, or elſe ſome lie,
                     Let them thinke ſo that will, ſo will not I.
                     Dooſt thou not thinke our anceſtors were wiſe,
                     That theſe religious Cels did firſt deuiſe?
                     As Hoſpitalls were for the ſore and ſicke,
                     Theſe for the crook'd, the hault, the ſtigmaticke,
                     Leſt that their ſeede mark'd with deformitie,
                     Should be a blemiſh to poſteritie.
                     Would heau'n her beautie ſhould be hid from ſight,
                     Nere would ſhe thus her ſelfe adorne with light,
                     With ſparkling lamps; nor would ſhe paint her throne,
                     But ſhe delighteth to be gaz'd vpon:
                     And when the golden glorious Sunne goes downe,
                     Would ſhe put on her ſtar-beſtudded crowne,
                     And in her masking ſute the ſpangled skie,
                     Come forth to bride it in her reuelrie,
                     And gaue this gift to all things in creation,
                     That they in this ſhould imitate her faſhion.
                     All things that faire, that pure, that glorious beene,
                     Offer themſelues of purpoſe to be ſeene;
                     In ſinks and vaults, the vgly toades do dwell,
                     The diuels ſince moſt vgly, they in hell:
                     
                        
Our mother Earth, nere glorious in her fruite,
                     Till by the Sunne clad in her Tinſell ſute.
                     Nor doth ſhe euer ſmile him in the face,
                     Till in his glorious armes he her embrace;
                     Which proues ſhe hath a ſoule, ſence, and delight
                     Of generations feeling appetite.
                     Well hypocrite (in faith) wouldſt thou confeſſe,
                     What ere thy tongue ſay, thy hart ſaith no leſſe.
                     Note but this one thing, (if naught elſe perſwade)
                     Nature, of all things male, and female made,
                     Shewing her ſelfe in our proportion plaine,
                     For neuer made ſhe any thing in vaine;
                     For as thou art, ſhould any haue beene thus,
                     She would haue left enſample vnto vs.
                     The Turtle that's ſo true and chaſte in loue,
                     Shewes by her mate ſomething the ſpirit doth moue;
                     Th'arabian bird that neuer is but one,
                     Is onely chaſte, becauſe ſhe is alone:
                     But had our mother Nature made them two,
                     They would haue done as Doues & Sparrowes doe;
                     But therefore made a Martire in deſire,
                     And doth her pennance laſtly in the fire;
                     So may they all be roſted quicke that bee
                     Apoſtataes to Nature, as is ſhe.
                     Finde me but one ſo young, ſo faire, ſo free,
                     (Woode, ſude & ſought, by him that now ſeekes thee)
                     But of thy minde, and heere I vndertake,
                     Strait to erect a Nunry for her ſake;
                     O hadſt thou taſted of theſe rare delights,
                     Ordainde each where to pleaſe great Princes ſights,
                     To haue their beauties and their wits admirde,
                     
                        
(Which is by nature of your ſexe deſirde)
                     Attended by our traines, our pompe, our port,
                     Like Gods adorde abroad, kne
                           ••
                        d to in Court,
                     To be ſaluted with the cheerefull cry,
                     Of highnes, grace, and ſoueraigne maieſtie;
                     But vnto them that know not pleaſures price,
                     Al's one, a priſon, and a Paradice.
                     If in a dungeon, cloſde vp from the light,
                     There is no difference twixt the day and night,
                     Whoſe pallate neuer taſted daintie cates,
                     Thinkes homely diſhes princely delicates.
                     Alas poore girle, I pitty thine eſtate,
                     That now thus long haſt liu'd diſconſolate;
                     Why now at length let yet thy hart relent,
                     And call thy father backe from baniſhment;
                     And with thoſe princely honours heere inueſt him,
                     That aukward loue, not hate hath diſpoſſeſt him.
                     Call from exile, thy deere alies and friends,
                     To whom the fury of my griefe extends;
                     And if thou take my counſaile in this caſe,
                     I make no doubt thou ſhalt haue better grace,
                     And leaue the Dunmow, that accurſed Cell,
                     There let blacke night and melancholie dwell;
                     Come to the Court, where all ioyes ſhall receiue thee,
                     And till that howre, yet with my griefe I leaue thee.
                  
                  
                     ¶ Notes of the Chronicle Hiſtorie.
                     THis Epiſtle of King Iohn to Matilda, is much more poeticall then hiſtoricall, making no mention at al of the occurrents of the time, or ſtate, touching onely his loue to her, and the extreamitie of his paſſions forced by his deſires, rightly faſhioning the humor of this king, as hath bin truely noted by the

moſt authnticall Writers; whoſe nature and diſpoſition is trulieſt diſcerned in the courſe of his loue; firſt ieſting at the ceremonies of the ſeruices of thoſe times, then going about by all ſtrong and probable arguments, to reduce her to pleaſures and delights; next with promiſes of honour, which he thinketh to be laſt and greateſt meane, and to haue greateſt power in her ſexe, with promiſe of calling home of her friends, which he thought might be a great inducement to his deſires.
                  
               
               
                  Matilda to King John.
                  
                     NO ſooner I receiu'd thy letters here,
                     Before I knew from whom, or whence they were
                     But ſuddaine feare my bloodleſſe veines doth fill,
                     As though diuining of ſome future ill:
                     And in a ſhiuering extaſie I ſtood,
                     A chilly coldneſſe runnes through all my blood;
                     Opening thy letters, I ſhut vp my reſt,
                     And let ſtrange cares into my quiet breaſt,
                     As though thy hard vnpittying hand had ſent me,
                     Some new deuiſed torture to torment me;
                     Well had I hop'd, I had beene now forgot,
                     Caſt out with thoſe things thou remembreſt not:
                     And that prowd beautie which enforſt me hether,
                     Had with my name now periſhed together:
                     But O (I ſee) our hoped good deceiues vs,
                     But what we would forgoe, that ſeldome leaues vs;
                     Thy blamefull lines beſpotted ſo with ſin,
                     Mine eyes would clenſe, ere they to reade begin.
                     But I to waſh an Indian go about,
                     For ill ſo hard ſet on, is hard got out.
                     
                        
I once determinde ſtill to haue beene mute,
                     Onely by ſilence to refell thy ſute,
                     But this againe did alter mine intent,
                     For ſome will ſay, that ſilence doth conſent:
                     Deſire, with ſmall encouraging growes bold,
                     And Hope, of euery little thing takes hold.
                     I ſet me downe at large to write my minde,
                     But now, nor pen, nor paper can I finde;
                     For dread and paſſion, are ſo powerfull o're me,
                     That I diſcerne not things that ſtand before me:
                     Finding the pen, the paper, and the waxe,
                     This at command, and now inuention lacks;
                     This ſentence ſerues, and that my hand out-ſtrikes,
                     That pleaſeth well, and this as much miſlikes,
                     I write, indite, I point, I raze, I quote,
                     I enterline, I blot, correct, I note;
                     
                        I hope, diſpaire, take courage, faint, diſdaine,
                     I make, alleadge, I imitate, I faine:
                     Now thus it muſt be, and now thus, and thus,
                     Bold, ſhame-fac'd, feareleſſe, doubtfull, timorous;
                     My faint hand writing, when my full eye reedes,
                     From euery word ſtrange paſſion ſtill proceedes.
                     O! when the ſoule is fettered once in wo,
                     T'is ſtrange what humors it doth force vs to;
                     A teare doth drowne a teare, ſigh, ſigh doth ſmother,
                     This hinders that, that interrupts the other:
                     Th'ouer-watched weakneſſe of a ſicke conceit,
                     
                        Is that which makes ſmall beautie ſeeme ſo great,
                     Like things which hid in troubled waters lie,
                     Which crook'd, ſeem ſtraight, if ſtraight, ſeem contrary:
                     And thus our vaine imagination ſhewes it,
                     
                        
As it conceiues it, not as iudgement knowes it,
                     (As in a Mirrhor, if the ſame be true)
                     Such as your likenes, iuſtly ſuch are you:
                     But as you change your ſelfe, it changeth there,
                     And ſhewes you as you are, not as you were;
                     And with your motion doth your ſhadow moue,
                     If frowne or ſmile; ſuch the conceit of loue.
                     Why tell me, is it poſſible the minde
                     A forme in all deformitie ſhould finde?
                     Within the compaſſe of mans face we ſee,
                     How many ſorts of ſeuerall fauours be;
                     And that the chin, the noſe, the brow, the eye,
                     If great, if ſmall flat, ſharpe, or if awry,
                     Alters proportion, altereth the grace,
                     And makes a mighty difference in the face;
                     And in the world, ſcarce two ſo likely are,
                     One with the other which if you compare,
                     But being ſet before you both together,
                     A iudging ſight doth ſoone diſtinguiſh either.
                     How woman like a weakneſſe is it then?
                     O what ſtrange madneſſe ſo poſſeſſeth men!
                     Bereft of ſence; ſuch ſenceleſſe wonders ſeeing,
                     Without forme, faſhion, certaintie, or being?
                     For which ſo many die to liue in anguiſh,
                     Yet cannot liue, if thus they ſhould not languiſh;
                     That comfort yeeldes not, and yet hope denies not,
                     A life that liues not, and a death that dies not;
                     That hates vs moſt, when moſt it ſpeakes vs faire,
                     Doth promiſe all things, alwaies paies with aire,
                     Yet ſometime doth our greateſt griefe appeaſe,
                     To double ſorrow after little eaſe.
                     
                        
Like that which thy laſciuious will doth craue,
                     Which if once had, thou neuer more canſt haue;
                     Which if thou get, in getting thou dooſt waſte it,
                     Taken, is loſt, and perriſh'd if thou haſt it;
                     Which if thou gain'ſt, thou ne're the more haſt wonne,
                     I looſing nothing, yet a
                           〈…〉
                         quite vndone;
                     And yet of that, if that a King depraue me,
                     No King reſtores, though he a kingdome gaue me.
                     Dooſt thou of father and of friends depriue me?
                     And tak'ſt thou from me all that heauen did giue me?
                     What Nature claimes by blood, alies or neereneſſe,
                     Or friendſhip challenge, by regard or deereneſſe.
                     Mak'ſt me an Orphan ere my father die,
                     A wofull widdow in virginitie?
                     Is thy vnbrideled luſt the cauſe of all?
                     And now thy flattering tongue bewailes my fall.
                     The dead mans graue with fained teares to fill,
                     So the deuouring Crocodile doth kill,
                     To harbor hate in ſhew of ſweeteſt things,
                     So in the Roſe the poiſned ſerpent ſtings.
                     To lurke farre off, yet lodge deſtruction by,
                     The Baſiliske doth poiſon with the eye;
                     To call for aide, and then to lie in wait,
                     So the Hiena murthers by deceit;
                     By ſweete inticements, ſuddaine death to bring,
                     So from the rockes th'alluring Mir-maides ſing;
                     In greateſt wants, t'inflict the greateſt woe,
                     This is the vtmoſt tyranny can doe.
                     But where (I ſee) the tempeſt thus preuailes,
                     What vſe of ankors, or what neede of ſailes?
                     Aboue vs bluſtring windes and dreadfull thunder,
                     
                        
The waters gape for our deſtruction vnder;
                     Heere on this ſide the furious billowes flie,
                     There rocks, there ſands, & dang'rous whirl-poole lie.
                     Is this the meane that mightineſſe approues?
                     And in this ſort do Princes woo their loues?
                     Mildeneſſe would better ſute with maieſtie,
                     Then raſh reuenge and rough ſeueritie.
                     O in what ſafety Temperance doth reſt,
                     Obtaining harbor in a ſoueraigne breaſt.
                     Which if ſo praiſefull in the meaneſt men,
                     In powerfull Kings, how glorious is it then?
                     Alas, and fled I hether from my ſo,
                     That innocence ſhould be betraied ſo?
                     Is Court and Country both her enemy,
                     And no place found to ſhrowd in chaſtitie?
                     Each houſe for luſt a harbour, and an Inne,
                     And euery Cittie a receite for ſinne;
                     And all do pittie beautie in diſtreſſe,
                     If beautie chaſte, then onely pittileſſe,
                     Thus is ſhe made a tempting ſtale to luſt,
                     Or vnreleeued, nedſly perriſh muſt.
                     Laſciuious Poets which abuſe the truth,
                     Which oft teach age to ſinne, infecting youth,
                     For the vnchaſte make trees & ſtones to mourne,
                     Or as they pleaſe, to other ſhapes do turne:
                     
                        Cinyras daughter, whoſe inceſtuous minde,
                     Made her wrong Nature and diſhonour Kinde;
                     Long ſince by them is turnde into a Mir,
                     Whoſe dropping liquor euer weepes for her;
                     And in a fountaine, Biblis doth deplore
                     Her fault ſo vile and monſterous before:
                     
                        
                        Silla, which once her father did betray,
                     Is now a bird, (if all be true they ſay.)
                     Shee that with Phoebus did the foule offence,
                     Now metamorphoſde into frankencenſe.
                     Other, to flowers, to odors, and to gumme,
                     At leaſt Ioues leman is a ſtarre become;
                     And more; they faine a thouſand fond excuſes,
                     To hide their ſcapes, and couer their abuſes,
                     The virgine onelie they obſcure and hide
                     Whilſt the vnchaſte, by them are deifide;
                     Yet if a Veſtals name be once expreſt,
                     She muſt be ſet together with the reſt.
                     I am not now, as when thou ſawſt me laſt,
                     That fauour ſoone is vaniſhed and paſt;
                     That Roſie-bluſh, lapt in a Lilly-vale,
                     Now with the morphew ouer-growne and pale,
                     And down my cheeks with ſhowres of ſwelling tears,
                     Remaine the furrowes that continuance weares,
                     And in the circles of my withered eies,
                     In aged wrinckles Beautie buried lies;
                     And in my grace, my preſence, geſture, cheere,
                     Ruine, diſtreſſe, woe, anguiſh, doth appeere.
                     That breaſt, that hand, that cheeke, that eie, that brow,
                     Faded, decayed, fallen, darkned, wrinckled now;
                     Such was my beautie once, now is it ſuch,
                     Once thought moſt rare, now altred more than much,
                     Nor I regarde all that thou canſt proteſt,
                     My vovv is taken, I a Nunne profeſt.
                     This veſtall habite doth content me more,
                     Then all the robes that yet I euer wore.
                     Had Roſamond, (a recluſe of our ſort)
                     
                        
Taken our Cloiſter, left the wanton Court,
                     Shadowing that beauty with a holy vale,
                     Which ſhe (alas) too looſely ſet to ſale,
                     She neede not like an vgly Minotaur,
                     Haue beene lookt vp from jealious Ellenor,
                     
                     But bin as famous by thy mothers wrongs,
                     As by thy father ſubiect to all tongues.
                     To ſhadow ſinne, might can the moſt pretend,
                     Kings, but the conſcience, all things can defend.
                     A ſtronger hand reſtraines our wilfull powres,
                     A will muſt rule aboue this will of ours,
                     Not following what our vaine deſires doe wooe
                     For vertues ſake, but what we (only) doe.
                     And hath my father choſe to liue exilde,
                     Before his eyes ſhould ſee my youth defilde?
                     And to withſtand a tyrants lewd deſire,
                     Beheld his towers and caſtles razde with fire:
                     Yet neuer tucht with griefe, ſo only I,
                     Exempt from ſhame might with true honor die.
                     And ſhall this jewell which ſo deerly coſt,
                     Now after all, by my diſhonour loſt?
                     No, no, his reuerend words, his holy teares,
                     Yet in my ſoule too deepe impreſſion beares
                     His lateſt farewell at his laſt depart,
                     More deepely is ingraued in my hart,
                     Nor ſhall that blot, by me his name ſhall haue,
                     Bring his gray haires with ſorrow to his graue,
                     Better his teares to fall vpon my tombe,
                     Then for my birth to curſe my mothers wombe.
                     Though Dunmow giue no refuge heere at all.
                     
                        Dunmow can giue my body buriall.
                     
                        
If all remorceleſſe, no teare-ſhedding eie,
                     My ſelfe will moane my ſelfe; ſo liue, ſo die.
                  
                  
                     Notes of the Chronicle hiſtory.
                     THis Epiſtle containeth no particular points of Hiſtorie, more than the generality of the argument layeth open; for after the baniſhment of the Lord Robert Fitzwater, and that Matilda was become a Recluſe at Dunmow, (from whence this reply is imagined to be written.) the King ſtill earneſtly perſiſting in his ſute. Matild. 
                        
                           〈…〉
                        ith this chaſte and conſtant deniall, hopes yet at length to find ſome comfortable remedy, and to rid her ſelfe of doubts, by taking vpon her this monaſticke habite, and to ſhew that ſhee ſtill beareth in minde his former cruelty, bred by the impatience of his luſt, ſhee remembreth him of her fathers baniſhment, and the lawleſſe exile of her alies and friends.

                           Dooſt thou of father and of friends depriue me?
                        
                     
                     Then complaining of hir diſtreſſe, that flying thether, thinking there to find reliefe, ſhe ſees herſelfe moſt aſſaild where ſhe hoped to haue found moſt ſafety.

                           Alas, and fled I hether from my fo
                                 •
                              ,
                           That, &c.
                        
                     
                     After againe, ſtanding vpon the preciſe poynts of conſcience, not to caſt off this habite ſhe had taken.

                           My vow in taken, I a Nunne profeſt.
                        
                     
                     And at laſt laying open more particularly the miſeries ſuſtaind by her father in England, the burning of his Caſtles and houſes, which ſhe prooueth to be for her ſake: as reſpecting only her honour, more then his natiue Country and his owne fortunes.

                           And to withſtand a tyrants lewd deſire,
                           Beheld his Towers and Caſtles ſet on fire.
                        
                     
                     Knitting vp her Epiſtle with a great and conſtant reſolution.

                           Though Dunmow giue no refuge heere at all,
                           
                              Dunmow can giue my body buriall.
                        
                     
                  
                  Finis.
               
               
                  
                  ¶ To the vertuous Lady, the Lady Anne Harrington, wife to the honorable Gentleman, ſir Iohn Harrington Knight.
                  
                     
                        MY ſinguler good Lady, your many vertues knowne in generall to all, and your gracious fauors to my vnworthy ſelfe, haue confirmed that in me, which before I knew you, I onlie ſaw by the light of other mens iudgements. Honour ſeated in your breaſt, findes her ſelfe adorned as in a rich Pallace, making that excellent which makes her admirable; which like the Sunne (from thence) begetteth moſt pretious things of this earthly world, onely by the vertue of his rayes, not the nature of the mould. Worth is best diſcerned by the worthy, deiected minds want that pure fire which ſhould giue vigor to vertue. I referre to your great thoughts (the vnpartiall Iudges of true affection) the vnfained zeale I haue euer borne to your honourable ſeruice; and ſo reſt your Ladiſhips humbly to commaund.
                  
                  
                     Mich: Drayton.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Queene Iſabell to Mortimer.
                  
                     The Argument.
                     Queene Iſabel, (the wife of Edward the ſecond, called Edward Carnaruan,) beeing the daughter of Philip de Beau, King of France, forſaken by the King her husband, who delighted onely in the company of Piers Gaueſton, his minion and fauorite, and after his death ſeduced by the euil counſel of the Spencers. This Queene thus left by her huſband, euen in the glory of her youth, drew into her especiall fauour Roger Mortimer, Lord of Wigmore, a man of a mightie and inuincible ſpirit. This Lord Mortimer riſing in armes againſt the King with Thomas Earle of Lancaſter, and the Barons, was taken ere he could gather his power, & by the King committed to the tower of London. During his impriſonment, he ordained a feaſt in honor of his birth-day, to which he inuited Sir Stephen Segraue, Lieutenant of the Tower, and the reſt of the officers, where, by meanes of a drinke prepared by the Queene, he caſt them all into a heauie ſleepe, and with Ladders of coards being ready prepared for the purpoſe, he eſcapeth and flieth into Fraunce, whither ſhe ſendeth this Epiſtie, complaining her owne misfortunes, and greatly reioycing at his ſafe eſcape.
                  
                  
                     THough ſuch ſweet comfort comes not now from her
                     As Englands Queene hath ſent to Mortimer.
                     
                     Yet what that wants, which might my power approue
                     If lines can bring, this ſhall ſupply with loue,
                     
                        
Me thinks affliction ſhould not fright me ſo,
                     No
                           •
                         ſhould reſume theſe ſundry ſhapes of woe;
                     But when I faine would finde the cauſe of this,
                     Thy abſence ſhewes me where the errour is.
                     Oft when I thinke of thy departing hence,
                     Sad ſorrow then poſſeſſeth eu'ry ſence:
                     But finding thy deere blood preſeru'd thereby,
                     And in thy life, my long-wiſht liberty,
                     With that ſweet thought my ſelff I only pleaſe
                     Amidſt my griefe, which ſometimes giues me caſe,
                     Thus doe extreameſt ills a ioy poſſeſſe,
                     And one woe makes another woe ſeeme leſſe.
                     That bleſsed night, that milde-aſpected howre,
                     Wherein thou madſt eſcape out of the Tower,
                     Shall conſecrated euermore remaine;
                     What gentle Planet in that houre did raigne;
                     And ſhall be happy in the birth of men,
                     Which was chiefe lord of the Aſcendant then.
                     O how I feard that ſleepy iuyce I ſent,
                     Might yet want power to further thine intent!
                     Or that ſome vnſeene myſterie might lu
                           •
                        ke,
                     Which wanting order, kindly ſhould not worke;
                     Oft did I wiſh thoſe dreadfull poyſned lees,
                     That cloſde the euer-waking Dragons eies,
                     Or I had had thoſe ſence-ber
                           •
                        auing ſtalkes,
                     That grow in ſhady Proſerpines darke walkes;
                     Or thoſe blacke weedes on Lethe bankes below,
                     Or Lunary that doth on Latmus flow;
                     Oft did I feare this moiſt and ſoggy clime,
                     Or that the earth, waxt barren now with time,
                     Should not haue hearbes to help me in this caſe,
                     
                        
Such as do thriue on Indiaes parched face,
                     That morrow, when the bleſsed Sunne did riſe,
                     And ſhut the liddes of all heauens leſser eies,
                     Forth from my pallace by a ſecret ſtaire,
                     I ſteale to Thames, as though to take the ayre;
                     And aske the gentle floud as it doth glide,
                     Or thou didſt paſſe or periſh by the tide?
                     If thou didſt periſh, I deſire the ſtreame
                     To lay thee ſoftly on her ſiluer teame,
                     And bring thee to me to the quiet ſhore,
                     That with hir tears thou mightſt haue ſome tears more.
                     When ſodainely doth riſe a rougher gale,
                     With that (me thinkes) the troubled waues looke pale,
                     And ſighing with that little guſt that blowes,
                     With this remembrance ſeeme to knit their browes.
                     Euen as this ſo daine paſſion doth affright me,
                     The cheerfull Sunne breaks from a cloude to light me,
                     Then doth the bottome euident appeere,
                     As it would ſhew me, that thou waſt not there,
                     Whenas the water flowing where I ſtand,
                     Doth ſeeme to tell me, Thou art ſafe on land.
                     Did Bulloyne once a feſtiuall prepare,
                     For England, Almaine, Cicile, and Nauarre?
                     
                     When France enuied thoſe buildings (only bleſt)
                     Gracde with the Orgies of my Bridall feaſt,
                     That Engliſh Edward ſhould refuſe my bed,
                     For that inceſtuous ſhameleſse Ganimed?
                     
                     And in my place, vpon his regall throne,
                     To ſet that gerle-boy, wanton Gaueſton.
                     
                     Betwixt the feature of my face and his,
                     My glaſse aſſures me no ſuch difference is,
                     
                        
That a foule witches baſtard ſhould thereby
                     Be thought more worthy of his loue than I.
                     What doth auaile vs to be Princes heires,
                     When we can boaſt our birth is onely theirs?
                     When baſe diſſembling flatterers ſhall deceiue vs,
                     Of all our famous aunceſtors did leaue vs;
                     And of our princely iewels and our dowres,
                     We but enjoy the leaſt of what is ours;
                     when minions heads muſt weare our monarks crowns
                     To raiſe vp dunghills with our famous townes;
                     When beggars-brats are wrapt in rich perfumes,
                     Their buzzard wings impt with our Eagles plumes;
                     And matcht with the braue iſſue of our blood,
                     Alle the kingdome to their crauand brood.
                     Did Longſhankes purchaſe with his conquering hand,
                     
                        Albania, Gaſcoyne, Cambria, Ireland?
                     
                     That yoong Carnarnan (his vnhappy ſonne)
                     Should giue away all that his father wonne?
                     To backe a ſtranger, prowdly bearing downe
                     The brake alies and branches of the crowne?
                     And did great Edward on his death-bed giue
                     This charge to them which afterwards ſhould liue,
                     That that prowde Gaſcoyne baniſhed the land,
                     No more ſhould treade vpon the Engliſh ſand?
                     And haue theſe great Lords in the quarrell ſtood,
                     And ſealde his laſt will with their decreſt blood,
                     That after all this fearefull maſſacre,
                     The fall of Beauchamp, Lacy, Lancaſter,
                     
                     Another faithleſſe fauòrite ſhould ariſe,
                     To cloude the ſunne of our Nobilities?
                     And gloried I in Gaueſtons great fall,
                     
                        
That now a Spenſer ſhould ſucceede in all?
                     And that his aſhes ſhould another breed,
                     Which in his place and Empire ſhould ſucceede;
                     That wanting one a kingdomes wealth to ſpend,
                     Of what that left, this now ſhall make an end;
                     To waſte all that our father won before,
                     Nor leaue our ſonne a ſword to conquer more.
                     Thus but in vaine we fondly do reſiſt,
                     Where power can doe (euen) all things as it liſt,
                     And with vniuſt men to debate of lawes,
                     Is to giue power to hurt a rightfull cauſe;
                     Whilſt Parlements muſt ſtill redreſſe their wrongs,
                     And we muſt ſtarue for what to vs belongs;
                     Our wealth but fuell to their fond exceſſe,
                     And we muſt faſt to feaſt their wantonneſſe.
                     Think'ſt thou our wrongs then inſufficient are,
                     To moue our brother to religious warre?
                     And if they were, yet Edward doth detaine
                     Homage for Pontiu, Guyne, and Aquytaine;
                     And if not that, yet hath he broke the truce,
                     Thus all accurre, to put backe all excuſe.
                     The ſiſters wrong, ioynde with the brothers right,
                     Me thinks might vrge him in this cauſe to fight.
                     Be all thoſe people ſenceleſſe of our harmes,
                     Which for our Country ought haue manag'd armes?
                     Is the braue Normans courage now forgot?
                     Or the bold Brittaines loſt the vſe of ſhot?
                     The big-bonde Almaines, and ſtowt Brabanders,
                     Their warlike Pikes, and ſharpe-edg'd Semiters?
                     Or do the Pickards let their Croſſe-bowes lie,
                     Once like the Centaurs of old Theſſalie?
                     
                        
Or if a valiant Leader be their lacke,
                     Where thou art preſent, who ſhould driue them back?
                     I doe coniure thee by what is moſt deere,
                     By that great name of famous Mortimer,
                     
                     By antient Wigmors honourable cr
                           •
                        ſt,
                     The tombes where all thy famous grand-ſires reſt;
                     Or if than theſe, what more may thee approue,
                     Euen by thoſe vowes of thy vnfained loue,
                     That thy great hopes may moue the Chriſtian King,
                     By forraigne armes ſome comfort yet to bring,
                     To curbe the power of traitors that rebell,
                     Againſt the right of princely Iſabell.
                     
                     Vaine witleſle woman, why ſhould I deſire.
                     To adde more heate to thy immortall fire?
                     To vrge thee by the violence of hate,
                     To ſhake the pillars of thine owne eſtate,
                     When whatſoeuer we intend to doe,
                     To our misfortune euer ſorts vnto;
                     And nothing elſe remaines for vs beſide,
                     But teares and coffins (onely) to prouide,
                     When ſtill ſo long as Burrough beares that name,
                     Time ſhall not blot out our deſerued ſhame;
                     And whilſt cleere Trent her wonted courſe ſhall keep,
                     For our ſad fall, her chriſtall drops ſhall weepe.
                     All ſee our ruine on our backes is throwne,
                     And to our ſelues our ſorrowes are our owne.
                     And Torlton now whoſe counſell ſhould direct,
                     The firſt of all is ſlaundred with ſuſpect;
                     For dang'rous things diſſembled ſeldome are,
                     Which many eyes attend with buſie care.
                     What ſhould I ſay? My griefes do ſtill renew,
                     
                        
And but begin when I ſhould bid adiew,
                     Few be my words, but manifold my woe,
                     And ſtill I ſtay, the more I ſhiue to goe.
                     As accents iſſue forth, griefes enter in,
                     And where I end, me thinks I but begin;
                     Till then faire time ſome greater good affords,
                     Take my loues paiment in theſe ayrie words.
                  
                  
                     ¶ Notes of the Chronicle Hiſtorie.
                     
                        O how I feard that ſleepte drinke I ſent,
                        Might yet want power to further thine intent.
                     
                     
                        MOrtimer being in the Tower, and ordaining a feaſt in honor of his birth-day, as he pretended, and inuiting there-vnto Sir Stephen Segraue, Conſtable of the Tower, with the reſt of the officers belonging to the ſame he gaue them a ſleepie drinke, prouided him by the Queene, by which meanes he got liberue for his eſcape.

                           I ſteale to Thames, as though to take the aire,
                           And aske the gentle ſtreame as it doth glide,
                        
                     
                     
                        Mortimer being got out of the Tower, ſwamme the riuer of Thames into Kent, whereof ſhe hauing intelligence, doubteth of his ſtrength to eſcape, by reaſon of his long impriſonment, being almoſt the ſpace of three yeares.

                           Did Bulloyne once a festiuall prepare,
                           For England, Almaine, Cicile and Niuarr
                                 •
                              ?
                        
                     
                     
                        Edward Càrnaruan, the firſt Prince of Wales of the Engliſh blood, married Iſabell, daughter of Philip the Faire at Bulloine, in the preſence of the Kings of Almaine, Nauarre, and Cicile, with the chiefe Nobilitie of France and England: which marriage was there ſolemnized with exceeding pompe and magnificence.

                           And in my place, vpon his regall throne,
                           To ſet that girle-boy, wanton Gaueſton.
                           
                        
                     
                     Noting the effeminacie and luxurious wantonneſſe of Gaueſton, the Kings Minion, his behauiour and attire euer ſo womanlike, to pleaſe the eye of his laſciuious Prince.

                           
                           That a fowle Witches baſtard ſhould thereby.
                        
                     
                     It was vrged by the Queene & the Nobility, in the diſgrace of Piers Gaueſtone that his mother was conuicted of witchcraft, and burned for the ſame, and that Piers had bewitched the King.

                           Albania, Gaſcoine, Cambria, Ireland.
                        
                     
                     Albania, Scotland, ſo called of Albanact, the ſecond ſon of Brutus, and Cambria; Wales, ſo called of Camber the third ſonne, the foure Realmes and Countries, brought in ſubiection by Edward Longſhanks.
                        
                           When of our princely Iewells and our dowers.
                           We but enioy the leaſt of what is ours.
                        
                     
                     A complaint of the prodigalitie of King Edward, giuing vnto Gaueſtone the jewels and treaſure which was left him, by the ancient Kings of England; and enriching him with the goodly Manor of Wallingford, aſſigned as parcell of the dower, to the Queenes of this famous 
                           •
                        le.

                           And ioyn'd with the braue iſſue of our blood,
                           Alie our kingdome to their crauand brood.
                        
                     
                     
                        Edward the ſecond, gaue to Piers Gaueſton in marriage, the daughtet of Gilbert Clare, Earle of Gloceſter, begot of the Kings ſiſter, lone of Acres, married to the ſaid Earle of Gloceſter.

                           Should giue away all that his father won,
                           To backe a ſtranger.
                        
                     
                     King Edward offered his right in France, to Charles his brother in law, and his right in Scotland to Robert Bruſe, to be aided againſt the Barrons, in the quarrell of Piers Gaueſton.
                        
                           And did great Edward on his death-bed giue.
                        
                     
                     
                        Edward Longſhankes, on his death-bed at Carlile, commanded yong Edward his ſonne on his bleſſing, not to call backe Gaueſton, which (for the miſ-guiding of the Princes youth) was before baniſhed by the whole counſell of the Land.

                           That after all this fearefull maſſaker,
                           The fall of Beuchamp, Laſy, Lancaſter.
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        Thomas, Earle of Lancaſter, Guy, Earle of Warwicke, and Henry Earle of Lincolne, who had taken their oaths before the deceaſed King at his death, to withſtand his ſonne Edward if he ſhould call Gaueſton frō exile, being a thing which he much feared: now ſeeing Edward to violate his fathers commandement, riſe in armes

againſt the King, which was the cauſe of the ciuill warre, and the ruine of ſo many Princes.

                           And gloried I in Gaueſtons great fall,
                           That now a Spenſer ſhould ſucceede in all.
                        
                     
                     The two Hugh Spenſers, the father & the ſon, after the death of Gaueſton, became the great fauorites of the king, the ſon being created by him lord Chamberlain, & the father Earl of Wincheſter.

                           And if they were, yet Edward doth detaine
                           Homage for Pontiu, Guyne, and Aquitaine.
                        
                     
                     
                        Edward Longſhankes, did homage for thoſe Citties and Territories to the French King, which Edward the ſecond neglecting, moued the French King, by the ſubornation of Mortimer, to ſeaſe thoſe Countries into his hands.

                           By antient Wigmors honourable Creſt.
                        
                     
                     
                        Wigmore in the marches of Wales, was the antient houſe of the Mortimers, that noble and couragious familie.

                           That ſtill ſo long as Borrough beares that name.
                        
                     
                     The Queene remembreth the great ouerthrow giuen to the Barrons, by Andrew Herckley, Earle of Carlil, at Borrough bridge, after the battaile at Burton.

                           And Torlton now whoſe counſells ſhould direct.
                        
                     
                     This was Adam Torlton, Biſhop of Herford, that great Polititiā, who ſo highly fauored the faction of the Queene & Mortimer, whoſe euil counſel afterward wroght the deſtruction of the king.
                  
               
               
                  Mortimer to Queene Iſabell.
                  
                     AS thy ſalutes my ſorrowes do adiourne
                     So backe to thee their intereſt I turne;
                     Though not in ſo great bounty (I confeſſe)
                     As thy heroicke princely lines expreſſe:
                     For how ſhould comfort iſſue from the breath,
                     Of one condemn'd, and long lodg'd vp in death?
                     From murthers rage thou didſt me once repriue,
                     
                        
Now in exile, my hopes thou dooſt reuiue;
                     Twice all was taken, twice thou all didſt giue,
                     And thus twice dead, thou mak'ſt me twice to liue.
                     This double life of mine, your onely due,
                     You gaue to me; I gaue it backe to you;
                     Ne're my eſcape had, I aduentur'd thus,
                     As did the sky-attempting Daedalus;
                     
                     And yet to giue more ſafetie to my flight,
                     Haue made a night of day, a day of night.
                     Nor had I backt the prowd aſpiring wall,
                     Which held without, my hopes, within, my fall,
                     Leauing the cords to tell where I had gone,
                     For gazing eyes with feare to looke vpon;
                     But that thy beautie (by a power diuine)
                     Breath'd a new life into this ſpirit of mine.
                     Drawne by the Sunne of thy celeſtiall eyes,
                     With fiery wings made paſſage through the skies,
                     The heauens did ſeeme the charge of me to take,
                     And ſea and land be friend me for thy ſake;
                     Thames ſtopt her tide, to make me way to go,
                     As thou hadſt charg'd her that it ſhould be ſo;
                     The hollow marmuring windes their due time kept,
                     As they had rock'd the world, while all things ſlept;
                     One billow bore me, and another draue me,
                     This ſtroue to helpe me, and that ſtroue to ſaue me;
                     The briſling reedes mou'd with the aire did chide me,
                     As they would tell me that they meant to hide me;
                     The pale-fac'd night beheld thy heauy cheere,
                     And would not let one little ſtarre appeare,
                     But ouer all her ſmokie maptle hurl'd,
                     And in thicke vapors mu
                           〈…〉
                        d vp the world;
                     
                        
And the pure ayre became ſo calme and ſtill,
                     As it had beene obedient to my will;
                     And euery thing diſpoſde vnto my reſt,
                     As when on Seas the Alcion buildes her neſt.
                     When thoſe rough waues which late with furie ruſht,
                     Slide ſmoothely on, and ſuddainely are huſht;
                     Nor Neptune lets his ſurges out ſo long,
                     As Nature is in bringing forth her yong;
                     Nor let the Spencers glory in my chance,
                     That I ſhould liue an exile heere in France:
                     That I from England baniſhed ſhould be,
                     But England rather baniſhed from me:
                     More were her want, France our great blood ſhould beare,
                     Then Englands loſſe ſhould be to Mortimer.
                     
                     My grandſire was the firſt ſince Arthurs raigne,
                     That the Round-table rectifide againe;
                     To whoſe great Court at Kenelworth did come,
                     The peereleſſe knighthood of all Chriſtendome:
                     Whoſe princely order, honoured England more,
                     Then all the Conqueſts ſhe atchiu'd before.
                     Neuer durſt Scot ſet foote in Engliſh ground,
                     Nor on his backe did Engliſh beare a wound,
                     Whilſt Wigmore flouriſht in our princely hopes,
                     And whilſt our Enſigne march'd with Edwards troups:
                     Whilſt famous Longſhankes bones (in Fortunes ſcorne)
                     As ſacred reliques to the field were borne;
                     Nor euer did the valiant Engliſh doubt,
                     Whilſt our braue battailes guarded them about.
                     Nor did our wiues and wofull mothers mourne,
                     The Engliſh blood that ſtained Banocksburne,
                     
                     Whilſt with his Minions ſporting in his Tent,
                     
                        
Whole daies and nights in banquetting were ſpent,
                     Vntill the Scots (which vnderſafegard ſtood)
                     Made lauiſh hauocke of the Engliſh blood?
                     And battered helmes lay ſcattered on the ſhore,
                     Where they in conqueſt had beene borne before.
                     A thouſand kingdomes will we ſeeke from far,
                     As many Nations waſte with ciuill war,
                     Where the diſheuel'd gaſtly Sea-nimph ſings,
                     Or well-rigd ſhips ſhall ſtretch their ſwelling wings,
                     And drag their ankors through the ſandy fome,
                     About the world in euery clime to rome,
                     And thoſe vnchriſtned Countries call our owne,
                     Where ſcarce the name of England hath bin knowne;
                     And in the dead-ſea ſinke our houſes fame,
                     From whoſe ſterne waues we firſt deriu'd our name,
                     Before fowle blacke-mouth'd infamy ſhall ſing,
                     That Mortimer e're ſtoop'd vnto a King.
                     And we will turne ſterne-viſag'd furie backe,
                     To ſeeke his ſpoile, who ſought our vtter ſacke:
                     And come to beard him in our natiue Ile,
                     E're he march forth to follow our exile.
                     And after all theſe boiſtrous ſtormie ſhockes,
                     Yet will we grapple with the chaulkie rockes:
                     Nor will we come like Pirates, or like the eues,
                     From mountaines, forreſts, or ſea-bordering Cleeues,
                     But fright the ayre with terror (when we come)
                     Of the ſterne trumpet, and the bellowing drum:
                     And in the field aduance our plumy Creſt,
                     And march vpon faire Englands flowrie breaſt;
                     And Thames which once we for our life did ſwim,
                     Shaking our dewy treſſes on her brim,
                     
                        
Shall beare my nauie; vaunting in her pride,
                     Falling from Tanet with the powerfull tide;
                     Which fertile Eſſex, and faire Kent ſhall ſee,
                     Spreading herflags along the pleaſant lee,
                     When on her ſtemming poope ſhe prowdly beares
                     The famous Enſignes of the Belgicke Peeres,
                     And for the hatefull ſacrilegious ſinne,
                     Which by the Pope he ſtands accurſed in,
                     The Canon text ſhall haue a common gloſſe,
                     Receits in parcels, ſhall be paide in groſſe.
                     This doctrine preachde, who from the Church doth take,
                     
                     
                        At leaſt ſhall trebble reſtitution make:
                     
                     For which Rome ſends her curſes out from farre,
                     Through the ſterne throte of terror-breathing warre,
                     Till to th'vnpeopled ſhores ſhe brings ſupplies
                     Of thoſe induſtrious Roman Colonies.
                     And for his homage, by the which of olde
                     Prowd Edward Guyne and Aquitaine doth hold.
                     
                        Charles by inuaſiue armes againe ſhall take,
                     And ſend the Engliſh forces o're the lake;
                     When Edwards fortune ſtands vpon this chance,
                     To looſe in England, or expulſde from France;
                     And all thoſe townes great Longſhankes left his ſonne,
                     Now loſt againe, which once his father wonne.
                     Within their ſtrong percullizde Ports ſhall lie,
                     And from their walls his ſieges ſhall defie.
                     And by that firme and vndiſſolued knot,
                     Betwixt their neighboring French, and bordring Scot,
                     
                     
                        Bruſe now ſhall bring his Red-ſhanks from the ſeas,
                     From th'Iled Oreads, and the Hebrydes.
                     And to his weſterne hauens giue free paſſe,
                     
                        
To land the warlike Iriſh Galiglaſſe,
                     
                     Marching from Tweede to ſwelling Humber ſands,
                     Waſting along the Northerne netherlands.
                     And wanting thoſe which ſhould his power ſuſtaine,
                     Conſumde with ſlaughter in his bloody raigne,
                     Our warlike ſword ſhall driue him from his throne,
                     Where he ſhall lie for vs to treade vpon;
                     And thoſe great lords now after their attaints,
                     Canonized amongſt the Engliſh Saints;
                     And by the ſuperſtitious people thought,
                     That by their Reliques, miracles are wrought,
                     And thinke that flood much vertue doth retaine,
                     Which tooke the blood of famous Bohun ſlaine;
                     Continuing the remembrance of the thing,
                     To make the people more abhorre their King.
                     Nor ſhall a Spenſer (be he ne're ſo great)
                     Poſſeſſe our Wigmore, our renowned ſeate.
                     To raze the antient Trophies of our race,
                     With our deſerts their monuments to grace;
                     Nor ſhall he leade our valiant marchers forth,
                     To make the Spenſers famous in the North;
                     Nor be the Gardants of the Britiſh pales,
                     Defending England, and preſeruing Wales.
                     At firſt our troubles eaſily reculde;
                     But now growne head-ſtrong hardly to be rulde;
                     With graueſt counſell all muſt be directed,
                     Where plaineſt ſhewes are openly ſuſpected;
                     For where miſ-hap our errour dooth aſſault,
                     There doth it eaſſieſt make vs ſee our fault,
                     Then (ſweet) repreſſe all fond and wilfull ſpleene,
                     Two things to be a woman, and a Queene;
                     
                        
Keepe cloſe the cindars, leſt the fire ſhould burne,
                     It is not this which yet muſt ſerue our turne.
                     And if I doe not much miſtake the thing,
                     The next ſupply ſhall greater comfort bring;
                     Till when I leaue my Princeſſe for a while,
                     Liue thou in reſt, though I liue in exile.
                  
                  
                     Notes of the Chronicle Hiſtorie.
                     
                        Of one condemnd, and long lodgde vp in death.
                     
                     
                        ROger Mortimer Lord of Wigmore, had ſtoode publikely condemned, for his inſurrection with Thomas erle of Lancaſter, and Bohune earle of Herford, by the ſpace of three months: and as the report went, the day of his execution was determined to haue bin ſhortly after, which he preuented by his eſcape.

                           Twice all was taken, twice thou all didſt giue.
                        
                     
                     At what time the two Mortimers, this Roger lord of Wigmore and his vncle Roger Mortimer the elder, were apprehended in the weſt, the Queene by meanes of Torlton Biſhop of Hereford, and Becke Biſhop of Dureſme, and Patriarke of Ieruſalem, being then both mighty in the ſtate, vpon the ſubmiſſion of the Mortimers, ſomewhat pacified the king, and now ſecondly ſhee wrought meanes for his eſcape.

                           Leauing the cordes to tell where I had gone,
                        
                     
                     With ſtrong ladders made of cords prouided him for the purpoſe, he eſcaped out of the Tower, which when the ſame were found faſtned to the walles, in ſuch a deſperate attempt they bred aſtoniſhment to the beholders.

                           Nor let the Spenſers glory in my d
                                 •
                              awe.
                        
                     
                     The two Hugh Spenſers, the father, and the ſonne, then being ſo highly fauored of the King, knew that their greateſt ſafety came by his exile, whoſe high and turbulent ſpirit could neuer brooke any corriuall in greatnes.

                           My grandſire was the firſt ſince Arthurs raigne,
                           That the Round-table rectifide againe.
                        
                     
                     
                        Roger Mortimer, called the great Lord Mortimer, Grandfather

to this Roger, which was afterward the firſt Earle of March, ree
                        
                           •
                        ected againe the Round-table at Kenelwoorth, after the ancient order of king Arthurs table, with the retinue of a hudred knights, and a hundred ladies in his houſe, for the entertaining of ſuch aduentures as came thither from all parts of Chriſtendome.

                           Whileſt famous Longſhanks bones in Fortunes ſcorne.
                        
                     
                     
                        Edward Longſhanks willed at his death, that his body ſhould be boyled, the fleſh from the bones, and that the bones ſhould bee borne to the wars in Scotland, which he was perſwaded vnto by aprophecie, which told that the Engliſh ſhould ſtill be fortunate in conqueſt, ſo long as his bones were caried in the field.

                           The Engliſh blood that ſtained Banocksburne.
                           
                        
                     
                     In the great voyage Edward the ſecond made againſt the Scots, at the battell at Striueling neere vnto the riuer of Banocksburne in Scotland, where there was in the Engliſh campe ſuch banket
                        
                           •
                        ing and exceſſe, ſuch riot and miſorder, that the Scots, (who in the meane time laboured for aduauntage) gaue to the Engliſh a great ouerthrow.

                           And in the Dead-ſea ſincke our horſes fame,
                           From whoſe, &c.
                        
                     
                     
                        Mortimer, ſo called of Mare mortuum, and in French Mort mer, in Engliſh the Dead-ſea, which is ſaid to be where Sodom 
                           •
                        nd Go morra once were, before they were deſtroyed by fire frō Heauen.

                           And for that hatefull ſacrilegious ſin
                           Which by the Pope he ſtand
                                 •
                               
                              
                                 〈…〉
                              urſed in.
                        
                     
                     
                        Gauſtelinus and Lucas, two Cardinals, ſent into England from Pope Clement, to appeaſe the auncient hate betweene the King and Thomas. Earle of Lancaſter, to whoſe Embaſſie the king ſeemed to yeeld, but after their departure hee went backe from his promiſes, for which he was accurſed at Rome.

                           Of thoſe induſtrious Roman Colonies.
                        
                     
                     A Colony is a ſort or number of people, that come to inhabite a place before not inhabited, whereby he ſeemes here to prophecie of the ſubuerſion of the land; the Pope ioyning with the power of other Princes againſt Edward for the breach of his promiſe.

                           
                              Charles by inuaſiue Armes againe ſhall take.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        Charles the French King, mooued by the wrong done vnto his ſiſter, ſeiſeth the Prouinces which belonged to the King of England into his hands, ſtirred the rather thereto by Mortimer, who ſolicited her cauſe in France, as is expreſſed before in the other Epiſtle, in the gloſſe vpon this poynt.

                           And thoſe great Lords now after their attaints,
                           Canonized among the Engliſh Saints.
                        
                     
                     After the death of Thomas Earle of Lancaſter at Pomfret, the people imagined great myracles to be done by his reliques: as they did of the body of Bohune earle of Hereford, ſlaine at Borough bridge.
                  
                  Finis.
               
               
                  
                  
                     ❧ To my worthy and honored friend, Sir Walter Aston Knight of the Bath.
                  
                     
                        SIR, though without ſuspition of flatterie I might in more ample and free tearmes, intimate my affection vnto you, yet hauing ſo ſenſible a taſte of your generous and noble aispoſition, which without this habite of ceremony can estimate my loue: I will rather affect bre
                           〈…〉
                        , though it ſhould ſeeme my fault, than by my tedious complement, to trouble mine owne opinion ſetled in your iudgement and diſcretion. I make you the Patron of this Epiſtle of the Blacke-Prince, which I pray you accept, till more eaſie houres may offer vppe from mee ſome thing more worthy of your view, and my trauell.
                  
                  
                     Yours truely deuoted,
Mich: Drayton.
                  
               
               
                  
                  ¶ Edward the Blacke-Prince to Alice Counteſse of Salisbury.
                  
                     The Argument.
                     
                        Alice Counteſſe of Saliſbury, remaining at Roxborough caſtle in the North, in the abſence of the earle her huſband, who was by the Kings commaund ſent ouer into Flaunders, and there deceaſed ere his returne. This Lady being beſieged in her caſtle by the Scots, Edward the Blacke-Prince being ſent by the King his father to relieue the north parts with an Armie, and to remooue the ſiege of Roxborough, there fell in loue with the Counteſſe; when after ſhe returned to London, hee ſought by diuers and ſundry meanes to winne her to his youthfull pleaſures, as by forcing the Earle of Kent her father, and her mother, vnnaturally to become his Agents in his vaine deſire; where after a long and aſſured triall of her inuincible conſtancie, hee taketh her to his wife, to which end he only frameth this Epiſtle.
                  
                  
                     REceiue theſe papers from thy wofull Lord,
                     With farre more woes than they with wordes are ſtorde,
                     Which if thine eie with raſhnes do reproue,
                     Thei'le ſay they came from that imperious loue.
                     In euery letter thou maiſt vnderſtand,
                     Which loue hath ſignde and ſealed with his hand;
                     And where no farther proceſſe he refers,
                     In blots ſet downe, for others Characters,
                     This cannot bluſh, although you doe refuſe it,
                     
                        
Nor will reply how euer you ſhall vſe it;
                     All, one to this, though you ſhould bid diſpaire,
                     This ſtill intreates you, this ſtill ſpeakes you faire;
                     Haſt thou a liuing ſoule? a humane ſence?
                     To like, diſlike p
                           •
                        oue, order and diſpence,
                     The depth of reaſon ſoundly to aduiſe,
                     To loue things good things hurtfull to deſpiſe;
                     The tuch of iudgement, which ſhould
                           〈…〉
                         things proue,
                     And haſt thou toucht, yet not allowſt my loue?
                     Sound moues his ſound, voyce doth beget his voyce,
                     One Ec
                           •
                        ho makes another to reioyce,
                     One well tunde ſtring ſet truely to his like,
                     Strooke neere at hand doth make another ſtrike.
                     How comes it then that our affections jarre?
                     What oppoſition doth beget this warre?
                     I know that Nature franckly to thee gaue,
                     That meaſure of her bounty that I haue,
                     And with that ſence ſhe likewiſe to vs lent
                     Each one his organ, each his inſtrument,
                     But euery one, becauſe it is thine owne,
                     Doth p
                           〈…〉
                        ſe it ſelfe, vnto it ſelfe alone.
                     Thy d
                           〈…〉
                        y hand, when it it ſelfe doth tuch,
                     That feeling tells it there was neuer ſuch;
                     When in thy gl
                           •
                        ſse thine eie it ſelfe doth ſee,
                     That thinkes theres none, like to it ſelfe can be,
                     And euery one doth iudge it ſelfe diuine.
                     Becauſe that thou dooſt challenge it for thine;
                     And each it ſelfe, Narciſſus. like dooth ſmother,
                     And loues it ſelfe, not like to any other;
                     Fie be not burnd thus in thine owne deſire,
                     Tis needleſſe beauty ſhould it ſelfe admire,
                     
                        
The Sunne, by which all creatures lightned bee,
                     And ſeeth all, it ſelfe yet cannot ſee;
                     And his owne brightneſſe his owne foile is made,
                     And is to vs the cauſe of his owne ſhade.
                     When firſt thy beautie by mine eye was prou'd,
                     It ſaw not then ſo much to be belou'd;
                     But when it came a perfect view to take,
                     Each looke of one, doth many beauties make:
                     In little circlets firſt it doth ariſe,
                     Then ſomewhat larger ſeeming in mine eyes,
                     And in this gi
                           •
                        ing compaſſe as it goes,
                     So more and more, the ſame in greatnes growes,
                     And as it yet at libertie is ſet,
                     The motion ſtill do
                           •
                        h other formes beget;
                     Vntill 
                           •
                        t length, looke any way I could,
                     Nothing there was but beautie to behold.
                     Art thou offended that thou art belou'd?
                     Remoue the cauſe, th'effect is ſoone remou'd;
                     Indent with Beautie how farre to extend,
                     Set downe deſire, a limmit where to end;
                     Then charme thine eies, their glances ſhal not wound,
                     And teach the ſence, the depth of loue to ſound:
                     If thou do this, nay then thou ſhalt do more,
                     And bring to paſſe what neuer was before;
                     Make anguiſh ſportiue, crauing all delight,
                     Mirth ſolemne, ſullen, and inclinde to night;
                     Ambition lowly, enuie ſpeaking well,
                     Loue, his reliefe of nigardize to ſell;
                     Our war-like father did theſe forts deuiſe,
                     As ſureſt holds againſt our enemies,
                     The ſafeſt places for our ſexe to reſt,
                     
                        
Feare ſoone is ſetled in a womans breaſt,
                     Thy breaſt is of another temper farre,
                     And then thy Caſtell fitter for the warre,
                     Thou dooſt not ſafely in thy Caſtell reſt,
                     Thy Caſtell ſhould be ſafer in thy breaſt,
                     That keepes out foes, but doth thy friends incloſe,
                     But thy breaſt keepes out both thy friends and foes;
                     That may be batterd, or be vnderminde,
                     Or by ſtrait ſiege, for want of ſuccour pinde;
                     But thy heart is inuincible to all,
                     And more defenſiue then thy Caſtell wall;
                     Of all the ſhapes that euer Ioue did proue,
                     Wherewith he vſde to entertaine his loue;
                     That likes me beſt, when in a golden ſhower,
                     He 
                           •
                        ainde himſelfe on Danae in her Tower,
                     Nor did I euer enuie his command,
                     In that he beares the thunder in his hand;
                     But in that ſhowrie ſhape I cannot bee,
                     And as he came to her, I come to thee,
                     Thy Tower with foes, is not begirt about,
                     If thou within, they are beſieg'd without,
                     One haire of thine, more vigor doth retaine
                     To binde thy foe, then with an yron chaine:
                     Who might be gyu'd in ſuch a golden ſtring,
                     Would not be captiue, though he were a King;
                     Hadſt thou all India heap'd vp in thy fort,
                     And thou thy ſelfe beſieged in that ſort,
                     Get thou but out, where they can thee eſpie,
                     They'le follow thee, and let the treaſure lie.
                     I cannot thinke what force thy Tower ſhould win,
                     If thou thy ſelfe dooſt guard the ſame within;
                     
                        
Thine eye retaines artillary at will,
                     To kill who euer thou deſir
                           •
                        ſt to kill;
                     For that alone more deepely wounds their hearts,
                     Then they can thee, though with a thouſand darts;
                     For there entrenched little Cupid lies,
                     And from thoſe turrets all the world defies:
                     And when thou letſt downe that tranſparant lid,
                     Of entrance, there an Armie doth forbid.
                     And as for Famine, thou needes neuer feare,
                     Who thinkes of want when thou art preſent there,
                     Thy onely ſight giues ſpirit vnto the blood,
                     And comforts life, though neuer taſting foode.
                     And as thy ſouldiers keepe their watch and ward,
                     So chaſtitie thy inward breaſt doth guard,
                     Thy modeſt pulſe ſerues as a latum bell,
                     Which watched by a wakefull Sentinell,
                     Is ſtirring ſtill with euery little feare,
                     Warning, if any enemy be neare.
                     Thy vertuous thought, when all the others reſt,
                     Like carefull Skowts paſſe vp and downe thy breaſt,
                     And ſtill they round about that place doe keepe,
                     Whilſt all the bleſſed garriſon do ſleepe.
                     But yet I feare, if that the truth were told,
                     That thou haſt robbde, and fl
                           •
                        ſt vnto this bolde
                     I thought as much, and didſt this Fort deuiſe,
                     That thou in ſafety heere mightſt tyrannize.
                     Yes, thou haſt robbde the heauen and earth of all,
                     And they againſt thy lawleſſe theft doe call;
                     Thine eies with mine, that wage continuall warres,
                     Borrow their brightneſſe of the twinckling ſtarres;
                     Thy breath, for which mine ſtill in ſighes conſumes,
                     
                        
Hath rob'd ſweete flowres, rich odors and perfumes,
                     Thy cheeke, for which mine all this penance proues,
                     Steales the pure whitenes both from Swans & doues.
                     Thy lips from mine, that in thy maske be pent,
                     Haue filch'd the bluſhing from the orient;
                     O mighty Loue! bring hether all thy power,
                     And fetch this heauenly theefe out of her Tower,
                     For if ſhe may be ſuffred in this ſort,
                     Heauens ſtore will ſoone be hoarded in this fort.
                     When I arriu'd before that ſtate of loue,
                     And ſaw thee on the battlement aboue,
                     I thought there was no other heauen but there,
                     And thou an Angel didſt from thence appeare.
                     But when my reaſon did reproue mine eye,
                     That thou wert ſubiect to mortalitie,
                     I then excuſde the Scot before had done,
                     No maruaile though he would the fort haue wonne;
                     Perceiuing well thoſe enuious walls did hide,
                     More wealth then was in all the world beſide;
                     Againſt thy foe, I came to lend thee aide,
                     And thus to thee my ſelfe, my ſelfe betraide;
                     He is beſieg'd, the ſiege that came to raiſe,
                     There's no aſſault that not my breaſt aſſaies,
                     Loue growne extreame, doth finde vnlawfull ſhifts,
                     The Gods take ſhapes, and do allure with gifts,
                     Commanding Ioue, that by great Stix doth ſweare,
                     Forſworne in loue, with louers oathes doth beare,
                     Loue cauſeleſſe ſtill, doth aggrauate his cauſe,
                     It is his law to violate all lawes;
                     His reaſon is, in onely wanting reaſon,
                     And were vntrue, not deepely tuch'd with treaſon;
                     
                        
Th'vnlawfull meanes, doth make his lawfull gaine,
                     Hee ſpeakes moſt true, when he the moſt doth faine;
                     Pardon the faults that haue eſcapde by mee,
                     Againſt faire vertue, chaſtitie and thee;
                     If Gods can their owne excellence excell,
                     Is it in pardoning mortalls that rebell?
                     When all thy trialls are enrol'd by fame,
                     And all thy ſexe made glorious by thy name,
                     Then I a captiue ſhall be brought heereby,
                     To adorne the triumph of thy chaſtitie;
                     I ſue not now thy Paramore to bee,
                     But as a husband to be linck'd to thee.
                     I am Englands heire, I thinke thou wilt confeſſe,
                     Wert thou a Prince, I hope I am no leſſe;
                     But that thy birth doth make thy ſtocke diuine,
                     Elſe durſt I boaſt, my blood as good as thine;
                     Diſdaine me not, nor take my loue in ſcorne,
                     Whoſe brow a crowne heereafter may adorne.
                     But what I am, I call mine owne no more,
                     Take what thou wilt, and what thou wilt, reſtore;
                     Onely I craue, what ere I did intend,
                     In faithfull loue, now happily may end.
                     Farewell ſweete Lady, ſo well maiſt thou fare,
                     To equall 
                           •
                        oy with meaſure of my care;
                     Thy vertues more then mortall tongue can tell,
                     A thouſand, thouſand times, farewell, farewell.
                  
                  
                     Notes of the Chronicle hiſtory.
                     
                        Receiue theſe papers from thy wofull Lord.
                     
                     
                        BAndello, by whō this hiſtory was made famous, being an Italiā as it is the peoples cuſtom in that clime, rather to faile ſomtime

in the truth of circumſtance, then to forgoe the grace of their conceit; n like manner as the Grecians, of whom the Satyriſt.

                           Et quicquid Graetia mendax,
                           Audet in hiſtoria.
                        
                     
                     Thinking it to be a greater triall, that a Counteſſe ſhould be ſude vnto by a King, then by the ſonne of a King, and conſeqently, that the honour of her chaſtitie ſhould be the more, hath cauſed it to be generally taken ſo; but as by Polidore, Fabian, and Froiſard, appeares the contrarie is true. Yet may Bandello be very well excuſed, as being a ſtranger, whoſe errors in the truth of our hiſtorie, are not ſo materiall, that they ſhould neede an inuectiue, leſt his wit ſhould bee defrauded of any part of his due, which were not leſſe, were euery part a fiction. Howbeit, leſt a common error ſhould preuaile againſt a truth; theſe Epiſtles are conceiued in thoſe perſons, who were indeede the actors: to wit, Edward, ſurnamed the Blacke 
                              〈◊〉
                           , not ſo much of his complexion, as of the diſmall battells which he fought in France, (in like ſence as we may ſay, a blacke day) for ſome tragicall euent, though the Sunne ſhine neuer ſo bright therein. And Alice, the Counteſſe of Salsburie, who as it is certaine, was beloued of Prince Edward; ſo it is as certaine, that many points now current in the receiued ſtory, can neuer hold together with likelihoode of ſuch enforcement, had it not beene ſhewed vnder the title of a King.

                           And when thou let'ſt downe that tranſparent lid.
                        
                     
                     Not that the lid is tranſparent, for no part of the skin is tranſparent, but for the gemme which at that cloſure is ſaid to containt, is tranſparent, for otherwiſe how could the minde vnderſtand by the eye? ſhould not the images ſlide through the ſame, and repleniſh the ſtage of the phantaſie? But this belongs to Optickes. The Latines call the eye lid cilium, (I will not ſay of celando) as the eye brow ſupercilium, and the haire on the eye lids palpebra, perhaps quod palpitet, all which haue their diſtinct and neceſſary vſes.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     Alice Counteſſe of Salsbury, to the Blacke Prince.
                  
                     AS one would grant; yet gladly would deny,
                     Twixt hope and feare, I doubtfully reply;
                     A womans weakeneſſe, leſt I ſhould diſcouer,
                     Anſwering a Prince, and writing to a louer;
                     And ſome ſay, Loue with Reaſon doth diſpence.
                     And wreſt our plaine words to another ſence:
                     Thinke you not then, poore women had not neede
                     Be well aduiſde to write, what men ſhould reade,
                     When being ſilent moouing but awry,
                     Giues cauſe of ſcandall and of obloquy;
                     Whilſt in our hearts, our ſecret thoughts abide,
                     Th'inuenom'd tongue of ſlander yet is tide;
                     But if once ſpoke, deliuered vp to Fame,
                     Hers the report, but ours returnes the ſhame.
                     About to write, yet newly entring in,
                     Me thinkes I end, ere I can well begin;
                     When I would end, then ſomething makes me ſtay,
                     And then me thinkes I ſhould haue more to ſay;
                     And ſome one thing remaineth in my breaſt,
                     For want of words that cannot be expreſt;
                     What I would ſay; as ſaid to thee I faine,
                     Then in thy perſon I reply againe,
                     Then in thy cauſe, vrge all I can obiect,
                     Then what againe mine honour muſt reſpect.
                     O Lord! what ſundry paſſions do I trie?
                     Striuing to hate, you forcing contrarie;
                     
                        
Being a Prince, I blame you not to proue,
                     The greater reaſon to obtaine your loue.
                     That greatneſſe which doth challenge no deniall,
                     The onely reſt that doth allow my triall:
                     
                        Edward ſo great, the greater were his fall,
                     And my offence in this were capitall.
                     To men is granted priuiledge to tempt,
                     But in that charter women be exempt:
                     Men win vs not, except we giue conſent;
                     Againſt our ſelues, except our ſelues are bent.
                     Who doth impute it is a fault to you?
                     You proue not falſe, except we be vntrue;
                     It is your vertue, being men, to try,
                     And it is ours, by vertue to deny.
                     Your fault it ſelfe, ſerues for the faults excuſe,
                     And makes it ours, though yours be the abuse.
                     Beautie a beggar, fie it is too bad,
                     When in it ſelfe ſufficiencie is had,
                     Not made a Lure t'entice the wandring eye,
                     But an attire t'adorne ſweete modeſtie,
                     If modeſtie and women once do ſeuer,
                     We may bid farewell to our fame for euer
                     Let Iohn and Henry, Edwards inſtance be,
                     
                        Matilda and faire Roſamond for me:
                     A like both woo'd, alike ſu'd to be wonne,
                     Th'one by the father, th'other by the ſonne;
                     
                        Henry obtaining, did our weakeneſſe wound,
                     And laies the fault on wanton Roſamond;
                     
                     
                        Matilda chaſte, in life and death all one,
                     By her deniall, l
                           ••
                        es the fault on Iohn;
                     
                     By theſe we proue, men acceſſary ſtill,
                     
                        
But women only principalls of ill.
                     What praiſe is ours, but what our vertues get?
                     If they be lent, ſo much we be in debt,
                     Whilſt our owne honours vertue doth defend,
                     All force too weake, what euer men pretend;
                     If all the world elſe, ſhould ſuborne our fame,
                     Tis we our ſelues that ouerthrow the ſame;
                     And howſoe're although by force you win,
                     Yet on our weakenes ſtill returnes the ſin.
                     A vertuous Prince who doth not Edward call?
                     And ſhall I then be guiltie of your fall?
                     Now God for bid; yet rather let me die,
                     Then ſuch a ſin vpon my ſoule ſhould lie.
                     Where is great Edward? whither is he led?
                     At whoſe victorious name whole armies fled.
                     Is that braue ſpirit that conquerd ſo in France,
                     Thus ouercome and vanquiſht with a glance?
                     Is that great hart that did aſpire ſo hie,
                     So ſoone tranſperſed with a womans eie?
                     He that a king at Poictiers battell tooke,
                     Himſelfe led captiue with a wanton looke?
                     Twice as a Bride to church I haue bin led,
                     Twice haue two Lords enjoyd my Bridale bed;
                     How can that beauty yet be vndeſtroyd,
                     That yeeres haue waſted, and two men enioyd,
                     Or ſhould be thought fit for a Princes ſtore,
                     Of which two ſubiects were poſſeſt before?
                     Let Spaine, let France, or Scotland ſo preferre
                     Their infant Queenes; for Englands dowager,
                     That bloud ſhould be much more than halfe diuine,
                     That ſhould be equall euery way with thine:
                     
                        
Yet princely Edward, though I thus reproue you,
                     As mine owne life, ſo deerely doe I loue you.
                     My noble husband, which ſo loued you,
                     That gentle Lord, that reuerend Mountague,
                     
                     Nere mothers voyce did pleaſe her babe ſo well,
                     As his did mine, of you to heare him tell;
                     I haue made ſhort the houres that time made long,
                     And chaind mine eares vnto his pleaſing tong,
                     My lips haue waited on your praiſes worth,
                     And ſnatcht his words ere he could get them forth:
                     When he hath ſpoke, and ſomething by the way
                     Hath broke off that he was about to ſay;
                     I kept in minde where from his tale he fell,
                     Calling on him the reſidue to tell;
                     Oft he would ſay, how ſweet a Prince is he!
                     When I haue praiſde him but for praiſing thee,
                     And to proceede, I would intreate and wooe,
                     And yet to eaſe him, help to praiſe thee too:
                     Muſt ſhe be forcde, t'exclaime th'iniurious wrong,
                     Offred by him, whom ſhe hath lou'd ſo long?
                     Nay, I will tell, and I durſt almoſt ſweare,
                     
                        Edward will bluſh, when he his fault ſhall heare.
                     Iudge now that time doth youths deſire aſſwage,
                     And reaſon mildely quencht the fire of rage.
                     By vpright iuſtice let my cauſe be tride,
                     And be thou iudge if I not iuſtly chide.
                     That not my fathers graue and reuerend yeeres,
                     When on his knee he beggd me with his teares,
                     By no perſwaſions poſſibly could winne,
                     To free himſelfe as guiltleſſe of my ſinne.
                     The woe for me my mother did abide,
                     
                        
Whoſe ſute (but you) theres none would haue denide.
                     Your luſt full rage your tyranny could ſtay;
                     Mine honours ruine further to delay;
                     Haue I ot lou'd you? let the truth be ſhowne,
                     That ſtill preſeru'd your honour with mine owne.
                     Had your fond will your foule deſires preuailde,
                     When you by them my chaſtitie aſſailde:
                     Though this no way could haue excuſde my fault,
                     True vertue neuer yeelded to aſſault:
                     Yet what a thing were this it ſhould be ſaid,
                     My parents ſin ſhould to your charge be laide:
                     And I haue gainde my libertie with ſhame,
                     To ſaue my life, made ſhip wracke of my name.
                     Did Roxborough once vaile her towring fane,
                     To thy braue enſigue, on the Northerne plaine?
                     And to thy trumpet ſounding from thy tent,
                     Often replide (as to my ſuccor ſent)
                     And did receiue thee as my ſou
                           •
                        raigne liege
                     Comming to ayde, thou ſhouldſt againe beſiege,
                     To raiſe a fo
                           •
                        , but for my treaſure came
                     To plant a foe, to take my honeſt name;
                     Vnder pretence to haue remou'd the Scot,
                     And wouldſt haue won more than he could haue got;
                     That did ingirt me ready ſtill to flie,
                     But thou laidſt batt'ry to my chaſtitie:
                     O modeſtie, didſt thou me not reſtraine,
                     How I could chide you in this angry vaine!
                     A Princes name (heauen knowes) I doe not craue,
                     To haue thoſe honours Edward
                              •
                           
                         ſpouſe ſhould haue;
                     Nor by ambitious lures will I be brought,
                     In my chaſte breaſt to harbour ſuch a thought,
                     
                        
As to be worthy to be made a Bride,
                     An Empreſse place by mighty Edwards ſide,
                     Of all the moſt vnworthy of that grace,
                     To waite on her that ſhould enioy that place.
                     But if that loue Prince Edward doth require,
                     Equall his vertues, and my chaſte deſire:
                     If it be ſuch as we may iuſtly vaunt,
                     A Prince may ſue for, and a Lady graunt:
                     If it be ſuch as may ſuppreſse my wrong,
                     That from your vaine vnbrideled youth hath ſprong,
                     That faith I ſend, that I from you receaue,
                     The reſt vnto your Princely thoughts I leaue.
                  
                  
                     ¶ Notes of the Chronicle Hiſtorie.
                     
                        Twice as a Bride I haue to Church beene led.
                     
                     THe two husbands of which ſhe makes mention, obiecting bigamy againſt herſelfe, as being therefore not meet to be married with a batcheller-Prince, were ſir Thomas Holland knight, & ſir Willlam Montague, afterward made Earle of Salisbury.

                           That not my fathers graue and reuerend yeeres.
                        
                     
                     A thing incredible, that any Prince ſhould be ſo vniuſt to vſe the fathers meanes for the corruption of the daughters chaſtitie, though ſo the hiſtorie importeth, her father being ſo honourable, and a man of ſo ſingular deſert, though Polidore would haue her thought to be Iane, the daughter to Edmund earle of Kent, vncle to Edward the third, beheaded in the Protectoriſhip of Mortimer, that dangerous aſpirer.

                           And I haue gainde my libertie with ſhame.
                        
                     
                     Roxborough is a caſtle in the North, miſ-termed by Bandello Salisbury caſtle, becauſe the king had giuen it to the Earle of Salisbury, in which her Lorde being abſent, the Counteſſe by the Scots was beſieged, who by the comming of the Engliſh Armie were remoued. Here firſt the Prince ſaw her, whoſe libertie had

bin gained by her ſhame, had ſhee bin drawne by diſhoneſt loue to ſatisfie his appetite, but by her moſt praiſe-worthy conſtancie ſhe conuerted that humor in him to an honourable purpoſe, and obtained the true reward of her admired vertues.

                           The reſt vnto your princely thoughts I leaue.
                        
                     
                     Leſt any thing be left out which were woorth the relation, it ſhall not be impertinent to annex the opinions that are vttered, concerning her, whoſe name is ſaid to haue bin Aclips, but that being rejected as a name vnknowne among vs, Froiſard is rather beleeued, who calleth her Alice. Polidore contrariwiſe as before is declared, names her Iane, who by Prince Edward had iſſue, Edward dying yong, and Richard the ſecond king of England, thogh (as he ſaith) ſhe was diuorced afterwards, becauſe within the degrees of conſanguinitie prohibiting to many, the trueth whereof I omit to diſcuſſe, her husband the Lord Montague, being ſent ouer into Flaunders by king Edward, was taken priſoner by the French, and not returning, left his Counteſſe a widow, in whoſe bed ſucceeded Prince Edward, to whoſe laſt and lawſull requeſt the reioyceſull Lady ſends this louing anſwere.
                  
                  Finis.
               
               
                  
                  ¶ To the right Honourable and my very good Lord, Edward Earle of Bedford.
                  
                     THrice noble and my gratious Lord, the loue I haue euer borne to the illuſtrious houſe of Bedford, and to the honourable familie of the Harringtons, to the which by marriage your Lordſhip is happily vnited, hath long ſince deuoted my true and zealous affection to your honourable ſeruice, and my Poems to the protection of my noble Ladie, your Counteſſe; to whoſe ſeruice I was furſt bequeathed, by that learnd & accompliſht gentleman ſir Henry Goodere, (not long ſince deceaſed,) whoſe I was whilſt hee was, whoſe patience pleaſed to beare with the imperfections of my heedles and vnſtaied youth. That excellent and matchleſſe Gentleman, was the firſt cheriſher of my Muſe, which had beene by his death left a poore Orphan to the world, had he not before bequeathed it to that Lady whom he ſo deerely liued. Vouchſafe then, my deere Lord, to accept this epiſtle, which I dedicate as zealouſly, as (I hope) you will patronize willingly, vntill ſome more acceptable ſeruice may be witneſſe of my loue to your honour,
                  
                  
                     Your Lordſhips euer
Michaell Drayton.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Queene Iſabell to Richard the ſecond.
                  
                  
                     The Argument.
                     Queene Iſabel the daughter of Charles king of France) being the ſecond wife of Richard the ſecond, the ſon of Edward the Blacke Prince, the eldeſt ſonne of King Edward the third; After the ſaide Richard her huſband was depoſed from his crowne and kingly dignitie, by Henry duke of Herford, the eldeſt ſon of Iohn of Gaunt duke of Lancaſter, the fourth ſonne of Edward the third, this Ladie being then very yong, was ſent backe againe into Fraunce, without dowre, at what time the depoſed King her huſband was ſent from the Tower of London (as a priſoner) vnto Pomfret Caſtle. Whether this poore Lady bewailing her huſbands misfortunes writeth this Epiſtle from France.
                  
                  
                     AS dooth the yeerely Auger of the ſpring
                     In deapth of woe, thus I my ſorrow ſing;
                     Words tunde with ſighes, teares falling oft among,
                     A dolefull burthen to a heauy ſong:
                     Words iſſue forth to finde my griefe ſome way,
                     Teares ouertake them, and doe bid them ſtay;
                     Thus whilſt one ſtriues to keepe the other backe,
                     Both once too forward, now are both too ſlacke.
                     If fatall Pomfret hath in former time.
                     Nurriſht the griefe of that vnnaturall clime.
                     
                        
Thether I ſend my ſorrowes to be ſed,
                     But, where firſt bo
                           •
                        ne, where fitter to be bred?
                     They vnto France be aliens and vnknowne,
                     England from her doth challenge theſe her owne.
                     They ſay all miſchiefe commeth from the North,
                     It is too true, my fall doth ſet it forth;
                     But why ſhould I thus limite Griefe a place,
                     When all the world is filld with our diſgrace?
                     And we in bounds thus ſtriuing to containe it,
                     The more reſiſts, the more we doe reſtraine it.
                     Oh how euen yet I hate theſe wretched eies,
                     And in my glaſſe oft call them faithleſſe ſpies
                     (Preparde for Richard) that vnwares did looke
                     Vpon that traitor Henry Bulingbrooke,
                     
                     But that exceſſe of ioy my ſence bereau'd
                     So much, my ſight had neuer bin deceau'd.
                     Oh how vnlike to my lou'd Lord was hee,
                     Whom raſhly I, ſweet Richard tooke for thee,
                     I might haue ſeene the Cou
                           •
                        ſers ſelfe did lacke,
                     That Princely rider ſhould beſtride his backe,
                     He that (ſince Nature her great worke began)
                     Shee made to be the mirrour of a man,
                     That when ſhe meant to forme ſome matchleſſe lim,
                     Still for a patterne, tooke ſome part of him,
                     And iealous of her cunning, brake the mould,
                     In his proportion done the beſt ſhe could.
                     Oh let that day be guiltie of all ſinne,
                     That is to come, or heeretofore hath bin,
                     Wherein great Norffolkes forward courſe was ſtaide,
                     To prooue the treaſons he to Herſord laide,
                     When (with ſterne furie) both theſe Dukes enragde,
                     
                        
Their warlike gloues at Couentry engag'd,
                     When firſt thou didſt repeale thy former grant,
                     Seal'd to braue Mowbray, as thy Combatant,
                     From his vnnumbred howres let time deuide it,
                     Leſt in his minutes he ſhould hap to hide it;
                     Yet on his brow continually to beare it,
                     That when it comes, all other daies may feare it,
                     And all ill-boding Planets by conſent,
                     That day may hold their dreadfull parlement,
                     Be it in heauens decrees enroled thus,
                     Blacke, diſmall, fatall, inauſpitious:
                     Prowd Herford then, in height of all his pride,
                     Vnder great Mowbraies valiant hand had dide;
                     Nor ſhould not thus from baniſhment retire,
                     The fatall brand to ſet our Troy on fire.
                     O why did Charles relieue his needy ſtate?
                     A vagabond and ſtragling runnagate;
                     And in this Court, with grace did entertaine
                     This vagrant exile, this abiected Caine,
                     
                     Who with a thouſand mothers curſes went,
                     Mark'd with the brand often yeeres baniſhment.
                     When thou to Ireland took'ſt thy laſt farewell,
                     Millions of knees vpon the pauements fell,
                     And euery where th'applauding ecchoes ring,
                     The ioyfull ſhowts that did ſalute a King;
                     Thy parting hence, what pompe did not adorne?
                     At thy returne, who laugh'd thee not to ſcorne?
                     Who to my Lord a looke vouchſafde to lend,
                     Then all too few on Herford to attend.
                     Princes (like ſunnes) be euermore in ſight,
                     All ſee the clowdes betwixt them and their light;
                     
                        
Yet they which lighten all downe from the skies,
                     See not the clowdes offending others eyes,
                     And deeme their noone-tide is deſir'd of all,
                     When all expect cleere changes by their fall.
                     What colour ſeemes to ſhadow Herfords claime,
                     When law and right his fathers hopes doth maime?
                     Affirm'd by church-men (which ſhould beare no hate)
                     That Iohn of Gaunt was illegi
                           •
                        timate;
                     Whom his reputed mothers tongue did ſpot,
                     By a baſe Flemiſh Boore to be begot,
                     Whom Edwards Eglets mortally did ſhun,
                     Daring with them to gaze againſt the Sun.
                     Where lawfull right and conqueſt doth allow,
                     A triple crowne on Richards princely brow,
                     Three kingly Lions beares his bloody field,
                     No baſtards marke doth blot his conquering ſhield,
                     Neuer durſt he attempt our hapleſſe ſhore,
                     Nor ſet his foote on fatall Rauenſpor
                           •
                        ;
                     Nor durſt his ſlugging Hulkes approch the ſtrand,
                     Nor ſtoope a top as ſignall to the land,
                     Had not the Percyes promiſde aide to bring,
                     Againſt their oath vnto their lawfull King,
                     Againſt their faith vnto our crownes true heire,
                     Their valiant kinſman, Edmond Mortimer;
                     
                     When I to England came, a world of eyes
                     Like ſtarres attended on my faire ariſe,
                     At my decline, like angry Planets frowne,
                     And all are ſet before my going downe;
                     The ſmooth fac'd ayre did on my comming ſmile,
                     But with rough ſtormes are driuen to exile;
                     But Bullingbrooke deuiſ
                           •
                        e we thus ſhould part,
                     
                        
Fearing two ſorrowes ſhould poſſeſſe one heart;
                     To make affliction ſtronger, doth denie,
                     That one poore comfort left our miſerie,
                     He had before diuorc'd thy crowne and thee,
                     Which might ſuffice, and not to widdow mee,
                     But that to proue the vtmoſt of his hate,
                     To make our fall the greater by our ſtate.
                     Oh would Aumerle had ſuncke when he betraid
                     The complot, which that holy Abbot laid.
                     When he infring'd the oth which he firſt tooke,
                     For thy reuenge on pe
                           •
                        iurde Bullingbrooke.
                     
                     And beene the ranſome of our friends deere blood
                     Vntimely loſt, and for the earth too good;
                     And we vntimely mourne our hard eſtate,
                     They gone too ſoone, and we remaine too late.
                     And though with teares I from my Lord depart,
                     This curſe on Horford fall, to eaſe my heart:
                     If the fowle breach of a chaſte nuptiall bed,
                     May bring a curſe, my curſe light on his head;
                     If murthers guilt with blood may deepely ſtaine,
                     
                        Greene, Scroope, and Buſhie, die his fault in graine;
                     If periury may heauens pure gates debar,
                     Damn'd be the oth he made at Dancaſter;
                     If the depoſing of a lawfull King,
                     The curſe condemne him, if no other thing;
                     If theſe diſioynde, for vengeance cannot call,
                     Let them vnited ſtrongly curſe him all.
                     And for the Percyes, heauen may heare my prayre,
                     That Bullingbrooke now placde in Richards chaire;
                     Such cauſe of woe vnto their wiues may be,
                     As thoſe rebellious Lords haue beene to me.
                     
                        
And that prowd Dame, which now controlleth all,
                     And in her pompe triumpheth in my fall,
                     For her great Lord may water her ſad eyne,
                     With as ſalt teares as I haue done for mine,
                     And mourne for Henry Hotſpur, her deere ſonne,
                     As I for my ſweete Mortimer haue done;
                     And as I am, ſo ſuccourleſſe be ſent,
                     Laſtly, to taſte perpetuall baniſhment.
                     Then looſe thy care, where firſt thy crowne was loſt,
                     Sell it ſo deerely, for it deerely coſt;
                     And ſith they did of libertie depriue thee,
                     Burying thy hope, let not thy care out-liue thee.
                     But hard (God knowes) with ſorrow doth it goe,
                     When woe becomes a comforter to woe;
                     Yet much me thinkes of comfort I could ſay,
                     If from my hart pale feare were rid away:
                     Something there is which tells me ſtill of woe,
                     But what it is, that heauen aboue doth know;
                     Griefe to it ſelfe, moſt dreadfull doth appeare,
                     And neuer yet was ſorrow voide of feare;
                     But yet in death, doth ſorrow hope the beſt,
                     And with this farewell wiſh thee happy reſt.
                  
                  
                     Notes of the Chronicle Hiſtorie.
                     
                        If fatall Pomfret hath in former time,
                     
                     POmfret Caſtle, euer a fatall place to the Princes of England, and moſt ominous to the blood of Plantaginet.
                        
                           Oh how euen yet I hate theſe wretched eyes,
                           And in my glaſſe, &c.
                        
                     
                     
                        
When Bullingbrooke returned to London from the Weſt, bringing Richard a priſoner with him, the Queene, who little knew of her husbands hard ſucceſſe, ſtaid to behold his comming in, little thinking to haue ſeene her husband thus ledde in triumph by his foe, and now ſeeming to hate her eyes, that ſo much had graced her mortall enemie.

                           Wherein great Norfolks forward courſe was ſtaid.
                        
                     
                     She remembreth the meeting of two Dukes of Herford and Norfolke at Couentry, vrging the iuſtneſſe of Mowbrayes quarrell againſt the Duke of Herford, and the faithfull aſſurance of his victorie.

                           O why did Charles relieue his needie ſtate?
                           A vagabond, &c.
                        
                     
                     
                        Charles the French King her father, receiued the Duke of Herford in his Court, and releeued him in Fraunce, being ſo neerely alied, as Coſin german to king Richard his ſonne in Law, which he did ſimply, little thinking that hee ſhould after returne into England, and diſpoſſeſſe King Richard of the Crowne.

                           When thou to Ireland took'ſt thy laſt farewell.
                        
                     
                     King Richard made a voyage with his Armie into Ireland, againſt Onell and Mackemur, which rebelled, at what time Henry entred here at home, and robd him of all kingly dignitie.

                           Affirmde by Church-men (which ſhould beare no hate)
                           That Iohn of Gaunt was illegit
                                 •
                              imate.
                        
                     
                     
                        William Wickham, in the great quarrell betwixt Iohn of Gaunt and the Clergy, of meere ſpight and malice (as it ſhould ſeeme) reported, that the Queene confeſſed to him on her deathbed, being then her Confeſſor, that Iohn of Gaunt, was the ſon of a Flemming, and that ſhee was brought to bed of a woman childe at Gaunt, which was ſmothered in the cradle by miſchance, & that ſhe obtained this childe of a poore woman, making the king beleeue it was her owne, greatly fearing his diſpleaſure. Fox e
                              •
                            Chron. Alban.
                        
                           No baſtards marke doth blot our conquering ſhield.
                        
                     
                     Shewing the true and indubitate birth of Richard, his right vnto the Crowne of England, as carrying the Armes without blot or difference.

                           Againſt their faith vnto the Crownes true heire,
                           
                              
Their noble kinſman, &c.
                        
                     
                     
                        Edmund Mortimer, Earle of March, ſonne of Earle Roger Mortimer, which was ſonne to Lady Phillip, daughter to Lionell Duke of Clarence, the third ſonne to King Edward the third, which Edmund (King Richard going into Ireland) was proclaimed heire apparant to the Crowne, whoſe Aunt called Ellinor, this Lord Piercie had married.

                           O would Aumerle had ſuncke when he betrayd
                           The compl
                                 •
                              t which that holy Abbot layd.
                        
                     
                     The Abbot of Weſtminſter had plotted the death of King Henry, to haue beene done at a Tilt at Oxford: of which confederacie there was Iohn Holland, Duke of Exceſter, Thomas Holland, Duke of Surrey, the Duke of Aumerle, Mountacute, Earle of Salſbury, Spenſer, Earle of Gloſter, the Biſhop of Carlile, Sir Thomas Blunt, theſe all had bound themſelues one to another by Indenture to performe it, but were all betrayd by the Duke of Aumerle.

                           
                              Scroope, Greene, and Buſhie, die his fault in graine,
                        
                     
                     
                        Henry going towards the Caſtle of Flint, where King Richard was, cauſed Scroope, Greene, and Buſhie, to be executed at Briſtow; as vile perſons, which had ſeduced this King to this laſciuious and wicked life.

                           Damn'd be the oth he made at Doncaster.
                        
                     
                     After Henries exile, at his returne into England, he tooke his oth at Doncaſter vpon the Sacrament, not to claime the crowne or Kingdome of England, but onely the Dukedome of Lancaſter, his owne proper right, and the right of his wife.

                           And mourne for Henry Hotſpur, her deere ſonne,
                           As I for my, &c.
                        
                     
                     This was the braue couragious Henry Hotſpur, that obtained ſo many victories againſt the Scots, which after falling out right with the curſe of Queene Iſabell, was ſlaine by Henry, at the battaile at Shrewsbury.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     Richard the ſecond to Queene Iſabell.
                  
                  
                     WHat may my Queene, but hope for frō that hand,
                     Vnfit to write; vnskilfull to cōmand?
                     A Kingdomes greatneſſe, hardly can he ſway,
                     That wholeſome counſaile neuer did obay;
                     Ill this rude hand did guide a Scepter then,
                     Worſe now (I feare me) gouerneth a pen;
                     How ſhall I call my ſelfe, or by what name,
                     To make thee know from whence theſe letters came?
                     Not from thy husband, for my hatefull life
                     Hath made thee widdow, being yet a wife;
                     Nor from a King, that title I haue loſt,
                     Now of that name prowd Bullingbroke may boaſt:
                     What I haue beene, doth but this comfort bring,
                     That no woe is, to ſay, I was a King.
                     
                     This lawleſſe life, which firſt procurde my hate,
                     This tongue, which then denounc'd my regall ſtate,
                     This abiect minde, that did conſent vnto it,
                     This hand, that was the inſtrument to doe it;
                     All theſe be witneſſe, that I doe denie
                     All paſſed hopes, all former ſoueraigntie.
                     Didſt thou for my ſake leaue thy fathers Court,
                     Thy famous Country and thy virgine port;
                     And vndertook'ſt to trauaile dangerous waies,
                     Driuen by aukward windes and boiſt'rous ſeas?
                     
                        
And left's great Burbon for thy loue to mee,
                     Who ſu'd in marriage to be linck'd to thee,
                     Offring for dower the Countries neighbouring nie.
                     Of fruitfull Almaine, and rich Burgundie:
                     Didſt thou all this, that England ſhould receiue thee,
                     To miſerable baniſhment to leaue thee?
                     And in my downefall, and my fortunes wracke,
                     Forſaken thus, to France to ſend thee backe.
                     When quiet ſleepe (the heauie hearts reliefe)
                     Hath reſted ſorrow, ſomwhat leſned griefe,
                     My paſſed greatnes vnto minde I call,
                     And thinke this while I dreamed of my fall:
                     With this conceit my ſorrowes I beguile,
                     That my faire Queene is but with-drawne a while,
                     And my attendants in ſome chamber by,
                     As in the height of my proſperitie.
                     Calling alowd, and asking who is there,
                     The Eccho anſwering, tells me Woe is there;
                     And when mine armes would gladly thee enfold,
                     
                        I clip the pillow, and the place is cold,
                     Which when my waking eyes preciſely view,
                     Tis a true token, that it is too true.
                     As many minutes as in the howres there be,
                     So many howres each minute ſeemes to me,
                     Each howre a day, morne, noone-tide, and a ſet,
                     Each day a yeare, with miſeries complet.
                     A winter, ſpring-time, ſummer and a fall,
                     All ſeaſons varying, but vnſeaſoned all:
                     In endeleſſe woe my thrid of life thus weares,
                     By minutes, howres, daies, months & lingring yeares,
                     They praiſe the ſummer, that enioy the South,
                     
                        
Pomfret is cloſed in the Norths cold mouth:
                     There pleaſant ſummer dwelleth all the yeere,
                     Froſt-ſtarued-winter dooth inhabite heere;
                     A place wherein diſpaire may fitly dwell,
                     Sorrow beſt ſuting with a cloudy Cell:
                     When Herford had his iudgement of exile,
                     Saw I the peoples murmuring the while;
                     Th'vncertaine Commons toucht with inward care,
                     As though his ſorrowes mutually they bare:
                     Fond women, and ſcarſe ſpeaking children mourne,
                     Bewaile his parting, wiſhing his returne,
                     Then being forcde t'abridge his baniſht yeeres,
                     When they bedewd his footſteps with their teares:
                     Yet by example could not learne to know
                     To what his greatnes by this loue might grow,
                     Whilſt Henry boaſts of our atchiuements done,
                     Bearing the trophies our great fathers wonne;
                     And all the ſtorie of our famous warre
                     Now grace the Annales of great Lancaſter.
                     Seauen goodly ſiens in their ſpring did flouriſh,
                     Which one ſelfe root brought forth, one ſtock did no
                        
                           •
                        iſh:
                     
                        Edward the top-branch of that golden tree,
                     Nature in him her vtmoſt power did ſee,
                     Who from the bud ſtill bloſſomed ſo faire,
                     As all might iudge what fruite it meant to beare:
                     But I his graft of eu'ry weede ore-growne,
                     And from the kind, as refuſe forth am throwne,
                     From our braue Grandſire, both in one degree,
                     Yet after Edward Iohn the yongſt of three.
                     Might Princely Wales beget an impe ſo baſe,
                     (That to Gaunts iſſue ſhould giue ſoueraigne place)
                     
                        
That leading Kings from France returned home,
                     As thoſe great Caeſars brought their ſpoiles to Rome,
                     Whoſe name obtained by his fatall hand,
                     Was euer fearefull to that conquered land;
                     His fame increaſing, purchaſde in thoſe warres,
                     Can ſcarcely now be bounded with the ſtarres,
                     With him is valour quite to heauen fled,
                     (Or elſe in me is it extinguiſhed,)
                     Who for his vertue and his conqueſts ſake
                     Poſteritie a demy god ſhall make,
                     And iudge this vile abiect ſpirit of mine
                     Could not proceede from temper ſo diuine.
                     What earthly humor, or what vulgar eie
                     Can looke ſo lowe as on our miſery?
                     When Bullingbrooke is mounted to our throne,
                     And makes that his, which we but calld our owne:
                     Into our counſells he himſelfe intrudes,
                     And who but Henry with the multitudes?
                     His power diſgrades, his dreadfull frowne diſgraceth,
                     He throwes them downe, whome our aduancement placeth:
                     As my diſable, and vnworthy hand,
                     Neuer had power belonging to command.
                     He treades our ſacred tables in the duſt,
                     And proues our acts of Parlament vniuſt;
                     As though he hated that it ſhould be ſaide,
                     That ſuch a law by Richard once was made,
                     Whilſt I depreſt before his greatnes, lie
                     Vnder the weight of hate and infamie.
                     My backe a footſtoole Bullingbrooke to raiſe,
                     My looſenes mockt, and hatefull by his praiſe:
                     Out-liu'd mine honour, buried my eſtate,
                     
                        
And nothing left me but the peoples hate.
                     (Sweet Queene) ile take all counſell thou canſt giue,
                     So that thou bidſt me neither hope nor liue;
                     Succour that comes, when ill hath done his worſt,
                     But ſharpens griefe, to make vs more accurſt.
                     Comfort is now vnpleaſing to mine eare,
                     Paſt cure, paſt care, my Bed become my Beere.
                     Since now misfortune humbleth vs ſo long,
                     Till heauen be growne vnmindfull of our wrong,
                     Yet they forbid my wrongs ſhall euer die,
                     But ſtill remembred to poſteritie;
                     And let the crowne be fatall that he weares,
                     And euer wet with woefull mothers teares.
                     Thy curſe on Percie angry heauens preuent,
                     Who haue not one curſe left, on him vnſpent,
                     To ſcourge the world, now borrowing of my ſtore,
                     As rich of woe, as I a King am poore.
                     Then ceaſe (deere Queene) my ſorrowes to bewaile,
                     My wounds too great for pittie now to heale,
                     Age ſtealeth on, whilſt thou complaineſt thus,
                     My griefes be mortall and infectious;
                     Yet better fortunes thy faire youth may trie,
                     That follow thee, which ſtill from me doth flie.
                  
                  
                     ¶ Notes of the Chronicle Hiſtorie.
                     
                        Thi
                              •
                            tongue which firſt denounc'd my regall ſtate.
                     
                     
                        RIchard the ſecond, at the reſignation of the crowne to the duke of Herford, in the Tower of London, deliuering the ſame with his owne hand, there confeſſed his diſabilitie to gouerne, vtterly denouncing all kingly authoritie.

                           
                           And left'ſt great Burbon for thy love to me.
                        
                     
                     Before the Princeſſe Iſabell was maried to the king, Lewes duke of Burbon ſued to have had her in marriage, which was thought he had obtained, if this motion had not fallen out in the meane time; This Duke of Burbon ſued againe to have received her at her comming into France, after the impriſonment of king Richard but King Charles her Father then croſt him as before, and gave her to Charles ſonne to the Duke of Orleans.

                           When Herford had his judgement of exile.
                        
                     
                     When the combate ſhould have beene at Couentrie, betwixt Henrie Duke of Herford, and Thomas Duke of Norfolke; where Herford, was adiudged to baniſhment for ten yeares, the commons exceedingly lamented, ſo greatly was he ever favored of the people.

                           Then being forc'd t'abridge his baniſht yeeres.
                        
                     
                     When the Duke came to take his leave of the King; beeing then at Eltham, the King to pleaſe the Commons, rather then for any love he bare to Herford, repleaded foure yeares of his baniſhment.

                           Whileſt Henry boaſts of our atchieuements done,
                        
                     
                     
                        Henry the eldeſt Sonne to Iohn Duke of Lancaſter, at the firſt Earle of Darby, then created Duke of Herford, after the death of the Duke Iohn his father, was Duke of Lancaſter and Hereford, Earle of Darby, Leiceſter, and Lincolne; and after he had obtained the Crowne, was called by the name of Bullingbrooke, which is a towne in Lincolneſhire, as vſually all the Kings of England bare the name of the places where they were borne.

                           Seauen goodly ſyens in their ſpring did flouriſh.
                        
                     
                     
                        Edward the third had ſeuen ſonnes, Edward Prince of Wales, after called the blacke Prince, William of Hatfield the ſecond, Lionell Duke of Clarence the third, Iohn of Gaunt Duke of Lancaſter the fourth, Edmund of Langley Duke of York the fifth, Thomas of Woodſtocke Duke of Gloſter the ſixth, William of Winſore the ſeuenth.

                           
                              Edward the top-branch of that golden tree.
                        
                     
                     Truly boaſting himſelfe to be the eldeſt Sonne of Edward the blacke Prince.

                           
                           Yet after Edward, Iohn the yongſt of three.
                        
                     
                     As diſabling Henry Bullingbrooke, being but the ſon of the fourth brother: William and Lionell being both before Iohn of Gaunt.
                        
                           That leading Kings from France, returned home,
                        
                     
                     
                        Edward the blacke Prince, taking Iohn king of France priſoner, at the battel of Poicters, brought him into England, where at the Sauoy he died.

                           Whoſe name atchieued by his fatall hand,
                        
                     
                     Called the Blacke Prince, not ſo much of his complexion, as of the famous battell he fought, as is ſhewed before: in the gloſſe vpon the Epiſtle of Edward to the Counteſſe of Salisbury.

                           And prooues our Actes of Parlement vniuſt.
                        
                     
                     In the text parlement, after Richards reſignation of the crown, Henry cauſed to be annihilated all the lawes made in the Parliament, called the wicked Parliament, held in the twenty yeere of king Richards raigne.
                  
                  Finis.
               
               
                  
                  To ſir Iohn Swinerton Knight, and one of the Aidermen of the Citie of London.
                  
                     
                        VOrthy Sir, ſo much miſtruſt I my owne abilitie, to doe the leaſt right to your vertues, that I could gladly wiſh any thing that is truely mine, were woorthy to beare your name, ſo much (reucrend Sir) I esteeme you, and ſo ample intereſt haue you in my loue; To ſome honourable friends haue I deaicated theſe Poemes (with whom I ranke you: may I eſcape prejumption) Like not this Britaine the worſe, though after ſome former Impreſſions he be laſtly to 
                           〈…〉
                        crated; in this like an honeſt man that would part
                        
                           〈…〉
                         his owne woorth, before he would preſume his 
                           〈…〉
                        ronage, with whom you ſhall euer commaund my 
                           〈◊〉
                        , and haue my beſt wiſhes.
                  
                  
                     That loue you truely,
Mich: Drayton.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Queene Katharine to Owen Tudor.
                  
                  
                     The Argument.
                     
                        After the death of that victorious Henry the fift, Queene Katharine, the Dowager of England and France, daughter to Charles the French King, holding her eſtate with Henry her ſonne, (then the fixt of that name) falleth in loue with Owen Tuder a Welchman, a braue and gallant Gentleman of the Wardrobe to the yong King her ſon; yet grently fearing if her loue ſhoulde be diſcouered, the Nobilitie woulde croſſe her purpoſed marriage; or fearing, that if her faire and princely promiſes ſhould not aſſure his good ſucceſſe, this high and great attempt, might (perhappes) daunt the forwardneſſe of his modeſt and ſhamefaſt youth; wherefore to breake the ice to her intent, ſhe writeth vnto him this Epiſtle following.
                     
                  
                  
                     IVdge not a Princeſſe worth impeacht hereby,
                     That loue thus triumphs ouer maieſtie;
                     Nor thinke leſſe vertue in this royall hand,
                     Which now intreates that wonted to command,
                     For in this ſort, though humbly now it wooe,
                     The day hath beene, thou wouldſt haue kneeld vnto.
                     Not thinke that this ſubmiſſion of my ſtate,
                     Proceedes from frailtie, (rather iudge it fate.)
                     
                        Alcides ne're more fit for warres ſterne ſhocke,
                     Then when for loue ſate ſpinning at the rocke,
                     Neuer leſſe cloudes did Phoebus glory dim,
                     Then in a clownes ſhape when he couered him;
                     
                        
                        Ioues great commaund was neuer more obeyd,
                     Than when a Satyres anticke parts he playd.
                     He was thy king that ſued for loue to mee,
                     Shee is thy Queene that ſues for loue to thee.
                     When Henry was, whats Tuders now, was his;
                     Whilſt yet thou arte, whats Henries, Tuders is;
                     My loue to Owen, him my Henry giueth,
                     My loue to Henry, in my Owen liueth;
                     
                        Henry woode me whilſt warres did yet increaſe,
                     I wooe my Tuder, in ſweet calmes of peace,
                     To force affection he did conqueſt proue,
                     I fight with gentle arguments of loue.
                     Incampt at Melans, in warres hote alarmes,
                     Firſt ſaw I Henry clad in princely armes.
                     At pleaſant Windſore firſt theſe eies of mine,
                     My Tuder iudgde for wit and ſhape diuine.
                     
                        Henry abroade, with p
                           •
                        iſſance and with force,
                     
                        Tuder at home, with courtſhip and diſcourſe,
                     He then, thou now, I hardly can iudge whether
                     Did like me beſt, Plantaginet or Tether.
                     
                     A march, a meaſure, battell or a daunce,
                     A courtly rapier, or a conquering launce.
                     His princely bed hath ſtrengthned my renowne,
                     And on my temples ſet a double crowne;
                     Which glorious wreathe, (as Henries lawfull heire)
                     
                        Henry the ſixt vpon his brow doth beare.
                     At Troy in Champaine he did firſt enioy
                     My Brydall rites, to England brought from Troy,
                     
                     In England now that honour thou ſhalt haue,
                     Which once in Champaine famous Henry gaue,
                     I ſeeke not wealth, three kingdomes in my power,
                     
                        
If theſe ſuffice not, where ſhall be my dower?
                     Sad diſcontent may euer follow her,
                     Which doth baſe pelfe before true loue prefer;
                     If titles ſtill could our affections tie,
                     What is ſo great but Maieſtie might buy?
                     As I ſeeke thee, ſo Kings do me deſire,
                     To what they would, thou eaſily mai'ſt aſpire.
                     That ſacred fire, once warmde my heart before,
                     The fuell fit, the flame is now the more,
                     And meanes to quench it, I in vaine do proue,
                     We may hide treaſure, but not hide our loue;
                     And ſince it is thy fortune (thus) to gaine it,
                     It were too late, nor will I now reſtraine it.
                     Nor theſe great titles vainely will I bring,
                     Wife, daughter, mother, ſiſter to a King,
                     Of grandſire, father, husband, ſonne and brother,
                     More thou alone to me, then all the other,
                     Nor feare my Tudor, that this loue of mine,
                     Should wrong the Gaunt-borne great Lancaſtrian line,
                     Nor ſtir the Engliſh blood, the Sunne and Moone,
                     T'repine at Lorame, Burbon, A lanſoon;
                     Nor do I thinke there is ſuch different ods,
                     They ſhould alone be numbred with the Gods.
                     Of Cadmus earthly iſſue reckoning vs;
                     And they from Ioue, Mars, Neptune, Eolus,
                     
                     Of great Latonas of-ſpring onely they,
                     And we the brats of wofull Niobe,
                     
                     Our famous grandſires (as their owne) beſtride,
                     That horſe of fame, that God, begotten ſteede,
                     Whoſe bounding hoofe plow'd that Boetian ſpring,
                     Where thoſe ſweete maides of memory do ſing,
                     
                        
Not onely Henries Queene, but boaſt as well,
                     To be the childe of Charles and Iſabell.
                     
                     Nor do I know from whence their grief ſhould grow,
                     They by this match ſhould be diſparag'd ſo;
                     When Iohn and Longſhankes iſſue both affied,
                     And to the Kings of Wales in wedlocke tied,
                     Shewing the greatneſſe of your blood thereby,
                     Your race, and royall conſanguinity.
                     And Wales as well as haughty England boaſts,
                     Of Camilot, and all her Penticoſts;
                     A nephewes roome in great Pendragons race,
                     At Arthurs Table held a princely place,
                     If by the often conqueſt of your land,
                     They boaſt the ſpoiles of their victorious hand,
                     If theſe our antient Chronicles be true,
                     They altogether are not free from you.
                     When bloodie Rufus ſought your vtter ſacke,
                     Twice entring Wales, yet twice was beatenbacke.
                     When famous Cambria waſh'd her in the flood,
                     Made by th'effuſion of the Engliſh blood,
                     And oft returnde with glorious victory,
                     From Worster, Herford, Cheſter, Shrowesbury,
                     
                     Whoſe power in euery conqueſt ſo preuailes,
                     As once expulſde the Engliſh out of Wales.
                     Although my beautie made my Countries peace,
                     And at my Bridall former broyles did ceaſe;
                     Yet more then power, had not his perſon beene,
                     
                        I had not come to England as a Queene.
                     Nor tooke I Henry to ſupply my wont,
                     Becauſe in France, that time my choice was ſcant;
                     When he had robde all Chriſtendome of men,
                     
                        
And Englands flower remainde amongſt vs then;
                     
                        Gloster, whoſe counſells (Nestor-like) aſſiſt,
                     Couragious Bedford, that great martialliſt,
                     
                        Clarence, for vertue honoured of his foes,
                     And Yorke, whoſe fame yet daily greater growes,
                     
                        Warwicke, the pride of Neuels haughty race,
                     Great Salebury, ſo fearde in euery place.
                     That valiant Poole, whom no atchieuement dares,
                     And Vere, ſo famous in the Iriſh warres,
                     Who though my ſelfe ſo great a Prince were borne,
                     The worſt of theſe my equall neede not ſcorne:
                     But Henries rare perfections and his parts,
                     As conquering Kingdomes, ſo he conquer'd hearts.
                     As chaſte was I to him as Queene might bee,
                     But freed from him, my chaſte lone vow'd to thee;
                     Beautie doth fetch all fauour from thy face,
                     All perfect courtſhip reſteth in thy grace.
                     If thou diſcourſe, thy lips ſuch accents breake,
                     As loue a ſpirit forth of thee ſeem
                           •
                        d to ſpeake.
                     The Brittiſh language, which our vowels wants,
                     And iarres ſo much vpon harſh conſonants,
                     Comes with ſuch grace from thy mellifluous tongue,
                     As do the ſweete notes of a well ſet ſong,
                     And runnes as ſmoothly from thoſe lips of thine,
                     As the pure Tuskan from the Florentine;
                     Leauing ſuch ſeaſoned ſweetenes in the eare,
                     As the voyce paſt, yet ſtill the ſound is there:
                     In Niſus Tower, as when Apollo lay,
                     And on his golden viall vſde to play,
                     Where ſenceleſſe ſtones were with ſuch muſicke drownd,
                     As many yeares they did retaine the ſound,
                     
                        
Let not the beames that greatnes doth reflect,
                     Amaze thy hopes with timerous reſpect;
                     Aſſure thee Tudor, maieſty can be
                     As kinde in loue, as can the mean'ſt degree;
                     And the embraces of a Queene as true,
                     As theirs (might iudge them) much aduanc'd by you,
                     When in our greatnes our affections craue
                     Thoſe ſecret ioyes that other women haue:
                     So I (a Queene) be ſoueraigne in my choice,
                     Let others fawne vpon the publique voice;
                     Or what (by this) can euer hap to thee,
                     Light in reſpect to be belou'd of mee.
                     Let peeuiſh worldlings prate of right and wrong,
                     Leaue plaints and pleas, to whom they do belong;
                     Let old men ſpeake of chances and euents,
                     And Lawyers talke of titles and diſcents,
                     Leaue fond reports to ſuch as ſtories tell,
                     And couenants to thoſe that buy and ſ
                           •
                        ll;
                     Loue my ſweete Tudor, that becomes thee beſt,
                     And to our good ſuceeſſe referre the reſt.
                  
                  
                     Notes of the Chronicle Hiſtorie.
                     
                        Great Henry ſought to accompliſh his deſire,
                        Armed, &c.
                     
                     
                        HEnry the fift, making claime to the Crowne of France, firſt ſought by Armes to ſubdue the French, and after ſought by marriage to confirme what he got by conqueſt, the heate and furie of which inuaſion, is alluded to the ſixion of Semele in Ouid: which by the crafty perſwaſion of Iuno, requeſted Ioue to come vnto her, as he was wont to come vnto his wife Iuno, who at her requeſt hee yeelding vnto, deſtroyed her in a tempeſt.

                           
                           Incamp'd at Melans in wars hote alarmes,
                           Firſt, &c.
                        
                     
                     Neere vnto Melans, vpon the Riuer of Scyne, was the appointed place of parley, betweene the two Kings of England and France, to which place, Iſabell the Qucene of France, and the Duke of Burgoyne, brought the yong Princeſſe Katherine, where King Henry firſt ſaw her.

                           And on my temples ſet a double Crowne.
                        
                     
                     
                        Henry the fift and Queene Katherine, were taken as King and Queene of France, and during the life of Charles the French king, Henry was called King of England, and heire of France, and after the death of Henry the fift, Henry the ſixt his ſonne, then being very yong, was crowned at Paris, as true and lawfull King of England and France.

                           At Troy in Champaine he did firſt enioy.
                        
                     
                     Troy in Champaine, was the place where that victorious king Henry the fift married the Ptinceſſe Katherine, in the preſence of the chiefe nobilitie of the Realmes of England and France.

                           Nor theſe great tules vainely will I bring,
                           Wife, daughter, mother, &c.
                        
                     
                     Few Queenes of England or France, were euer more princely alied then this Queene, as it hath beene noted by Hiſtoriographers.

                           Nor thinke ſo Tudor that this loue of mine,
                           Should wrong the Gaunt-borne, &c.
                        
                     
                     Noting the diſcent of Henry her husband, from Iohn Duke of Lancaſter, the fourth ſonne of Edward the third, which Duke Iohn was ſirnamed Gaunt, of the Cittie of Gaunt in Flanders, where he was borne.

                           Nor ſtirre the Engliſh blood, the Sunne and Moone,
                           Trepine, &c.
                        
                     
                     Alluding the greatnes of the Engliſh line, to Phoebus and Phoebe, fained to be the children of Latona, whoſe heauenly kind might ſeorne to be ioyned with any earthly progenie: yet withall, boaſting the blood of France, as not inferior to theirs. And with this alluſion followeth on the hiſtorie of the ſtrife betwixt Iuno and the race of Cadmus, whoſe iſſue was afflicted by the wrath of heauen. The children of Niobe ſlaine, for which the wofull mother

became a rocke, guſhing forth continually a ſountaine of teares.

                           And Iohn and Longſhanks iſſue, both affied,
                        
                     
                     
                        Lheellin or Leolin ap Iorweth, married Ioane, daughter to king Iohn, a moſt beautifull Lady. Some Authors affirme that ſhe was baſe borne, Lhewellin ap Gryfith, married Ellenor, daughter to Simon Montfort, Earle of Leiceſter, and Coſin to Edward Long-ſhankes, both which Lhewellins were Princes of Wales.

                           Of Camilot and all her Pentecoſts,
                           A Nephewes roome, &c.
                           
                        
                     
                     Camilot, the antient Pallace of King Arthur, to which place all the Knightes of that famous order yeerely repaired at Penticoſt, according to the law of the Table, and moſt of the famous home-borne Knights were of that Country, as to this day is perceiued by their antient monuments.

                           When bloody Rutus ſought your vtter ſacke.
                        
                     
                     Noting the ill ſucceſſe which that William Rufus bad in two voyages he made into Wales; in which a number of his chiefe Nobilitie were ſlaine.

                           And oft returnde with glorious victorie.
                        
                     
                     Noting the diuers ſundry incurſions that the Welchmen made into England, in the time of Rufus, Iohn, Henry the ſecond, and Longſhankes.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     ❧ Owen Tudor to Queene Katherine
                  
                     WHen firſt mine eyes heheld your princely name,
                     And found from whence this friendly letter came,
                     As in exceſſe of ioy my ſelfe forgot,
                     Whether I ſaw it, or I ſaw it not;
                     My panting heart doth bid mine eyes proceede,
                     
                        
My dazeled eye, inuites my tongue to reede;
                     Mine eye ſhould guide my tongue, amazed miſt it,
                     My lips which now ſhould ſpeak, are dombe, & kiſt it,
                     And leaues the paper in my trembling hand,
                     When all my ſences ſo amazed ſtand;
                     Euen as a mother comming to her childe,
                     Which from her preſence hath been long exilde,
                     With tender armes his gentle necke doth ſtraine,
                     Now kiſſing him, now clipping him againe;
                     And yet exceſſiue ioy deludes her ſo,
                     As ſtill ſhe doubts if this be hers or no:
                     At length awak'ned from this pleaſing dreame,
                     When paſſion ſomwhat leaues to be extreame,
                     My longing eyes, with their faire obiect meete,
                     Where euery letter's pleaſing, each word ſweete.
                     It was not Henries conqueſts nor his Court,
                     That had the power to win me by report,
                     Nor was his dreadfull terror-ſtriking name,
                     The cauſe that I from Wales to England came,
                     For Chriſtian Rhodes, and our religious truth,
                     To great atchieuements firſt had wonne my youth;
                     Before aduenture did my valour proue,
                     Before I yet knew what it was to loue:
                     Nor came I hether by ſome poore euent,
                     But by th'eternall Deſtinies conſent,
                     Whoſe vncompriſed wiſedomes did fore-ſee,
                     That you in marriage ſhould be linck'd to mee.
                     By our great Merlin, was it not fore-told,
                     (Amongſt his holy prophecies enrold),
                     When firſt he did of Tudors name diuine,
                     That Kings and Queenes ſhould follow in our line,
                     
                        
And that the Helme, (the Tudors antient Creſt)
                     Should with the golden Flower-delice be dreſt;
                     And that the Leeke, (our Countries chiefe renowne)
                     Should grow with Roſes in the Engliſh Crowne:
                     As Charles faire daughter, you the Lilly weare,
                     As Henries Queene the bluſhing Roſe you beare;
                     By France's conqueſt, and by Englands oth,
                     You are the true made dowager of both;
                     Both in your crowne, both in your cheeke together,
                     Ioyne Tethers loue to yours, and yours to Tether.
                     
                     Then make no future doubts, nor feare no hate,
                     When it ſo long hath beene fore-told by Fate;
                     And by the all-diſpoſing doome of heauen,
                     Before our births, vnto one bed were giuen.
                     No Pallas heere, nor Iuno is at all,
                     When I to Venus giue the golden ball;
                     Nor when the Graecians wonder I enioy,
                     None in reuenge to kindle fire in Troy.
                     And haue not ſtrange euents diuinde to vs,
                     That in our loue we ſhould be proſperous.
                     When in your preſence I was call'd to dance,
                     In lofty trickes whilſt I my ſelfe aduance;
                     And in my turne, my footing failde by hap,
                     Was't not my chance to light into your lap?
                     Who would not iudge it Fortunes greateſt grace,
                     Sith he muſt fall, to fall in ſuch a place?
                     His birth from heauen, your Tudor not deriues,
                     Nor ſtands on tip-toes in ſuperlatiues,
                     Although the enuious Engliſh do deuiſe,
                     A thouſand ieaſts of our hyperbolies;
                     Nor do I claime that plot by antient deedes,
                     
                        
Where Phoebus paſtures his firie-breathing ſteedes;
                     Nor do I boaſt my god-made Grandſires ſcarres,
                     Nor Giants trophies in the Titans warres;
                     Nor faine my birth (your princely eares to pleaſe)
                     By three nights getting as was Hercules,
                     
                     Nor doe I forge my long deſcent to runne
                     From aged Neptune, or the glorious Sunne,
                     And yet in Wales with them moſt famous be,
                     Our learned Bards doe ſing my pedigree,
                     And boaſt my birth from great Cadwallader,
                     
                     From old Cair-ſepton, in mount Palador,
                     
                     And from Eneons line, the South-wales king
                     By The
                              •
                           dor the Tuders name do bring.
                     My royall mothers princely ſtocke began,
                     From her great grandam faire Gwenellian;
                     
                     By true deſcent from Leolin the great,
                     As well from North-wales as faire Powſlands ſeat;
                     Though for our princely genealogie,
                     I doe not ſtand to make apologie;
                     Yet who with iudgements true vnpartiall eyes,
                     Shall looke from whence our name at firſt did riſe,
                     Shall finde that Fortune is to vs in debt;
                     And why not Tuder as Plantaginet?
                     
                     Nor that terme Croggen, nicke-name of diſgrace,
                     Vſde as a by-word now in euery place,
                     Shall blot our blood, or wrong a Welchmans name,
                     Which was at firſt begot with Englands ſhame.
                     Our valiant ſwords our right did ſtill maintaine,
                     Againſt that cruell, prowde, vſurping Dane;
                     
                     And bucklde in ſo many dangerous fights,
                     With Norwayes, Swethens, and with Muſcouits,
                     
                     
                        
And kept our natiue language now thus long,
                     And to this day yet neuer changde our tong,
                     When they which now our Nation faine would tame,
                     Subdude, haue loſt their country, and their name:
                     Nor neuer could the Saxons ſwords prouoke
                     Our Brittaine neckes to beare their ſeruile yoke,
                     Where Cambr
                              •
                           aes pleaſant Countries bounded bee,
                     With ſwelling Seuerne, and the holy Dee;
                     
                     And ſince great Brutus firſt arriu'd, haue ſtood,
                     The onely remnant of the Tr
                              ••
                           an blood.
                     To euery man is not allotted chaunce,
                     To boaſt with Henry to haue conque
                           •
                        d Fraunce;
                     Yet if my fortunes thus may raiſed be,
                     This may preſage a farther good to me.
                     And our S. Dauid, in the Brutaines right,
                     May ioyne with Grorge, the ſainted Engliſh knight,
                     And old Caer-marden, Merlins famous towne,
                     Not ſcorn'd by London, though of ſuch renowne.
                     Ah would to God, that houre my hopes attend,
                     Were with my wiſh brought to deſired end,
                     Blame me not Madame, though I thus deſire,
                     When eies with enuie doe my hap admire;
                     Till now your beauty in nights boſome ſlept,
                     What eie durſt ſt
                           ••
                        re, where awfull Henry kept?
                     Who durſt attempt to ſaile but neere the bay,
                     Where that all-conquering great Alcides lay?
                     Thy beauty now is ſet a royall prize,
                     And Kings repaire to cheapen merchandize.
                     If thou but walke to take the breathing aire,
                     
                        Orithia makes me that I Boreas feare,
                     If to the fire Ioue once in lightning came,
                     
                        
And faire Egina make me feare the flame.
                     If in the Sunne, then ſad ſuſpition dreames
                     
                        Phoebus ſhould ſpread Lucothoe in his beames,
                     If in a fountaine thou dooſt coole thy blood,
                     
                        Neptune I feare, which once came in a flood;
                     If with thy maides, I dread Apolloes rape,
                     Who cooſned Chion in an old wiues ſhape;
                     If thou dooſt banquet, Bacchus makes me dread,
                     Who in a grape Erigone did feede;
                     And if my ſelfe the chamber doore ſhould keepe,
                     Yet feare I Hermes comming in a ſleepe.
                     Pardon (ſweete Queene) if I offend in this,
                     In theſe delayes loue moſt impatient is;
                     And youth wants powre his hote ſplene to ſuppreſſe,
                     When Hope already banquets in exceſſe.
                     Though Henries fame in me you ſhall not finde,
                     Yet that which better ſhall content your minde;
                     But onely in the title of a King
                     Was his aduantage, in no other thing:
                     If in his loue more pleaſure you did take,
                     Neuer let Queene truſt Brittaine for my ſake.
                     Yet iudge me not from modeſtie exempt,
                     That I another Phaetons charge attempt,
                     My minde that thus your fauours dare aſpire,
                     Declare a temper of celeſtiall fire;
                     If loue a fault, the more is Beauties blame,
                     When ſhe her ſelfe is author of the ſame.
                     All men to ſome one qualitie incline,
                     Onely to loue is naturally mine.
                     Thou arte by Beauty famous, as by birth;
                     Ordainde by heauen, to cheere the drowping earth,
                     
                        
Adde faithfull loue vnto your greater ſtate,
                     And then alike in all things fortunate.
                     A King might promiſe more, I not deny,
                     But yet (by heauen) he lou'd not more than I.
                     And thus I leaue, till time my faith approue,
                     I ceaſe to write, but neuer ceaſe to loue.
                  
                  
                     ¶ Notes of the Chronicle Hiſtorie.
                     
                        And that the helme, the Tudors ancient Creſt,
                     
                     THe armes of Tudor was the helmes of mens heads, whereof he ſpeaketh as a thing prophetically fore-told of Merlin.
                        
                           When in thy preſence I was call'd to daunce.
                        
                     
                     
                        Owin Tudor, being a courtly and actiue Gentleman, commrunded once to daunce before the Queen, in a turne (not being able to recouer himſelfe) fell into her lappe, as ſhee ſate vpon a little ſtoole, with many of her Ladies about her.

                           And yet with them in Wales moſt famous be,
                           Our learned Bards, &c.
                        
                     
                     This Berdh, as they call it in the Brittiſh tongue, or as we more properly ſay Bard, or Bardus, be their Poets, which keepe the records of Petigrees and diſcents, and ſing in odes and meaſures to the Harps, after the old maner of the Lirick Poets.

                           And boaſt my blood from great Cadwallader.
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        Cadwallader, the laſt king of the Britaines, deſcended of the noble and ancient race of the Troyans, to whom an Angell appeared, commaunding him to goe to Rome to Pope Sergius, where he ended his life.

                           Since faire Caer-Septon in mount Palador.
                        
                     
                     Caer-Septon, now called Shaftsburie, at whoſe building it was ſaid an 
                           ••
                        agle prophecied (or rather one named Aquila) of the fame of that place, and of the recouerie of the Ile of the Brytaines, bringing backe with them the bones of Cadwallader from Rome.

                           
                           And from Eneons line, the South-wales King,
                           From Theodor, &c.
                        
                     
                     This Eneon was ſlaine by the Rebels of Gwentſland, he was a noble and worthie Gentleman, who in his life did many noble acts, and was father to Theodor, or Tudor Maur, of whom diſcended the Princes of South-wales.

                           From her great Grandam faire Guenelliam.
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        Guenelliam, the daughter of Rees ap Griffeth, ap Theodor, Prince of South-wales, maried Edniuet Vahan aunceſtor to Owen Tudor.
                        
                           By true deſcent from Liolin the great,
                        
                     
                     This is tho Lewhelin, called Liolinus Magnus, Prince of North-wales.

                           Nor that word Croggen, nick-name of diſgrace.
                        
                     
                     In the voyage that Henry the ſecond made againſt the Welchmen, as his Souldiers paſſed Offas ditch at Croggen Caſtel, they were ouerthrowne by the Welchmen: which word Croggen, hath ſince beene vſed to the Welchmens diſgrace, which was at firſt begun with their honour.

                           And old Caer-Merdin, Merlins famous towne,
                        
                     
                     Caer-Merdin, or Merlins Towne, ſo called of Merlius beeing found there. This was Ambroſe Merlin, whoſe prophecies wee haue. There was another of that name, called Merlin Silueſtris, borne in Scotland, ſurnamed Calidonius, of the Forreſt Calidon where he prophecied.

                           And kept our natiue language now thus long.
                        
                     
                     The Welchmen bee thoſe ancient Britaines, which when the Picts, Danes, and Saxons inuaded heere, were firſt driuen into thoſe parts, where they haue kept their language euer ſince the firſt, without commixtion with any other language.
                  
                  Finis.
               
               
                  
                  To my worthy and deerly eſteemed friend, Maiſter Iames Huiſh.
                  
                     SIR your own naturall inclination to vertue, & your loue to the Muſes, aſſure me of your kinde acceptance of my dedication. It is ſeated by cuſtome (from which wee are now bolde to aſſume authoritie) to beare the names of our friends vpon the fronts of our bookes, as Gentlemen vſe to ſet their Armes ouer their gates. Some ſay this vſe began by the Heroes & braue ſpirits of the old world, which were deſirous to be thought to patronize learning; and men in requitall honour the names of thoſe braue Princes. But I think ſome after, put the names of great men in their bookes, for that men ſhould ſay there was ſome thing good, only becauſe indeed their names ſtood there; But for mine owne part (not to diſſemble) I find no ſuch vertue in any of their great titles to do ſo much for any thing of mine, and ſo let them paſſe. Take knowledge by this, I loue you, and in good faith, worthie of all loue I thinke you, which I pray you may ſupply the place of further complement.
                  
                  
                     Yours euer,
M. Drayton.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Elinor Cobham to Duke Humfrey.
                  
                     The Argument.
                     
                        Elinor Cobham, daughter to the Lord Cobham of Sterborough, and wife to Humfrey Plantaginet duke of Gloceſter, the ſonne of Henry the fourth, King of England, ſurnamed Bullingbrooke. This noble Duke for his great wiſdome and iuſtice called the good, was by King Henry the fift (brother to this Duke) at his death appointed Protector of the land, during the nonage of Henry the ſixt; this Elinor Duches of Gloceſter, a prowd and ambicious woman, knowing that if young Henry died without iſſue, the Duke her husband was the neereſt of the bloud, conſpired with one Bullingbrooke, (otherwiſe called Onely a great Magitian) Hun a prieſt and Iourdane witch of Eye, by ſorcerie to make away the King, and by coniuration to know who ſhould ſucceed. Of this being iuſtly conuicted, ſhee was adiudged to do penance three ſeuerall times openly in London, and then to perpetuall baniſhment in the Ile of Man, from whence ſhe writeth this Epiſtle.
                  
                  
                     ME thinks, not knowing who theſe lines ſhould ſend,
                     Thou ſtraight turn'ſt ouer to the latter end,
                     Where thou my name no ſooner haſt eſpi'd,
                     But in diſdaine my letters caſt aſide;
                     Why if thou wilt, I will my ſelfe denie,
                     Nay, I'le affirme and ſweare I am not I,
                     
                        
Orifin that thy ſhame thou dooſt perceiue,
                     Ile leaue that name, that name my ſelfe ſhall leaue,
                     And yet me thinkes amazd thou ſhouldſt not ſtand,
                     Nor ſeeme ſo much appauled at my hand,
                     For my misfortunes haue invrde thine eie
                     (Long before this) to ſights of miſery;
                     No, no, reade on tis I, the very ſame,
                     All thou canſt reade, is but to reade my ſhame.
                     Be not diſmaide, nor let my name affright,
                     The worſt it can, is but t'offend thy ſight;
                     It cannot wound, nor doe thee deadly harme,
                     It is no dreadfull ſpell, nor magique charme;
                     If ſhee that ſent it loue duke Humfrey ſo,
                     Iſt poſſible her name ſhould be his foe?
                     Yes, I am Elnor, I am verie ſhee,
                     Who brought for dower a virgins hed to thee,
                     Though enuious Beuford ſlaunderd me before,
                     To be duke Humfreis wanton Paramore,
                     And though indeede I can it not denie,
                     To Magique once I did my ſelfe apply,
                     
                        I wonne thee not, as there be many thinke,
                     With poiſning Philters, and bewitching drinke,
                     Nor on thy perſon did I euer proue,
                     Thoſe wicked portions ſo procuring loue,
                     
                        I cannot boaſt to be rich Hollands heire,
                     Nor of the bloud and greatnes of Bauire,
                     
                     Yet Elnor brought no forraine armies in,
                     To fetch her backe, as did thy Iacomin;
                     
                     Nor clamorous husbands followed me that fled.
                     Exclayming Humfrey to defile his bed,
                     Nor waſt thou forcde the ſlaunder to ſuppreſſe.
                     
                        
To ſend me backe as an adultereſſe;
                     Brabant nor Burgoyne, claimed me by force,
                     Nor ſu'd to Rome to haſten my deuorce;
                     Nor Belgias pompe defac'd with Belgias fire,
                     The iuſt reward of her vniuſt deſire;
                     Nor Bedford ſpouſe, your noble ſiſter Anne,
                     
                     That princely-iſſued great Burgunnian,
                     Should ſtand with me, to moue a womans ſtrife,
                     To yeelde the place to the Protectors wife.
                     If Cobhams name my birth can dignifie,
                     Or Sterborough renowne my familie;
                     Where's Greenewich now, thy Elnors Court of late,
                     Where ſhe with Humfrey held a princely ſtate?
                     That pleaſant Kent, when I abroad ſhould ride,
                     That to my pleaſure laid forth all her pride;
                     The Thames by water when I tooke the ayre,
                     Danc'd with my Barge in lanching from the ſtaire;
                     The ankoring ſhips that when I paſs'd the road,
                     Were wont to hang their chequered tops abroad;
                     How could it be, thoſe that were wont to ſtand,
                     To ſee my pompe, ſo goddeſſe-like on land,
                     Should after ſee me mayld vp in a ſheete,
                     Doe ſhamefull penance three times in the ſtreet
                           •
                        ?
                     Rung with a bell, a Taper in my hand,
                     Bare-foote to trudge before a Beedles wand;
                     That little babes, not hauing vſe of tongue,
                     Stood pointing at me as I came along.
                     Where's Humfreys power, where was his great command,
                     Waſt thou not Lord-protector of the Land?
                     Or for thy iuſtice, who can thee deny,
                     The title of the good Duke Humfrey?
                     
                     
                        
Haſt thou not at thy life, and in thy looke,
                     The ſeale of Gaunt, the hand of Bulling brooke;
                     
                     What blood extract from famous Edwards line,
                     Can boaſt it ſelfe to be ſo pure as thine?
                     Who elſe next Henry ſhould the Realme prefer,
                     If it allow of famous Lancaster?
                     
                     But Rayners daughter muſt from France be fet,
                     And with a vengeance on our throne be ſet;
                     Mauns, Maine and Aniou, on that begger caſt,
                     To bring her home to England in ſuch haſte,
                     And what for Henry thou haſt laboured there,
                     To ioyne the King with Arminacks rich heire,
                     Muſt all be daſh'd, as no ſuch thing had beene,
                     
                        Poole needes muſt haue his darling made a Queene;
                     How ſhould he with our Princes elſe be plac'd,
                     To haue his Farleſhip with a Dukedome grac'd?
                     And raiſe the of-ſpring of his blood ſo hie,
                     As Lords of vs and our poſteritie.
                     O that by ſea when he to France was ſent,
                     The ſhip had ſuncke wherein the traitor went;
                     Or that the ſands had ſwallowed her before
                     She e're ſet foote vpon the Engliſh ſhore.
                     But all is well, nay we haue ſtore to giue,
                     What neede we more, we by her lookes can liue:
                     All that great Henry by his conqueſts heapt,
                     And famous Beaford to his glory kept,
                     Be giuen backe 
                           •
                        o Rayner all in poſt,
                     And by this meanes, rich Normandy be loſt;
                     Thoſe which haue comen as Miſtreſſes of ours,
                     Haue into England brought their goodly dowers,
                     Which to our Coffers yeerely tribute brings,
                     
                        
The life of ſubiects and the ſtrength of Kings;
                     The meanes where by faire England euer might
                     Raiſe power in France, to backe our antient right;
                     But ſhe brings ruine heere to make aboad,
                     And cancells all our lawfull claime abroad,
                     And ſhe muſt recapitulate my ſhame,
                     And giue a thouſand by words to my name,
                     And call me Beldam, Gib, Witch, Night-mare, Trot,
                     With all deſpight that may a woman ſpot:
                     O that I were a witch but for her ſake!
                     I faith her Queeneſhip little reſt ſhould take;
                     I would ſcratch that face that may not feele the ayre,
                     And knit whole ropes of witch-knots in her haire,
                     O I would hag her nightly in her bed,
                     And on her breaſt ſit like a lumpe of lead,
                     And like a Fayrie, pinch that dainty skin,
                     Her wanton blood is now ſo cockered in,
                     Or take me ſome ſuch knowne familiar ſhape,
                     As ſhe my vengeance neuer ſhould eſcape;
                     Were I a garment, none ſhould neede the more
                     To ſprinckle me with Neſſus poiſned gore,
                     It were enough if ſhe once put me on,
                     To teare both fleſh and ſinewes from the bone;
                     Were I a flower that might her ſmell delight,
                     Though I were not the poiſning Acenite,
                     I would ſend ſuch a fume into her brow,
                     Should make her mad, as mad as I am now.
                     They ſay, the Druides once liu'd in this Ile,
                     This fatall Man, the place of my exile,
                     Whoſe powerfull charmes, ſuch dreadfull wonders wroght,
                     Which in the gotiſh Iſland tongue were taught;
                     
                        
O that their ſpels to me they had reſignde,
                     Wherewith they raiſde and calmde both ſea & winde,
                     And made the Moone pawſe in her paled ſpheare,
                     Whilſt her grim Dragons drew them throgh the aire,
                     Their helliſh power to kill the Plow-mans ſeede,
                     Or to fore-ſpeake the flockes as they did ſeede,
                     To nurſe a damned ſpirit with humaine blood,
                     To carry them through earth, ayre, fire and flood;
                     Had I this skill that time hath almoſt loſt,
                     How like a Goblin I would haunt her ghoſt,
                     O pardon, pardon my miſ-gouernde tongue,
                     A womans ſtrength cannot endure my wrong.
                     Did not the heauens her comming in withſtand,
                     As though affrighted when ſhe came to land?
                     The earth did quake, her comming to abide,
                     The goodly Thames did twice keepe backe her tide;
                     Pauls ſhooke with tempeſts, and that mounting ſpire,
                     With lightning ſent from heauen was ſet on fire;
                     Our ſtately buildings to the ground were blowne,
                     Her pride by theſe prodigious ſignes were ſhowne;
                     More fearefull viſions on the Engliſh earth,
                     Than euer were at any death or birth.
                     Ah Humfrey, Humfrey, if I ſhould not ſpeake,
                     My breaſt would ſplit, my very heart would breake.
                     
                        I that was wont ſo many to command,
                     Worſe now then with a clapdiſh in my hand;
                     A ſimple mantle couering me withall,
                     A very leaper of Cares hoſpitall,
                     That from my ſtate a preſence held in awe,
                     Glad heere to kennell in a pad of ſtraw;
                     And like an Owle by night to goe abroad,
                     
                        
Rooſted all day within an Iuy tod,
                     Among the ſea-cliffes, in the dampy caues,
                     In charnall houſes, or among the graues;
                     Saw'ſt thou thoſe eies, in whoſe ſweet cheereful looke,
                     Duke Humfrey once ſuch ioy and pleaſure tooke;
                     Sorrow hath ſo diſpoyl'd me of all grace,
                     Thou couldſt not ſay, this was my Eluors face;
                     Like a fowle Gorgon, whoſe diſheuel'd haire,
                     With euery blaſt flies gla
                           •
                        ing in the ayre;
                     Some ſtanding vp like hornes vpon my head,
                     Euen like thoſe women that in Coos are bred:
                     My lanke breaſts hang like bladders left vnblowne,
                     My skin with lothſome laundize ouer growne;
                     So pinde away, that if thou long'ſt to ſee
                     Ruines true picture, onely looke on mee;
                     Sometime in thinking of what I haue had,
                     Euen in a ſuddaine extaſie am mad;
                     Then like a Bedlam, forth thy Elnor runnes,
                     Like one of Bacchus raging franticke Nunnes,
                     Or like a Tartar, when in ſtrange diſguiſe,
                     Preparde vnto a diſmall ſacrifice.
                     That Prelate Beuford, a fowle ill befall him,
                     Prelate ſaid I
                           •
                         nay diuell I ſhould call him,
                     Ah God forgiue me, if I thinke amiſſe,
                     His very name me thinks my poiſon is;
                     Ah that vi
                           •
                        e Iudas, our profeſſed foe,
                     My curſe purſue him where ſo e're he goe;
                     That to my iudgement when I did appeare,
                     Laid to my charge thoſe things which neuer were.
                     
                        I ſhould pertake with Bullingbrookes intents,
                     The hallowing of his magique inſtruments;
                     
                        
That I procured Southwell to aſſiſt,
                     Which was by order conſecrate a Prieſt,
                     That it was I ſhould couer all they did,
                     That but for him, had to this day beene hid.
                     Ah that vile baſtard, that himſelfe dare vaunt
                     To be the ſonne of thy braue grandſire Gaunt,
                     
                     Whom he but fatherd of meere charity,
                     To rid his mother of that infamy,
                     Who if report of Elder times be true,
                     Vnto this day his father neuer knew.
                     He that by murthers blacke and odious crime,
                     To Henries throne attempted once to clime;
                     Hauing procurde by hope of golden gaine,
                     A fatall hand his ſoueraigne to haue ſlaine;
                     Who to his Chamber cloſely he conuaide,
                     And for that purpoſe fitly there had laide,
                     Vpon whoſe ſword that famous Prince had died,
                     If by a dogge he had not beene diſcried.
                     But now the Queene, her Minion Poole and he,
                     As it pleaſe them, ſo now muſt all things be;
                     England's no place for any one beſide,
                     All is too little to maintaine their pride:
                     What of a King hath Henry but the name,
                     And now ſcarce that, ſo publike his defame?
                     And I pray God I do not liue the day,
                     To ſee thy ruine, and thy Realmes decay;
                     And yet as ſure as Humfrey ſeemes to ſtand,
                     He be preſeru'd from that vile traytors hand;
                     From Glosters ſeate, I would thou wert eſtrang'd,
                     Or would to God that Dukedomes name were chang'd;
                     For it portends no goodnes vnto vs,
                     
                        
Ah Humfrey, Humfrey, it is ominous,
                     Yet rather then thy hap ſo hard ſhould be,
                     
                        I would thou wert heere baniſhed with me:
                     
                        Humfrey adue, farewell true noble Lord,
                     My wiſh is all thy Elnor can afford.
                  
                  
                     ¶ Notes of the Chronicle Hiſtorie.
                     
                        I ſought that dreadfull Sorcereſſe of Eye.
                     
                     
                        ELinor Cobham was accuſed by ſome that ſought to withſtand, and miſtiked her marriage with Duke Humſrey, that ſhe practiſed to giue him Philters, and ſuch poiſoning potions, to make him loue her, as ſhe was ſlandered by Cardinall Beuford, to haue liued as the Dukes Lemman, againſt the which Cardinall ſhe exclaimeth in this Epiſtle in the verſe before.

                           Though enuious Beuford ſlandered me before.
                        
                     
                     Noting the extreame hate he euer bore her.

                           Nor Elnor brought thee forraine Armies in,
                           To fetch her backe as did thy Iacomin.
                           
                        
                     
                     This was the chiefe and onely thing that euer tutched the reputation of this good Duke, that dotingly he married Iacomin, or as ſome call her Iaquet, daughter and heire to William Bauier, Duke of Holland, married before, and lawfull wife to Iohn Duke of Brabant, then liuing; which after as it is ſhewed in this verſe following.

                           Brabant nor Burgoyne claimed me by force,
                           N
                                 •
                              rſu'd to Rome to haſten my deuorce.
                        
                     
                     Cauſed great warres, by reaſon that the Duke of Burgoyne tooke part with Brabant, againſt the Duke of Gloceſter; which being arbitrated by the Pope, the Lady was adiudged to be deliuered backe to her former husband.

                           Nor Bedfords ſpouſe, your noble ſiſter Anne,
                           
                           That Princely iſſued braue Burgonian.
                        
                     
                     
                        Iohn Duke of Bedfort, that ſcourge of France, and the glory of

the Engliſhmen, married Anne, ſiſter to the Duke of Burgundie, a vertuous and beautifull Lady; by which marriage, as alſo by his victories attained in France, he brought great ſtrength to the Engliſh Nation.

                           Where's Greenewich now, thy Elnors Court of lat
                                 •
                              ?
                        
                     
                     That faire and goodly pallace of Greenewich, was firſt builded by that famous Duke, whoſe rich and pleaſant ſituation might remaine an aſſured monument of his wiſedome, if there were no other memory of the ſame.

                           They ſay the Druidesonce liued in this Ile.
                        
                     
                     It would ſeeme that there were two Ilands, both of them called Mona, though now diſtinguiſhed the one by the name of Man, the other by the name of Angleſey, both which were full of many infernall ceremonies, as may appeare by Agricolaes voyage, made into the hithermoſt Man, deſcribed by his ſonne in law Cornelius Tacitus. And as ſuperſtition, the daughter of barbariſme and ignorance; ſo amongſt thoſe Northerly nations, like as in America, Magicke was moſt eſteemed. Druidae were the publicke miniſters of their religion, as throghly taught in all rites thereof; their doctrine concerned the immortalitie of the ſoule, the contempt of death, and all other points which may conduce to reſolution, fortitude, and magnanimitie: their aboad was in groues and woods, whereupon they haue their name; their power extended it ſelfe to maiſter the ſoules of men deceaſed, and to conferre with ghoſts and other ſpirits, about the ſucceſſe of things. Plutarch, in his profound and learned diſcourſe of the defect of Oracles, reporteth that the outmoſt Brittiſh Iles, were the priſon of I wot not what Demi-gods; but it ſhall not neede to ſpeake any farther of the Drueda, then that which Lucas doth.

                           Et 
                                 〈◊〉
                               barbaricus ritus, morem
                                 
                                    
                                 
                                 que
                               ſineſtrum,
                           Sacrorum, Druidae poſitis repetiſtis ab armis.
                        
                     
                     
                        Did not the heauens her comming in withſtand?
                     
                     Noting the prodigious and fearefull ſignes that were ſeene in England, a little before her comming in: which Elinor expreſſeth in this Epiſtle, as fore-ſhewing the dangers which ſhould enſe vpon this vnlucky marriage.

                           
                           The hallowing of the magique inſtruments.
                        
                     
                     The inſtruments which Bullenbrooke vſed in his coniurations, according to the diuelliſh ceremonies and cuſtomes of theſe vnlawfull Artes, were dedicated at a Maſſe in the Lodge in Har
                              •
                           ſey Parke, by Southwell, Prieſt of Westminster.
                        
                           Hauing procurde by hopes of golden gaine,
                        
                     
                     This was one of the Articles that Duke Humfrey vrgde againſt the Cardinall Beuford, that conſpired the death of Henry the fift, by conuaying a villaine into his chamber, which in the night ſhould haue murthered him: but what ground of trueth hee had for the ſame, I leaue to diſpute.
                  
               
               
                  ¶ Duke Humfrey to Elinor Cobham
                  
                  
                     ME thinks thou ſhuldſt not doubt I could forget
                     Her whom ſo many do remember yet;
                     No, no, our ioyes away like ſhadowes ſlide,
                     But ſorrowes firme, in memory abide;
                     Nay I durſt anſwere, thou dooſt nothing leſſe,
                     But moou'd with paſſion, vrgde by thy diſtreſſe;
                     No Elnor no, thy woes, thy griefe, thy wrong,
                     Haue in my breaſt beene reſident too long;
                     Oh when report in euery place had ſpred,
                     My Elnor was to ſanctuarie fled,
                     With curſed Ouley, and the witch of Eye,
                     As guiltie of their vile conſpiracie;
                     The dreadfull ſpirits when they did inuocate,
                     
                        
For the ſucceſſion, and the realmes eſtate;
                     When Henries Image they in waxe had wrought,
                     By which he ſhould vnto his death be brought;
                     That as his picture did conſume away,
                     His perſon ſo by ſicknes ſhould decay;
                     Griefe that before could ne're my thoughts controule,
                     That inſtant tooke poſſeſſion of my ſoule.
                     Ah would to God I could forget thine ill,
                     As for mine owne, let that inſtruct me ſtill;
                     But that before hath taken too ſure hold,
                     Forget it ſaid I; would to God I could.
                     Of any woe, if thou haſt but one part,
                     I haue the whole remaining in my hart;
                     I haue no neede of others cares to borrow,
                     For all I haue is nothing elſe but ſorrow.
                     No my ſweete Nell, thou tookſt not all away,
                     Though thou wentſt hence, here ſtil thy woes do ſtay,
                     Though from thy husband thou wert forcde to go,
                     Thoſe ſtill remaine, they will not leaue me ſo;
                     No eie bewailes my ill, moanes my diſtreſſe,
                     Our griefe is more, but yet our debt is leſſe;
                     we owe no teares, no mourning dayes are kept;
                     For thoſe that yet for vs haue neuer wept;
                     we hold no obijts, no ſad exequies
                     Vpon the death-daies of vnweeping eies.
                     Alas good Nell, what ſhould thy patience moue,
                     T'vpbraid thy kind Lord with a forraine loue?
                     Thou mightſt haue bid all former ills adue,
                     Forgot the olde, we haue ſuch ſtore of new.
                     Did I omit thy loue to entertaine
                     with mutuall griefe to anſwere griefe againe?
                     
                        
Or thinkſt thou I vnkindly did forbeare,
                     To bandie woe for woe, and teare for teare?
                     Did I omit, or careleſly neglect,
                     Thoſe ſhewes of loue that Ladies ſo reſpect?
                     In mournefull blacke was I not ſeene to goe?
                     By outward ſhewes to tell my inward woe:
                     Nor dr
                           •
                        rie words were waſted in lament,
                     Nor cloudy brow bewraid my diſcontent,
                     Is this the cauſe? if this be it, know then,
                     One griefe concealde more grieuous is than ten:
                     If in my breaſt thoſe ſorrowes ſometimes were,
                     And neuer vtterd, ſtill they muſt be there,
                     And if thou knowſt, they many were before,
                     By time increaſing they muſt needes be more;
                     England to me, can challenge nothing lent,
                     Let her caſt vp, what is receiu'd, what ſpent,
                     If I her owne, can ſhe from blame be free,
                     If ſhe but proue a ſtepdame vnto mee?
                     That if I ſhould with that prowd baſtard ſtriue,
                     To pleade my birth-right and prerogatiue;
                     If birth allow, I ſhould not neede to feare it,
                     For then my true nobilitie ſhould beare it;
                     If counſell ayde, that Fraunce will tell (I know)
                     Whoſe townes lie waſte before the Engliſh foe;
                     When thrice we gaue the conquered French the foile.
                     At Agincourt, at Crauant, and Uernoile,
                     
                     If faith auaile, theſe armes did Henry hold,
                     To claime his crowne, yet ſcarcely nine months old.
                     If countries care haue leaue to ſpeake for me,
                     Gray haires in youth, my witnes then may be,
                     If peoples tongues giue ſplendor to my fame,
                     
                        
They adde a title to duke Humfries name;
                     If toyle at home, French treaſon, Engliſh hate,
                     Shall tell my skill in managing the ſtate,
                     If forraine trauell my ſucceſſe may try,
                     In Flaunders, Almaine, Boheme, Burgundy,
                     
                     That robe of Rome prowd Benford now doth weare,
                     In euery place ſuch ſway ſhould neuer beare.
                     The Croſier ſtaffe in his imperious hand,
                     To be the Scepter that controules the land;
                     That home to England, deſpenſations drawes,
                     Which are of power to abrogate our lawes,
                     That for thoſe ſummes the wealthy church ſhould pay,
                     Vpon the needy Commontie to lay,
                     His ghoſtly counſells onely doe aduiſe,
                     The meanes how Langlies progenie may riſe,
                     Pathing young Henries vnaduiſed waies,
                     A Duke of Yorke from Cambridge houſe to raiſe,
                     which after may our title vndermine,
                     Grafted ſince Edward in Gaunts famous line:
                     Vs of ſucceſſion ſafely to depriue,
                     which they from Clarence fainedly deriue,
                     Knowing the will old Cambridge euer bore,
                     To eateh the wreathe that famous Henry wore.
                     With Gray and Scroope, when firſt he laide the plot,
                     From vs, and ours, the ga
                           •
                        land to haue got,
                     As from the Match-borne Mortimer to raigne,
                     Whoſe title Glendour ſtoutly did maintaine,
                     When the prowde Percies haughty March, and hee,
                     Had ſharde the Land by equall partes in three.
                     His Prieſthoode now ſterne Mowbray doth reſtore,
                     To ſtirre the fire that kindled was before;
                     
                        
Againſt the Yorkiſts ſhall their claime aduance,
                     To ſteele the poynt of Norffolkes ſturdie lance,
                     Vpon the breaſt of Herfords iſſue bent,
                     In iuſt reuenge of antient baniſhment.
                     He dooth aduiſe to let our priſ
                           •
                        er goe,
                     And doth enlarge the faithleſſe Scottiſh foe,
                     Giuing our heires in marriage, that their dowres
                     May bring inuaſion vpon vs and ours.
                     Ambitious Suffolke ſo the helme doth guide,
                     With Benfords damned policies ſupplide;
                     He and the Queene in counſell ſtill conferre,
                     How to raiſe him who hath aduanced her.
                     But my deere heart, how vainely do I dreame,
                     And flie from thee, whoſe ſorrowes are my theame?
                     My loue to thee and England thus diuided,
                     With the moſt parte how hard to be decided,
                     Or thee, or that, to whether I am loath,
                     So neere are you, ſo deere vnto me both,
                     Twixt that and thee, for equall loue I finde
                     England in gratefull, and my Elnor kind.
                     But though my country iuſtly I reproue,
                     For countries ſake vnkinde vnto my loue,
                     Yet is thy Humfrey to his Elnor, now,
                     As when freſh beauty triumpht on thy brow,
                     As when thy graces I admired moſt,
                     Or of thy fauours might the frankli'ſt boaſt,
                     Thoſe beauties were ſo infinite before,
                     That in abundance I was onely poore,
                     Of which, though time hath taken ſome againe,
                     I aske no more but what doth yet remaine.
                     Be patient gentle heart in thy diſtreſſe,
                     
                        
Thou arte a Princeſſe, not a whit leſſe.
                     Whilſt in theſe breaſts we beare about this life,
                     I am thy husband, and thou arte my wife;
                     Caſt not thine eie on ſuch as mounted be,
                     But looke on thoſe caſt downe as lowe as we;
                     For ſome of them which prowdly pearch ſo hie,
                     Ere long ſhall come as lowe as thou or I.
                     They weepe for ioy, and let vs laugh in woe,
                     We ſhall exchange when heauen will haue it ſo.
                     We mourne, and they in after time may mourne,
                     Woe paſt may once, laugh preſent woe to ſcorne,
                     And worſe than hath beene we can neuer taſte,
                     Worſe cannot come than is already paſt.
                     In all extreames, the onely depth of ill,
                     Is that which comforts the afflicted ſtill;
                     Ah would to God thou wouldſt thy griefes denie,
                     And on my backe let all the burthen lie!
                     Or if thou canſt reſigne, make thine mine owne,
                     Both in one carrige to be vndergone,
                     Till we againe our former hopes recouer,
                     And proſp'rous times blow theſe misfortunes ouer,
                     For in the thought of thoſe forepaſſed yeares,
                     Some new reſemblance of old ioy appeares.
                     Mutuall our care, ſo mutuall be our loue,
                     That our affliction neuer can remoue,
                     So reſt in peace, where peace hath hope to liue,
                     Wiſhing thee more than I my ſelfe can giue.
                  
                  
                     
                     ¶ Notes of the Chronicle Hiſtorie.
                     
                        At Agincour
                              •
                           , at Grauant, and Vernoyle,
                     
                     THe three famous battels, fought by the Engliſhmen in France:
                     Agincourt by Henry the fift, againſt the whole power of France, Crauant fought by Montacute, Earle of Salisburie, and the Duke of Burgoyne, againſt the Dolphine of France, & William Stuart, Conſtable of Scotland: Vernoile, fought by Iohn Duke of Bedford, againſt the Duke of Alanſon, and with him moſt of the Nobilitie of France, Duke Humfrey an Eſpeciall Councellour in all theſe expeditions.

                           In Flaunders, Almain, Boheme, Burgundie.
                        
                     
                     Here remembring the auncient amitie which in his ambaſſaes he concluded betwixt the King of England, and Sigiſmund Emperour of Almaine, drawing the Duke of Burgoyne into the ſame league, giuing himſelfe as an hoſtage for the duke of ſaint Omers, while the Duke came to Calice to confirme the league. With his many other imployments to forraine Kingdoms.

                           That croſier ſtaffe in his imperious hand.
                        
                     
                     
                        Henry Beuford, Cardinall of Wincheſter, that proud & haughtie Prelate, receyued his Cardinals hat at Calice by the Popes Legate, which dignitie, Henry the fift his nephew, forbade him to take vpon him, knowing his haughtie and malicious ſpirit vnfit for that robe and calling.

                           The meanes how Langleis progenie may riſe.
                        
                     
                     As willing to ſhew the houſe of Cambridge to bee deſcended of Edmund Langley Duke of Yorke, a yonger brother to Iohn of Gaunt his Grand-father (as much as in him lay) to ſmother the title that the Yorkiſts made to the crowne (from Lionell of Clarence, Gaunts elder brother) by the daughter of Mortimer.
                        
                           
                           His priesthood now, ſterne Mowbray doth restore.
                        
                     
                     Nothing the ancient grudge betweene the houſe of Lancaſter and Norffolke, euer ſince Mowbray duke of Norffolke was baniſhed for the accuſation of Henry duke of Herford, (after the king of England father to duke Humfrey,) which accuſation hee came as a Combatant, to haue made good in the Liſts at Couentry.

                           And giues our heires in marriage that their dowers.
                        
                     
                     
                        Iames Stuart King of Scots, hauing bin long priſoner in England, was releaſed, and tooke to wife the daughter of Iohn duke of Somerſet, ſiſter to Iohn duke of Somerſet, neece to the Cardinall, and the duke of Exceſter, and cooſin germain remooued to the King, this King broke the oath he had taken, and became after a great enemie to England.
                  
                  FINIS.
               
               
                  
                  ¶ To my Honored Miſtris, Miſtris Elizabeth Tanfield, the ſole daughter and heire of that famous and learned Lawyer, Lawrence Tanfield Eſquire.
                  
                     FAire and vertuous Mistres, ſince first it was my good fortune to bee a witneſſe of the many rare perfections wherewith nature and education haue adorned you, I haue beene forced ſince that time, to attribute more admiration to your ſexe, then euer Petrarch could before perſwade mee to by the praiſes of his Laura. Sweete is the French tongue more ſweete the Italian; but most ſweete are they both, if ſpoken by your admired ſelfe. If Poeſie were praiſeleſſe, your vertues alone were a ſubiect ſufficient to make it eſteemed, though among the barbarous Getes: by how much the more your tender yeeres giue ſcarcely warrant for your more then womanlike wiſedome, by ſo much is your iudgement and reading the more to be wondred at. The Graces ſhall haue one more ſiſter by your ſelfe, and England to her ſelfe ſhall adde one Muſe more to Muſes. I reſt the humble deuoted ſeruant, to my deere and modest Mistreſſe, to whom I wiſh the happiest fortunes I can deuiſe.
                  
                  
                     Michaell Drayton.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     William de la Pole Duke of Suffolke, to Queene Margaret.
                  
                     The Argument.
                     
                        William de la Pole, firſt Marques, and after created Duke of Suffolke, being ſent into France by King Henry the ſixt, concluded a marriage betweene the King his Maſter, and Margaret, daughter to Rayner, Duke of Aniou, who onely had the title of the King of Cicily and Ieruſalem. This marriage being made, contrary to the liking of the Lords and Counſell of the Realme (by reaſon of the yeelding vp of Aniou and Maine into the Dukes hands, which ſhortly after proued the loſſe of all Aquitaine,) they euer after continually hated the Duke, and after, (by meanes of the Commons) baniſhed him at the Parlement at Berry; where after he had the iudgement of his exile, being then ready to depart, hee writeth backe to the Queene this Epiſtle.
                  
                  
                     IN my diſgrace (deere Queene) reſt thy content,
                     And Margarets health from Suffolkes baniſhment,
                     Not one day ſeemes fiue yeeres exile to mee,
                     But that ſo ſoone I muſt depart from thee;
                     Where thou not preſent, it is euer night,
                     All be exilde that liue not in thy ſight.
                     Thoſe Sauages which worſhip the Sunnes riſe,
                     Would hate their God, if they beheld thine eyes;
                     The worlds great light, might'ſt thou be ſeene abroad,
                     Would at our noone-ſtead neuer make aboad;
                     
                        
And make the poore Antipodes to mourne,
                     Fearing leſt he would neuer more returne,
                     Wert not for thee, it were my great'ſt exile,
                     To liue within this ſea-inuirond Ile.
                     
                        Poles courage brookes not limmitting in bands,
                     But that (great Queene) thy ſoueraignty commands:
                     Our Falcons kinde cannot the cage endure,
                     Nor buzzard-like dooth ſtoope to euery lure;
                     Their mounting broode in open ayre doth roue,
                     Nor will with Crowes be coop'd within a groue;
                     We all do breath vpon this earthly ball,
                     Likewiſe one heauen encompaſſeth vs all,
                     No baniſhment can be to him aſſignde,
                     Who doth retaine a true reſolued minde.
                     Man in himſelfe, a little world doth beare,
                     His ſoule the Monarch, euer ruling there,
                     Where euer then his body doth remaine,
                     He is a King that in himſelfe doth raigne,
                     And neuer feareth Fortunes hot'ſt alarmes,
                     That beares againſt her Patience for his Armes,
                     This was the meane prowd Warwicke did inuent,
                     To my diſgrace at Leiſter Parlement,
                     That onely I, by yeelding vp of Maine,
                     Should be the loſſe of fertile Aquitaine,
                     With the baſe vulgar ſort to win him fame,
                     To be the heire of good Duke Humfreys name;
                     And ſo by treaſon ſpotting my pure blood,
                     Make this a meane to raiſe the Neuels brood.
                     With Salsbury his vile ambitions ſyre,
                     In Yorkes ſterne breaſt, kindling long hidden fire,
                     By Clarence title working to ſupplant,
                     
                        
The Eagle ayrie of great Iohn of Gaunt.
                     
                     And to this end did my exile conclude,
                     Thereby to pleaſe the raſcall multitude;
                     Vrg'd by theſe enuious Lords to ſpend their breath,
                     Calling reuenge on the Protectors death,
                     That ſince the old decrepit Duke is dead,
                     By me of force he muſt be murthered.
                     If they would know who rob'd him of his life,
                     Let him call home Dame Ellinor his wife,
                     Who with a taper walked in a ſheete,
                     To light her ſhame at noone through London ſtreet;
                     And let her bring her Negromanticke booke,
                     That fowle hag Iordane, Hun, and Bullenbrooke,
                     
                     And let them call the ſpirits from hell againe,
                     To know how Humfrey died, and who ſhall raigne.
                     For twenty yeeres and haue I ſerude in France,
                     Againſt great Charles and baſtard Orleance?
                     
                     And ſeene the ſlaughter of a World of men,
                     Victorious now, and conquered agen;
                     And haue I ſeene Vernoylas batfull fields,
                     Strew'd with ten thouſand helms, ten thouſand ſhields,
                     Where famous Bedford did our fortune try,
                     Or France, or England for the victory?
                     The ſad inneſting of ſo many Townes,
                     Scorde on my breaſt in honorable wounds;
                     When Mountacute and Talbot of ſuch name,
                     Vnder my Enſigne both firſt won their fame,
                     In heate and cold all fortunes haue indurde,
                     To rowze the French, within their walls immurde;
                     Through all my life, theſe perrills haue I paſt,
                     And now to feare a baniſhment at laſt?
                     
                        
Thou knowſt how I (thy beauty to aduance)
                     For thee refuſde the infant Queene of France,
                     Brake the contract Duke Humfrey firſt did make,
                     Twixt Henry and the Princeſſe Arminacke;
                     
                     Onely (ſweete Queene) thy preſence I might gaine,
                     
                        I giue Duke Rayner, Aniou, Mauns and Maine,
                     Thy peereleſſe beutie for a dower to bring,
                     To counterpoize the wealth of Englands King;
                     And from Aumerle with-drew my warlike powers,
                     And came my ſelfe in perſon firſt to Towers,
                     Th'Ambaſſadors for truce to entertaine,
                     From Belgia, Denmarke, Hungary and Spaine,
                     And telling Henry of thy beauties ſtory,
                     
                        I taught my tongue a louers Oratory,
                     As the report it ſelfe did ſo indite,
                     And make it raviſh teares with ſuch delight;
                     And when my ſpeech did ceaſe (as telling all)
                     My lookes ſhewde more that was Angelicall.
                     And when I breathde againe and pawſed next,
                     
                        I left mine eyes dilating on the text;
                     Then comming of thy modeſty to tell,
                     In muſickes numbers my voyce roſe and fell:
                     And when I came to paint thy glorious ſtile,
                     My ſpeech in greater cadences to file,
                     By true deſcent to weare the Diadem,
                     Of Naples, Cicils and Ieruſalem,
                     And from the Gods thou didſt deriue thy birth,
                     If heauenly kinde could ioyne with broode of earth;
                     Gracing each title that I did recite,
                     With ſome mellifluous pleaſing Epethite,
                     Nor left him not, till he for loue was ſicke,
                     
                        
Beholding thee in my ſweete Rhetoricke.
                     A fifteenes taxe in France I freely ſpent
                     In triumphs, at thy nuptiall tournament;
                     And ſolemnizde thy marriage in a gowne,
                     Valude at more then was thy fathers Crowne;
                     And onely ſtriuing how to honour thee,
                     Gaue to my King what thy loue gaue to mee.
                     Iudge if his kindeneſſe haue not power to moue,
                     Who for his loues ſake gaue away his loue.
                     Had he which once the prize to Greece did bring,
                     (Of whom old Poets long agoe did ſing)
                     Seene thee for England but imbarqu'd at Deepe,
                     Would ouer-boord haue caſt his golden ſheepe,
                     As too vnworthy ballace to be thought,
                     To peſter roome, with ſuch perfection fraught.
                     The briny ſeas which ſaw the ſhip enfold thee,
                     Would vaut vp to the hatches to behold thee,
                     And falling backe, themſelues in thronging ſmother,
                     Breaking for griefe, ennying one another;
                     When the prowd Barke, for ioy thy ſteps to feele,
                     Scornd the ſalt waues ſhuld kiſſe her furrowing keele,
                     And trick'd in all her flags, her ſelfe ſhe braues,
                     Capring for ioy vpon the ſiluer waues;
                     When like a Bull from the Phenician ſtrand,
                     
                        Ioue with Europa, tripping from the land,
                     Vpon the boſome of the maine doth ſcud,
                     And with his ſwanniſh breaſt cleauing the floud,
                     Tow'rd the faire fields, vpon the other ſide,
                     Beareth Agenors ioy, Ph
                              ••
                           icias pride.
                     All heauenly beauties ioyne themſelues in one,
                     To ſhew their glory in thine eye alone;
                     
                        
Which when it turneth that celeſtiall ball,
                     A thouſand ſweet ſtarres riſe, a thouſand fall.
                     Who iuſtly ſaith, mine baniſhment to bee,
                     When onely France for my recourſe is free?
                     To view the plaines where I haue ſeene ſo oft,
                     Englands victorious engines raiſde aloft,
                     When this ſhall be my comfort in my way,
                     To ſee the place where I may boldly ſay,
                     Heere mighty Bedford forth the vaward led,
                     Heere Talbot charg'd, and heere the Frenchmen fled,
                     Heere with our Archers valiant Scales did lie,
                     Heere ſtood the Tents of famous Willoughbie;
                     
                     Heere Mountacute rangde his conquering band,
                     Heere forth we march'd, and heere we made a ſtand.
                     What ſhould we ſtand to mourne and grieue all day,
                     For that which time doth eaſily take away?
                     What fortune hurts, let patience onely heale,
                     No wiſedome with extreamities to deale.
                     To know our ſelues to come of humane birth,
                     Theſe ſad afflictions croſſe vs heere on earth.
                     A taxe impoſde by heauens eternall law,
                     To keepe our rude rebellious will in awe.
                     In vaine we prize that at ſo deere a rate,
                     Whoſe beſt aſſurance is a fickle ſtate,
                     And needeleſſe we examine our intent,
                     When with preuention, we cannot preuent;
                     When we ourſelues fore-ſeeing cannot ſhun,
                     That which before, with deſtinie doth run,
                     
                        Henry hath power, and may my life depoſe,
                     Mine honour mine, that none hath power to loſe;
                     Then be as cheerefull, (beauteous royall Queene)
                     
                        
As in the Court of France we erſt haue beene;
                     As when arriu'd in Porcheſters faire road,
                     (Where, for our comming Henry made aboad)
                     When in mine armes I brought thee ſafe to land,
                     And gaue my loue to Henries royall hand,
                     The happy howres we paſſed with the King,
                     At faire South-hampton, long in banquetting,
                     With ſuch content as lodg'd in Henries breaſt,
                     When he to London brought thee from the Weſt;
                     Through golden Cheape, when he in pompe did ride,
                     To Weſtminſter, to entertaine his Bride,
                  
                  
                     Notes of the Chronicle Hiſtorie.
                     
                        Our Falcons kinde cannot the cage indure.
                     
                     HE alludes in theſe verſes to the Falcon, which was the antient deuice of the Poles, comparing the greatneſſe and hawtineſſe of his ſpirit, to the nature of this bird.

                           This was the meane prowd Warwicke did inuent,
                           To my diſgrace, &c.
                        
                     
                     The Commons at this Parlement, through Warwicks meanes, accuſed Suffolke of treaſon, and vrged the accuſation ſo vehemently, that the king was forced to exile him for fiue yeeres.

                           That onely I by yeelding vp of Maine,
                           Should be the loſſe of fertile Aquitaine.
                        
                     
                     The Duke of Suffolke being ſent into France to conclude a peace, choſe Duke Rainers daughter, the Lady Margaret, whom he eſpouſed for Henry the ſixt, deliuering for her to her father, the Countries of Aniou and Maine, and the Citty of Mauns. Whereupon the Earle of Arminach (whoſe daughter was before promiſed to the King) ſeeing himſelfe to bee deluded, cauſed all the Engliſhmen to be expulſed Aquitino Gaſcoyne and Guyen.

                           
                           With the baſe vulgar ſort to win him ſame,
                           To be the heyre of good Duke Humfreys name.
                        
                     
                     This Richard that was called the great Earle of Warwicke, when Duke Humfrey was dead, grew into exceeding great fauour with the Commons.
                     
                        With Salisburie, his vile ambicious Sire,
                        In Yorks ſterne breaſt, kindling long hidden fire,
                        By Clarence title, working to ſupplant,
                        The Eagle Ayrie of great Iohn of Gaunt.
                     
                     
                        Richard Plantagenet, Duke of Yorke, in the time of Henry the ſixt, claimed the Crowne (being aſſiſted by this Richard Nea
                              •
                           ll Earle of Salisburie, and father to the great Earle of Warwicke, who fauoured exceedingly the houſe of Yorke) in open Parliament, as heir to Lionell Duke of Clarence, the third ſonne of Edward the third, making his title by Anne his Mother, wife to Richard Earle of Cambridge, ſonne to Edmund of Langley, Duke of Yorke; which Anne was daughter to Roger Mortimer Earle of March, which Roger was ſonne & heire to Edmund Mortimer that married the Ladie Philip, daughter and heire to Lionell Duke of Clarence, the third ſonne of King Edward, to whom the crowne after King Richard the ſeconds death, linealy deſcended, he dying without iſſue. And not to the heires of the Duke of Lancaſter, that was yonger brother to the Duke of Clarence. Hall. cap. 1. Tit. Yor. & Lanc.
                        
                           Vrg'd by theſe enuious Lords to ſpend their breath,
                           Calling reuenge on the Protectors death.
                        
                     
                     
                        Humfrey Duke of Gloceſter, & Lord Protector in the 25. yeare of Henry the ſixt, by the meanes of the Queene, and the Duke of Suffolke was arreſted by the Lord Beumond, at the Parliament holden at Berrie, and the ſame night after murthered in his bed.

                           If they would know who robd him, &c. To this verſe,
                           
                           To know how Humfrey died, and who ſhall raigne.
                        
In theſe verſes he ieſts at the Protectors wife, who (being accuſed & conuicted of treaſon, becauſe with Iohn Hun a prieſt, Roger Bullingbrooke a Negromancer, & Margery Iordan, called the Witch of Eie, ſhe had conſulted by ſorcery to kil the king) was adiudged to

perpetuall priſon in the Ile of Man, and to doe penance openly in three publique places in London.

                           For twentie yeares and haue I ſeru'd in Fraunce,
                        
                     
                     In the ſixt yeare of Henry the ſixt, the Duke of Bedford being deceaſed, then Lieutenant generall, and Regent of Fraunce; this Duke of Suffolke, was promoted to that dignity, hauing the Lord Talbot, Lord Scales, and the Lord Mountacute to aſſiſt him.

                           Againſt great Charles, and baſtard Orleance.
                           
                        
                     
                     This was Charles the ſeauenth, and after the death of Henry the fifth obtained the crowne of France, and recouered againe much of that his father had loſt. Baſtard Orleance, was ſonne to the Duke of Orleance, begotten of the Lord Cawnies wife, preferred highly to many notable offices, becauſe hee being a moſt valiant Captaine, was continuall enemie to the Engliſhmen, dayly infeſting them with diuerſe incurſions.

                           And haue I ſeene Vernoyla's batfull fields.
                        
                     
                     
                        Vernoyle is that noted place in Fraunce, where the great battell was fought in the beginning of Henrie the ſixt his raigne, where the moſt of the French Chiualrie were ouercome by the Duke of Bedford.

                           And from Aumerle with-drew my warlike powers,
                        
                     
                     Aumerle is that ſtrong defenced towne in France, which the Duke of Suffolke got after 24. great aſſaults giuen vnto it.
                     
                        And came my ſelfe in perſon firſt to Towers
                        Th'Embaſſadours for truce to entertaine,
                        From Belgia, Denmarke, Hungary and Spaine.
                     
                     Towers is a Cittie in France, built by Brutus as hee came into Britaine, where, in the twentie and one yeare of the raigne of Henry the ſixt, was appoynted a great diet to bee kept, whither came the Embaſſadours of the Empire, Spaine, Hungary, & Denmarke, to entreate for a perpetuall peace, to bee made betweene the two Kings of England and Fraunce.

                           By truo deſcent to weare the Diadem,
                           Of Naples, Cicilie, and Ieruſalem.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                        Rainer Duke of Aniou, father to Queene Margaret, called him ſelfe King of Naples, Cicily, and Ieruſalem, hauing the title alone of King of thoſe Countries.

                           A fifteene taxe in Fraunce I freely ſpent.
                        
                     
                     The Duke of Suffolke, after the marriage concluded twixt King Henry and Margaret, daughter to duke Rayner, asked in open Parliament a whole fifteenth to fetch her into England.

                           Seene thee for England but imbarqu'd at Deepe.
                        
                     
                     Deepe is a towne in Fraunce, bordering vpon the Sea, where the Duke of Suffolke with Queene Margaret, tooke ſhippe for England.

                           As when arriu'd in Porcheſter faire Roade.
                        
                     
                     Porcheſter, a hauen towne in the South-weſt part of England, where the King tarried, expecting the Queenes arriuall, whom from thence he conuayed to South-hamton.
                  
               
               
                  Queene Margaret to VVilliam de-la-Poole Duke of Suffolke.
                  
                     WHat newes (ſweet Pole) look'ſt thou my liues ſhuld tell,
                     But like the tolling of the dolefull Bell?
                     Bidding the deaths-man to prepare the graue,
                     Expect from me no other newes to haue,
                     My breſt, which once was mirths imperiall throne,
                     A vaſt and deſart wilderneſſe is growne:
                     Like that cold Region, from the world remote,
                     
                        
On whoſe breeme ſeas the icie mountaines flote
                     Where thoſe poore creatures baniſht from the light,
                     Do liue impriſond in continuall night.
                     No ioy preſents my ſoules eternall eies,
                     But diuination of ſad tragedies,
                     And Care takes vp her ſolitarie inne,
                     Where youth and ioy their court did once beginne.
                     As in September when our yeere reſignes,
                     The glorious Sunne vnto the watrie ſignes,
                     Which through the clouds looks on the earth in ſcorn;
                     The little bird, yet to ſalute the morne,
                     Vpon the naked branches ſets her foote,
                     The leaues now lying on the moſſie roote;
                     And there a ſeely chitipping dooth keepe,
                     As though ſhe faine would ſing, yet fame would weep,
                     Praiſing faire ſummer that too ſoone is gone,
                     Or ſad for winter too faſt comming on,
                     In this ſtrange plight I mourne for thy depart,
                     Becauſe that weeping cannot eaſe my hart.
                     Now to our aide, who ſtirs the neighbouring kings?
                     Or who from France a puiſſant armie brings?
                     Who moues the Norman to abet our warre?
                     Or ſtirs vp Burgoyne, to ayde Lancaſter?
                     
                     Who in the North our lawfull claime commends,
                     To win vs credite with our valiant friends?
                     To whom ſhall I my ſecret griefe impart?
                     Whoſe breaſt I made the cloſet of my hart.
                     The ancient Heroes fame thou didſt reuine,
                     And didſt from them thy memorie deriue,
                     Nature by thee, both gaue and taketh all,
                     Alone in Poole ſhe was too prodigall;
                     
                        
Of ſo diuine and rich a temper wrought,
                     As heauen for him perfections deepe had ſought;
                     VVell knew king Henry what he pleaded for,
                     when he choſe thee to be his Orator;
                     VVhoſe Angell-eye by powerfull influence,
                     Doth vtter more than humane eloquence,
                     That when Ioue would his youthful ſports haue tride,
                     But in thy ſhape himſelfe would neuer hide;
                     which in his loue had bin of greater power,
                     Then was his Nymph, his flame, his ſwan, his ſhower,
                     To that allegiance Yorke was bound by oath,
                     To Henries heires and ſafety of vs both,
                     No longer now he meanes record ſhall beare it,
                     He will diſpence with heauen, and will vnſweare it.
                     He that's in all the worlds blacke ſinnes forlorne,
                     Is careleſſe now how oft he be forſworne;
                     And now of late his title hath ſet downe,
                     By which he make his claime vnto the Crowne.
                     And now I heare his hatefull ducheſſe chats,
                     And rips vp their deſcent vnto her brats,
                     And bleſſeth them as Englands lawfull heires,
                     And tells them that our diademe is theirs.
                     And if ſuch hap her goddeſſe Fortune bring,
                     If three ſonnes faile, ſheele make the fourth a King.
                     He that's ſo like his Damme, her yongeſt Dicke,
                     
                     That foule, il-fauored, crooke backt ſtigmaticke,
                     That like a carcas ſtolne out of a tombe;
                     Came the wrong way out of hir mothers wombe;
                     with teeth in's head, his paſſage to haue torne,
                     As though begot an age ere he was borne.
                     Who now will curbe prowde Yorke when he ſhal riſe?
                     
                        
Or armes out right againſt his enterprize,
                     To crop that baſtard weede which daily growes
                     To ouer-ſhadow our vermilian Roſe?
                     Or who will muzzel that vnruly Beare,
                     Whoſe preſence ſtrikes our peoples harts with feare?
                     Whilſt on his knees this wretched King is downe,
                     To ſaue them labour, reaching at his Crowne,
                     Where like a mounting Cedar he ſhould beare
                     His plumed top aloft into the ayre;
                     And let theſe ſhrubs ſit vnderneath his ſhrowdes,
                     Whilſt in his armes he doth embrace the clowdes,
                     O that he ſhould his fathers right inherite,
                     Yet be an alien to that mightie ſpirite.
                     How were thoſe powers diſperſde, or whether gone,
                     Should ſympathize in generation,
                     Or what appoſed influence had force,
                     So much t'abuſe and alter natures courſe?
                     All other creatures follow after kinde,
                     But man alone doth not beget the minde.
                     My Daiſie-flower, which erſt perfumde the ayre,
                     Which for my fauours Princes once did weare;
                     Now in the duſt lies troden on the ground.
                     And with Yorkes garlands euery one is crownd.
                     When now his riſing waites on our decline,
                     And in our ſetting he beginnes to ſhine,
                     Now in the skies that dreadful Comet waues,
                     And who be ſtarres but Warwickes bearded ſtaues?
                     And all thoſe knees which bended once ſo low,
                     Grow ſtiffe, as though they had forgot to bow;
                     And none like them purſue me with deſpite,
                     Which moſt haue cride, God ſaue Queene Margarite,
                     
                     
                        
When fame ſhall brute thy baniſhment abroade,
                     The Yorkiſh faction then will lay on loade;
                     And when it comes once to our weſterne coaſt,
                     O how that hag Dame Elinor will boaſt,
                     And labour ſtrait by all the meanes ſhe can,
                     To be calld home out of the Ile of Man,
                     To which I know great Warwicke will conſent,
                     To haue it done by act of Parlement,
                     That to my teeth my birth ſhe may defie,
                     Slaundring duke Rayner with baſe beggerie;
                     The onely way ſhe could deuiſe to grieue me,
                     wanting ſweete Suffolke, which ſhouldſt moſt relieue me,
                     And from that ſtocke doth ſprowt another bloome,
                     A Kentiſh rebell, a baſe vpſtart groome;
                     And this is he the white Roſe muſt preferre,
                     By Clarence daughter, matcht with Mortimer,
                     
                     Thus by Yorkes meanes, this raſcall peſant Cade,
                     
                     Muſt in all haſte Plantaginet be made;
                     Thus that ambitious duke ſets all on worke,
                     To ſound what friends affect the claime of Yorke,
                     
                     whilſt he abroad doth practiſe to command,
                     And makes vs weake by ſtrengthning Ireland;
                     
                     More his owne power ſtill ſeeking to increaſe,
                     Then for king Henries good, or Englands peace.
                     Great Winchester vntimely is deceaſde,
                     That more and more my woes ſhould be increaſde.
                     
                        Beuford, whoſe ſhoulders prowdly bare vp all
                     The Churches prop, that famous Cardinall.
                     The Commons (bent to miſchiefe) neuer let,
                     with Fraunce t'vpbraid that valiant Sommerſet,
                     
                     Rayling in tumults on his ſouldiers loſſe,
                     
                        
Thus all goes backeward, croſſe comes after croſſe,
                     And now of late duke Humfries old alies,
                     With baniſht Elnors baſe complices,
                     Attending their reuenge grow wondrous crouſe,
                     And threaten death and vengeance to our houſe;
                     And I lone the wofull remnant am,
                     T'endure theſe ſtormes with wofull Buckingham.
                     
                     I pray thee Poole, haue care how thou dooſt paſſe,
                     Neuer the Sea yet halfe ſo dangerous was;
                     And one foretolde by Water thou ſhouldſt die,
                     (Ah! foule befall that foule tongues prophecie)
                     And euery night am troubled in my dreames,
                     That I doe ſee thee toſſt in dangerous ſtreames;
                     And oft-times ſhipwrackt, caſt vpon the land,
                     And lying breathleſſe on the queachy ſand;
                     And oft in viſions ſee thee in the night,
                     Where thou at Sea maintainſt a dangerous fight;
                     And with thy proued target and thy ſword,
                     Beatſt backe the pyrate which would come aboord.
                     Yet be not angry that I warne thee thus,
                     The trueſt loue is moſt ſuſpitious,
                     Sorrow doth vtter what vs ſtill doth grieue,
                     But hope forbids vs ſorrovve to belieue;
                     And in my counſell yet this comfort is,
                     It can not hurt, although I thinke amiſſe,
                     Then liue in hope in triumph to returne,
                     When cleerer dayes ſhall leaue in cloudes to mourne,
                     But ſo hath ſorrow girt my ſoule about,
                     That that word Hope (me thinks) comes ſlowly out;
                     The reaſon is, I know it heere vvould reſt,
                     Where it vvould ſtill behold thee in my breaſt.
                     
                        
Farewell ſweete Pole, faine more I would indite,
                     But that my teares doe blot as I do write.
                  
                  
                     ¶ Notes of the Chronicle Hiſtorie.
                     
                        Or brings in Burgoyne to ayde Lancaſter.
                     
                     
                        PHillip Duke of Burgoyne and his ſonne, were alwaies great fauorites of the houſe of Lancaſter, howbeit they often diſſembled both with Lancaſter and Yorke.

                           Who in the North our lawfull claime commends,
                           To win vs credite with our valiant friends.
                        
                     
                     The chiefe Lords of the North parts, in the time of Henry the fixt, withſtood the Duke of Yorke at his riſing, giuing him two great ouerthrowes.
                     
                        To that allegeance Yorke was bound by oth
                        To Henries heires, and ſafety of vs both,
                        No longer now he meanes Records ſhall beare it,
                        He will diſpence with heauen, and will vnſweare it.
                     
                     The Duke of Yorke at the death of Henry the fift, and at this Kings coronation, tooke his oth to be true ſubiect to him and his heires for euer; but afterward diſpenſing therewith, claimed the crowne as his rightfull and proper inheritance.

                           If three ſonnes faile, ſhee'le make the fourth a King.
                        
                     
                     The Duke of Yorke had foure ſonnes, Edward Earle of March, that afterward was Duke of Yorke, and King of England, when he had depoſed Henry the ſixt, and Edmund Earle of Rutland, ſlaine by the Lord Clifford at the battel at Wakefield: and George Duke of Clarence, that was murthered in the Tower: and Richard Duke of Gloſter, who was (after he had murthered his brothers ſonnes) King by the name of Richard the third.
                     
                        He that's ſo like his Dam, her yongeſt Dicke,
                        That fowle illfauored crookeback'd Stigmaticke, &c.
                        
                           Till this verſe, As though begot an age, &c.
                     
                     This Richard (whom ironically ſhe heere calls Dicke) that by

treaſon after his Nephewes murthered, obtained the crowne, was a man low of ſtature, crooke-back'd, the left ſhoulder much higher then the right, and of a very crabbed and ſower countenance: his mother could not be deliuered of him, hee was borne toothd, & with his feet forward, contrary to the courſe of nature.

                           To ouerſhadow our vermilian Roſe.
                        
                     
                     The red Roſe was the badge of the houſe of Lancaster, and the white Roſe of Yorke, which by the marriage of Henry the ſeauenth, with Elizabeth indubitate heire of the houſe of Yorke, was happily vnited.

                           Or who will muzzell that vnruly beare.
                        
                     
                     The Earle of Warwicke, the ſetter vp and puller downe of Kings, gaue for his Armes the white Beare rampant, and the ragged ſtaffe.

                           My Daiſie flower which erſt perfumde the ayre,
                           Which for my fauour Princes once did weare, &c.
                        
                     
                     The Daiſie in French is called Margaret, which was Queene Margarets badge, where-withall the Nobilitie and chiualrie of the Land, at the firſt arriuall were ſo delighted, that they wore it in their hats in token of honour.

                           And who be ſtarres but Warwikes bearded ſtaues.
                        
                     
                     The ragged or bearded ſtaffe, was a part of the Armes belonging to the Earledome of Warwicke.

                           Slandring Duke Rayner with baſe beggery.
                        
                     
                     
                        Rayner Duke of Aniou, called himſelfe King of Naples, Cicile, and Ieruſalem, hauing neither inheritance nor tribute from thoſe parts, and was not able at the marriage of the Queene, of his owne charges, to ſend her into England, though he gaue no dower with her: which by the Dutcheſſe of Gloceſter, was often in diſgrace caſt in her teeth.

                           A Kentiſh rebell, a baſe vpſlart groome.
                        
                     
                     This was Iacke Cade, which cauſed the Kentiſh-men to rebell in the 28. yeere of King Henry the fixth.

                           And this is he the white Roſe muſt prefer,
                           By Clarence daughter match'd to Mortimer.
                           
                        
                     
                     This Iacke Cade inſtructed by the Duke of Yorke, pretended to be deſcended from Mortimer, which married Lady Phillip, daughter to the Duke of Clarence.

                           
                           And makes vs weake by ſtrengthning Ireland.
                        
                     
                     The Duke of Yorke being made Deputy of Ireland, firſt there began to practiſe his long pretended purpoſe, ſtrengthning himſelfe by all meanes poſſible, that hee might at his returne into England by open warre, claime that which ſo long he had priuily gone about to obtaine.

                           Great Wincheſter vntimely is deceaſde.
                        
                     
                     
                        Henry Benford, Biſhop and Cardinall of Wincheſter, ſonne to Iohn of Gaunt, begot in his age, was a prowd and ambitious Prelate, fauouring mightily the Queene and the Duke of Suffolke, continually heaping vp innumerable treaſure, in hope to haue beene Pope, as himſelfe on his death-bed confeſſed.

                           With France t'vpbraide the valiant Somerſet.
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        Edmund Duke of Somerſet, in the 24. of Henry the ſixth, was made Regent of France, and ſent into Normandie to deſend the Engliſh territories againſt the French inuaſions, but in ſhort time he loſt all that King Henry the fifth won, for which cauſe the Nobles and Commons euer after hated him.

                           T'endure theſe ſtormes with wofull Buckingham.
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        Humfrey Duke of Buckingham, was a great fauorite of the Queenes faction, in the time of Henry the ſixt.

                           And one ſore-told, by water thou ſhouldſt die.
                        
                     
                     The Witch of Eye, receiued anſwer from her ſpirit, that the Duke of Suffolke ſhould take heede of water: which the Queene forwarnes him of, as remembring the Witches prophecie, which afterwards came to paſſe.
                  
                  Finis.
               
               
                  
                  To the Right Worſhipfull Sir Thomas Munſon, Knight.
                  
                     SIR, amongſt many which moſt deſeruedly loue you, though I the leaſt, yet am loth to be the laſt, whoſe endeuours may make knowne how highly they eſteeme of your noble and kinde diſpoſition; Let this Epiſtle Sir (I beſeech you) which vnworthily weares the badge of your worthy name, acknowledge my zeale with the reſt, (though much leſſe deſeruing) which for your ſake, doe honour the houſe of the Mounſons. I know true generoſitie accepteth what is zealouſly offred, though not euer deſeruingly excellent; yet for loue of the Art from whence it receiueth reſemblance. The light Phrigian harmony ſtirreth delight, as well as the melancholy Doricke moueth paſſion; both haue their motion in the ſpirit, as the liking of the ſoule moueth the affection. Your kinde acceptance of my labour, ſhall giue ſome life to my Muſe, which yet houers in the vncertaintie of the generall cenſure.
                  
                  
                     Mich: Drayton.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     Edward the fourth to Shores wife
                  
                  
                     The Argument.
                     This Miſtris Shore, King Edward the fourths beauteous Paramore, was ſo called of her husband a Gold ſmith, dwelling in Lombard ſtreete. Edward the fourth, ſonne to Richard Duke of Yorke, after he had obtained the crowne by depoſing Henry the ſixth, (which Henry was after murthered in the Tower by Richard Crookebacke) and after the battell ſought at Barnet, where the famous Earle of Warwicke was ſlaine, and that King Edward quietly poſſeſſed the Crowne, hearing (by report of many) the rare and wonderfull beautie of the aforeſaid Shores wife, commeth himſelfe diſguiſed to London to ſee her; where after he had once beheld her, he was ſo ſurpriſed with her admirable beautie, as not long after he robbed her husband of his deereſt iewell; but firſt by this Epiſtle he writeth vnto her.
                  
                  
                     VNto the fair'ſt that euer breath'd this ayre,
                     From Engliſh Edward to that faireſt faire,
                     Ah would to God thy title were no more,
                     That no remembrance might remaine of Shore,
                     
                     To countermand a Monarchs high deſire,
                     And bar mine eyes of what they moſt admire.
                     O why ſhould Fortune make the Citty prowd,
                     To giue that more then is the Court allow'd?
                     
                        
Where they like (wretches) hoard it vp to ſpare,
                     And do engroſſe it, as they do their ware.
                     When fame firſt blaz'd thy beautie heere in Court,
                     Mine cares repulſde it as a light report,
                     But when mine eyes ſawe that mine eare had heard,
                     They thought report too nigardly had ſparde;
                     And ſtrooken dumbe with wonder, did but mutter,
                     Conceiuing more then ſhe had words to vtter.
                     Then thinke of what thy husband is poſſeſt,
                     When I enuie that Shore ſhould be ſo bleſt;
                     When much aboundance makes the needie mad,
                     And hauing all, yet knowes not what is had.
                     Into fooles boſomes this good fortune creepes,
                     And wealth comes in the whilſt the miſer ſleepes.
                     If now thy beautie be of ſuch eſteeme,
                     Which all of ſo rare excellencie deeme,
                     What would it be, and prized at what rate,
                     Where it adorned with a kingly ſtate?
                     Which being now but in ſo meane a bed,
                     Is like an vncut Diamond in lead,
                     E're it be ſet in ſome high-prized ring,
                     Or garniſhed with rich enamiling;
                     We ſee the beauty of the ſtone is ſpilt,
                     Wanting the gratious ornament of guilt.
                     When firſt attracted by thy heauenly eyes,
                     I came to ſee thee, in a ſtrange diſguiſe,
                     Paſſing thy ſhop, thy husband calls me backe,
                     Demanding what rare jewell I did lacke:
                     I want (thought I) one that I dare not craue,
                     And (one I feare) thou wilt not let me haue;
                     He calls for Caskets forth, and ſhewes me ſtore,
                     
                        
But yet I knew he had one jewell more;
                     And deadly curſt him that he did denie it,
                     That I might not for loue or mony buy it.
                     O might I come a Diamond to buy,
                     That had but ſuch a luſtre as thine eye.
                     Would not my treaſure ſerue, my Crowne ſhould go,
                     If any jewell could be prized ſo;
                     An Agat, branched with thy bluſhing ſtraines,
                     A Saphire, but ſo az
                           •
                        rde as thy veines;
                     My kingly Scepter onely ſhould redeeme it,
                     At ſuch a price if iudgement could eſteeme it.
                     How fond and ſenceleſſe be thoſe ſtrangers then,
                     VVho bring in toyes to pleaſe the Engliſhmen?
                     
                        I ſmile to thinke how fond th'Italians are,
                     To iudge their artificiall gardens rare,
                     VVhen London in thy cheeks can ſhew them heere,
                     Roſes and Lillies growing all the yeere:
                     The Portugall, that onely hopes to win,
                     By bringing ſtones from fartheſt India in,
                     VVhen happy Shore can bring them forth a girle,
                     Whoſe lips be Rubies, and her teeth be Pearle.
                     How ſilly is the Polander and Dane,
                     To bring vs Criſtall from the frozen maine?
                     When thy cleere skins tranſparence doth ſurpaſſe
                     Their Chriſtall, as the Diamond doth glaſſe.
                     The fooliſh French which brings in traſh and toyes,
                     To turne our women, men, or girles to boyes,
                     When with what tire thou dooſt thy ſelfe adorne,
                     That for a faſhion onely ſhall be worne;
                     Which though it were a garment but of haire,
                     More rich then robe that euer Empreſſe ware.
                     
                        
Me thinks thy husband takes his marke aw
                           •
                        y,
                     To ſet his plate to ſale when thou art by;
                     When they which do thy Angel locks behold,
                     Like baſeſt droſſe do but reſpect his gold,
                     And wiſh one haire before that maſſie heape,
                     And but one locke before the wealth of Cheap
                           •
                        ;
                     And for no cauſe elſe, hold we gold ſo deare,
                     But that it is ſo like vnto thy haire,
                     And ſure I thinke Shore cannot chooſe but flowt,
                     Such as would finde the great Elixar out,
                     And laugh to ſee the Alchimiſts, that choke
                     Themſelues with fumes, & waſte their wealth in ſmoke.
                     When if thy hand but touch the groſſeſt mold,
                     It is con
                           •
                        erted to refined gold,
                     When theirs is chafferd at an eaſie rate,
                     VVell knowne to all to be adulterate;
                     And is no more when it by thine is ſet,
                     Then paltry Beugle, or light-prized jeat.
                     Let others weare perfumes, for thee vnmeete,
                     If there were none, thou could'ſt make all things ſweet.
                     Thou comfort'ſt ſence, and yet all ſence doſt waſte,
                     To heare, to ſee, to ſmell, to feele, to taſte;
                     Thou a rich ſhip, whoſe very refuſe ware,
                     Aromatickes, and pretious odors are.
                     If thou but pleaſe to walke into the Pawne,
                     To buy thee Cambrieke, Callico, or Lawne,
                     If thou the whitenes of the ſame wouldſt proue,
                     From thy more whiter hand plucke off thy gloue;
                     And thoſe which buy, as the beholders ſtand,
                     Will take thy hand for Lawne, Lawne for thy hand;
                     A thouſand eyes, cloſde vp by enuious night,
                     
                        
Do vviſh for day, but to enioy thy ſight;
                     And vvhen they once haue bleſt their eies vvith thee,
                     Scorne euery obiect elſe, vvhat ere they ſee,
                     So like a goddeſſe beauty ſtill controules,
                     And hath ſuch povverfull vvorking in our ſoules.
                     The Merchant vvhich in traffike ſpends his life,
                     Yet loues at home to haue a dainty vvife,
                     The blunt ſpoke Cynicke poring on his booke,
                     Sometimes (aſide) at beauty loues to looke.
                     The church-man, by whoſe teaching wee are led,
                     Allovves what keepes loue in the marriage bed;
                     The bloudy Souldier ſpent in armes and broiles,
                     With beautie yet content to ſhare his ſpoiles;
                     The buſie Lavvyer wrangling in his pleas;
                     Findeth that Beauty giues his labour eaſe;
                     The toyling tradeſ-man, and the ſweating clowne,
                     Wold haue his wench faire, thogh his bread be brown;
                     So much is Beauty pleaſing vnto all,
                     To Prince and p
                           ••
                        ſant like in generall;
                     Nor neuer yet did any man deſpiſe it,
                     Except too deere, and 
                           •
                        hat he could not prize it,
                     Vnlearn'd is learning, artleſſe be all Artes,
                     If not imployde to praiſe thy ſeuerall partes;
                     Poore plodding Schoolemen they are farre too lowe,
                     Which by probations, rules, and axiomes goe;
                     He muſt be ſtill familiar with the skies,
                     Which notes the reuolutions of thine eies:
                     And by that skill which meaſures ſea and land,
                     See beauties all, thy waſte, thy foote, thy hand,
                     vvhere he may find, the more that hee doth view,
                     Such rare delights as are both ſtrange and new;
                     
                        
And other worlds of beauty more and more,
                     Which neuer were diſcouered before;
                     And to thy rare proportion to apply,
                     The lines and circles in Geometry,
                     Vſing alone Arithmetickes ſtrong ground,
                     Numbring the vertues that in thee are found.
                     And when theſe all haue done what they can doo,
                     For thy perfections all too little too.
                     When from the Eaſt the dawne hath broken out,
                     And gone to ſeeke thee all the world about,
                     Within thy Chamber hath ſhe fixt her light,
                     Where but that place the world hath all beene night;
                     Then is it fit that euery vulgar eie,
                     Should ſee Loue banquet in her maieſtie
                           •
                        
                     
                     We deeme thoſe things our ſight doth moſt frequent,
                     To be but meane, although moſt excellent;
                     For ſtrangers ſtill the ſtreetes are ſwept and ſtrowd,
                     Few looke on ſuch as daily come abroade;
                     Things much reſtraind, doth make v
                           •
                         much deſire thē,
                     And beauties ſeldome ſeene makes vs admire them.
                     Nor is it fit a cittie ſhop ſhould 
                           〈…〉
                        de,
                     The worlds delight and natures onely pride,
                     But in a Princes ſumptuous gallery.
                     Hung all with tiſſue, floorde with tapeſtrie
                           •
                        
                     
                     Where thou ſhalt ſit, and from thy ſtate ſhalt ſee,
                     The tiltes and triumphs that are done for thee.
                     Then know the diffrence (if thou liſt to proue)
                     Betwixt a vulgar, and a kingly loue;
                     And when thou findſt, as now thou doubtſt the troth,
                     Be thou thy ſelfe vnpartiall Iudge of both.
                     Where hearts be knit, what helps if not enioy?
                     
                        
Delayes breedes doubts, no cunning to be coy.
                     Whilſt lazie Time his turne by tariance ſerues,
                     Loue ſtill growes ſickly, and hope dayly ſterues,
                     Meane while receiue that warrant by theſe lines,
                     which princely rule and ſoueraintie reſignes:
                     Till when, theſe papers by their Lords commaund
                           •
                        
                     
                     By me ſhall kiſſe thy ſweete and daintie hand.
                  
                  
                     ¶ Notes of the Chronicle Hiſtorie.
                     THis Epiſtle of Edward to Shores wife, and of hers to him, being of vnlawfull affection, miniſtreth ſmall occaſion of hiſtoricall notes, for had he mentioned the many battels betwixt the Lancaſtrian faction and him, or other warlike daungers, it had beene more like to Plautus boaſting Souldier then a kingly Courtier. Notwithſtanding, it ſhall not be amiſſe to annexe a line or two.

                           From Engliſh Edward to the faireſt faire,
                        
                     
                     
                        Edward the fourth was by nature very chiualrous, and very amorous, applying his ſweet & amiable aſpect to attaine his wanton appetite the rather, which was ſo well knowne to Lewes the French king, who at their interuiew inuited him to Paris, that as Comineus reports, being taken at his word, hee notwithſtanding brake off the matter, fearing the Pariſian Dames with their witty conuerſation, would detaine him longer then ſhould bee for his benefit, by which means Edwad was diſapointed of his iorny: and albeit Princes whilſt they liue, haue nothing in them but what is admirable; yet we need not miſtruſt the flatterie of the Court in thoſe times: fot certain it is, that his ſhape was excellent, his haire drew neare to a black, making his faces fauor to ſeeme more delectable. Though the ſmalnes of his eies full of a ſhining moiſture, as it tooke away ſome comelineſſe; ſo it argued much ſharpnes of vnderſtanding, and cruelty mingled togither. And indeed George Buccanan (that imperious Scot) chargeth him and other Princes

of thoſe times, with affectation of tyranny, as Richard the third manifeſtly did.

                           When firſt attracted by thy heauenly eyes,
                        
                     
                     
                        Edwards intemperate deſires, with which he was wholy ouer-come, how tragically they in his of-ſpring were puniſhed, is vniuerſally knowne. A mirrour repreſenting their ouerſight; that rather leaue their children what to poſſeſſe, then what to imitate.

                           How ſeely is the Polander and Dane;
                           To bring vs Criſtall from the frozen maine.
                        
                     
                     Alluding to their opinions, who imagin Criſtall to be a kind of Ice, and therefore it is likely, they who come from the frozen parts, ſhould bring great ſtore of that tranſparent ſtone, which is thought to be congealed with extreame colde. Whether Criſtall be Ice, or ſome other liquor, I omit to diſpute, yet by the examples of Amber and Corall, there may be ſuch an induration; for Solinus out of Plinie mentioneth, that in the Northerly Region, a yellow jelly is taken vp out of the ſea at two tides, which he cals Succinum, we Amber; ſo likewiſe, out of the Liguſticke deepe, a part of the Meridian Sea, a greeniſh ſtalk is gathered, which hardned in the ayre, becomes to be Corrall, either white, or red. Amber notwithſtanding is thought to drop out of trees, as appeares by Martials Epigram.
                     
                        Et latet, & lucet Phaethonide condita gutta,
                        Vt vidcatur apis nectare clauſa ſuo,
                        Dignum tantorum pretium tulit ille laborum,
                        Credibile eſt ipſam ſic voluiſſe mors.
                     
                     To behold a Bee incloſed in Electrum, is not ſo rare as that a boyes throat ſhould be cut with the fal of an Ice-ſicle, the which Epigram is excellent, the 18. li. 4 He cals it Phaethontis G
                              •
                           tta, becauſe of that fable which Ouid rehearſeth, concerning the Heliades or Phaetons ſiſters, metamorphoſed into thoſe trees, whoſe Gum is Amber, where flies alighting, are often times tralucently impriſoned.
                  
               
               
                  
                  ¶ The Epiſtle of Shores wife to king Edward the fourth.
                  
                  
                     AS the weake child, that from the mothers wing,
                     Is taught the Lutes delicious fingering,
                     At euery ſtrings ſoft touch, is mou'd with feare,
                     Noting his maiſters curious liſtning eare;
                     whoſe trembling hand, at euery ſtraine bewraies.
                     In what doubt he his new ſet leſſon plaies;
                     As this poore child, ſo ſit I to indite,
                     At euery word ſtill quaking as I write.
                     VVould I had led an humble ſhepheards life,
                     Nor knowne the name of Shores admired wife,
                     And liu'd with them in Count
                           •
                        ie fields that range,
                     Nor ſeene the golden Cheape, nor glittering Change,
                     To ſtand a Comet gaz'd at in the skies,
                     Subiect to all tongues, obiect to all eyes,
                     Oft haue I heard my beautie praiſd of many,
                     But neuer yet ſo much admir'd of any;
                     A Princes Eagle eye to find out that,
                     which vulgar ſights do ſeldome wonder at,
                     Makes me to thinke affection flatters ſight,
                     Or in the obiect ſome thing exquiſite.
                     To houſed beautie, ſeldome ſtoop's report,
                     Fame muſt attend on that which liues in Court.
                     VVhat Swan of great Apollos brood doth ſing
                     
                        
To vulgar loue in courtly Sonetting?
                     Or what immortall Poets ſugred pen,
                     Attends the glory of a Cittizen?
                     Oft haue I wondred what ſhould blinde your eye,
                     Or what ſo far ſeduced Maieſty,
                     That hauing choice of beauties ſo diuine,
                     Amongſt the moſt to chooſe this leaſt of mine?
                     More glorious ſunnes adorne faire Londons pride,
                     Then all rich Englands continent beſide;
                     Who takes in hand to make account of this,
                     May number Rumneys flowers, or Iſis fiſh;
                     Who doth frequent our Temples, walkes, and ſtreets
                     Noting the ſundry beauties that he meetes,
                     Thinkes not that Nature left the wide world poore
                     And made this place the Chequer of her ſtore:
                     As heauen and earth were lately falne at iarres,
                     And growne to vying wonders, dropping ſtarres.
                     That if but ſome one beautie ſhould incite,
                     Some ſacred Muſe, ſome rauiſht ſpirit to write,
                     Heere might he fetch that true Promethian fire,
                     As after ages ſhould his lines admire;
                     Gathering the honny from the choiſeſt flowers,
                     Scorning the wither'd weedes in Country bowers.
                     Heere in this garden (onely) ſprings the Roſe,
                     In euery common hedge the Bramble growes,
                     Nor are we ſo turnde Neapolitan,
                     That might incite ſome fowle-mouth Mantuan,
                     
                     To all the world to lay out our defects,
                     And haue iuſt cauſe to raile vpon our ſexe;
                     To prancke old wrinckles vp in new attire,
                     To alter Natures courſe, proue Time a lier,
                     
                        
Abuſing fate, and heauens iuſt doome reuerſe,
                     On beauties graue to ſet a crimſon hearſe,
                     With a deceitfull foile to lay a ground,
                     To make a glaſſe to ſeeme a Diamond.
                     Nor cannot without hazard of our name,
                     In faſhion follow the V
                           •
                        netian Dame,
                     Nor the fantaſticke French to imitate,
                     Attirde halfe Spaniſh, halfe Italionate;
                     Nor waſt, nor curle, body nor brow adorne,
                     That is in Florence, or in Genoa borne.
                     But with vaine boaſts how witleſſe fond am I,
                     
                     Thus to draw on mine owne indignitie?
                     And what though married when I was but yong,
                     Before I knew what did to loue belong,
                     Yet he which now's poſſeſſed of the roome,
                     Cropt beauties flower when it was in the bloome,
                     And goes away enriched with the ſtore,
                     Whilſt others gleane, where he hath reapt before;
                     And he dares ſweare that I am true and iuſt,
                     And ſhall I then deceiue his honeſt truſt?
                     Or what ſtrange hope ſhould make you to aſſaile,
                     Where ſtrongeſt battery neuer could preuailt?
                     Belike you thinke that I repulſt the reſt,
                     To leaue a King the conqueſt of my breaſt,
                     Or haue thus long preſerude my ſelfe from all,
                     A Monarch now ſhould glory in my fall.
                     Yet rather let me die the vildeſt death,
                     Then liue to draw that ſinne-polluted breath;
                     But our kinde hearts mens teares cannot abide,
                     And we leaſt angry oft, when moſt we chide;
                     Too well know men what our creation made vs,
                     
                        
And nature too well taught them to inuade vs.
                     They know but too well, how, what, when, and where,
                     To write, to ſpeake, to ſue, and to forbeare,
                     By ſignes, by ſighs, by motions, and by tears,
                     When vows ſhuld ſerue, when oths, when ſmiles, when praiers,
                     What one delight our humors moſt doth moue,
                     Onely in that you make vs nouriſh loue.
                     If any naturall blemiſh blot our face,
                     You doe proteſt it giues our beautie grace,
                     And what attire we moſt are vſde to weare,
                     That of all other excellentſt you ſweare.
                     And if vve vvalke, or ſit, or ſtand, or lie,
                     It muſt reſemble ſome one deitie,
                     And vvhat you knovve vve take delight to heare,
                     That are you euer ſounding in our eare;
                     And yet ſo ſhameleſſe vvhen you tempt vs thus,
                     To lay the fault on beautie, and on vs.
                     
                        Romes vvanton O
                              •
                           id did thoſe rules impart,
                     O that your nature ſhould be helpt vvith Arte.
                     Who vvould haue thoght, a King that cares to raigne,
                     Inforcde by loue, ſo Poet-like ſhould faine?
                     To ſay that Beauty, Times ſterne rage to ſhunne,
                     In my cheekes (Lillies) hid her from the Sunne;
                     And vvhen ſhe meant to triumph in her Maie,
                     Made that her Eaſt, and heere ſhe broke her day,
                     And ſwearſt that ſummer ſtill is in my ſight,
                     And but vvhere I am, all the vvorld is night;
                     As though the fairſt, ere ſince the vvorld beganne,
                     To me a Sunne-burnt baſe Egyptian;
                     But yet I knovve more than I meane to tell,
                     (O would to God you knew it not too well)
                     
                        
That women oft their moſt admirers raiſe,
                     Though publikely not flattering their owne praiſe.
                     Our churliſh husbands which our youth enioy'd,
                     Who with our dainties haue their ſtomackes cloyd,
                     Do lothe our ſmooth hand with their lips to feele,
                     T'enrich our fauours, by our beds to kneele;
                     At our command to waite, to ſend, to goe,
                     As euery howre our amorous ſeruants doe;
                     Which makes a ſtolne kiſle often we beſtow,
                     In earneſt of a greater good we owe;
                     When he all day torments vs with a frowne,
                     Yet ſports with Venus in a bed of dowlne;
                     Whoſe rude embracement, but too ill beſeemes
                     Her ſpan broad waſte, her white and dainty limmes,
                     And yet ſtill preaching abſtinence of meate,
                     When hee himſelfe of euery diſh will eate.
                     Blame you our husbands then, if they denie
                     Our publike walking, our looſe libertie;
                     If with exception ſtill they vs debar,
                     The circuite of the publike Theater;
                     To heare the ſmooth-tongude Poets Syren vaine,
                     Sporting in his laſciuious Comicke ſcene;
                     Or the young wanton wits, when they applawd
                     The ſlie perſwaſions of ſome ſubtile Bawd,
                     Or paſſionate Tragedian in his rage,
                     Acting a loue-ſicke paſſion on the ſtage:
                     When though abroad reſtraining vs to rome,
                     They very hardly keepe vs ſafe at home,
                     And oft are touch'd with feare and inward griefe,
                     Knowing rich prizes ſooneſt tempt a theeefe.
                     What ſports haue we whereon our mindes to ſet?
                     
                        
Our dogge, our Parrat, or our Marmuzet;
                     Or once a weeke to walke into the field,
                     Small is the pleaſure that thoſe toyes do yielde,
                     But to this griefe, a medicine you applie,
                     To cure reſtraint with that ſweete libertie;
                     And ſoueraignty, (O that bewitching thing)
                     Yet made more great, by promiſe of a King;
                     And more, that honour which doth moſt intice
                     The holieſt Nunne, and ſhe that's ne're ſo nice.
                     Thus ſtill we ſtriue, yet ouer-come at length,
                     For men want mercy, and poore women ſtrength:
                     Yet grant, that we could meaner men reſiſt,
                     when Kings once come, they conquer as they liſt.
                     Thou art the cauſe Shore pleaſeth not my ſight,
                     That his embraces giue me no delight;
                     Thou art the cauſe I to my ſelfe am ſtrange,
                     Thy comming is my full, thy ſet my change.
                     Long winter nights be minutes, if thou heere,
                     Short minutes if thou abſent be a yeere.
                     And thus by ſtrength thou art become my fate,
                     And mak'ſt me loue euen in the midſt of hate.
                  
                  
                     ¶ Notes of the Chronicle Hiſtorie.
                     
                        Would I had led an humble Sheep heards life,
                        Nor knowne the name of Shores admired wife.
                     
                     TWo or three Poemes written by ſundry men, haue magnified this womans beautie; whom that ornament of England and Londons more particular glory, Sir Thomas Moore very highly hath praiſed for her beautie, ſhe being aliue in his time, though being poore and aged. Her ſtature was meane, her haire of a

dark yellow, her face round & ful, her eie gray, delicate harmony being betwixt each parts proportion, & each proportions colour, her body fat, white, and ſmooth, her countenance cheerefull, and like to her condition. That picture which I haue ſeen of hers, was ſuch as ſhe roſe out of her bed in the morning, hauing nothing on but a rich mantle caſt vnder one arme ouer her ſhoulder, and ſitting in a chaire on which her naked arme did lie. What her fathers name was, or where ſhe was borne, is not certainly known; but Shore a yong man of right good perſon, wealth and behauiour, abandoned her bed after the king had made her his Concubine. Richard the third cauſing her to do open penance in Paules Church-yard, commaunded that no man ſhould relieue her, which the tyrant did not ſo much for his hatred to ſinne, but that by making his brothers life odious, he might couer his horrible treaſon the more cunningly.

                           May number Rumneys flowers, or Iſis fiſh.
                        
                     
                     Rumney is that famous Marſh in Kent, at whoſe ſide Rie a Hauen towne dooth ſtand. Hereof the excellent Engliſh Antiquarie Maiſter Camden, and Maiſter Lambert in his preambulation do
                           •
                         make mention. And Mariſhes are commonly called thoſe low grounds, which abut vpon the ſea, and from the Latine word are ſo denominated. Iſis is heere vſed for Thameſis by a Synecdochicall kind of ſpeach, or by a Poeticall libertie, in vſing one for another: for it is ſaid that Thameſis is compounded of Tame and Iſis, making when they are met, that renowmed water running by London, a Cittie much more renowmed then that water: which being plentifull of fiſh, is the cauſe alſo why all things elſe are plentifull therein. Moreouer, I am perſwaded, that there is no riuer in the world beholds more ſtately buildings on either ſide cleane throgh, then the Thames. Much is reported of the Graund Canale in Venice, for that the fronts on either ſide are ſo gorgeous.

                           That might intice ſome foule-mouth'd Mantu
                                    •
                                 n,
                           
                        
                     
                     
                        Mantuan a paſtorall Poet, in one of his Eglogs bitterly inueyeth agaynſt woman-kind, ſome of the which by way of an Appendex, might be heere inſerted, ſeeing the fantaſticke and inſolent humours of many of that ſexe deſerue much ſharper phiſicke were it not that they are growne wiſer then to amend, for

ſuch an idle Poets ſpeech as Mantuan, yea or for Euripides himſelfe, or Senecas inflexible Hippolitus.

                           The circuite of the publike Theater.
                        
                     
                     
                        Ouid, a moſt fit Author for ſo deſolute a Sectary, calls that place Chaſtities ſhipwracke, for though Shores wife wantonly pleade for liberty, which is the true humour of a Curtizan, yet much more is the praiſe of modeſty, then of ſuch libertie. Howbeit the Veſtall Nunnes had ſeates aſſigned them in the Roman Theater, whereby it ſhould appeare, it was counted no impeachment to modeſtie, though they offending therein, were buried quicke: a ſharpe law for them, who may ſay as Shores wife doth.

                           When though abroad restraining vs to rome,
                           They very hardly keepe vs ſafe at home.
                        
                     
                  
                  FINIS.
               
               
                  
                  To the right VVorſhipfull Sir Henry Goodere of Powleſworth Knight.
                  
                     SIR, this Poeme of mine, which I imparted to you, at my being with you at your lodging at London in Maie laſt, brought at length to perfection, (emboldned by your wonted fauours) I aduenture to make you Patron of. Thus Sir you ſee I haue aduentured to the world, with what like or diſlike, I know not, 
                           •
                        if it pleaſe, (which I much doubt of) I pray you then be partaker of that which I ſhall eſteeme not my leaſt good; if diſlike, it ſhall leſſen ſome part of my griefe; if it pleaſe you to allow but of my loue: howſoeuer, I pray you accept it as kindely as I offer it, which though without many proteſtations, yet (I aſſure you) with much deſire of your honour. Thus vntill ſuch time as I may in ſome more larger meaſure, make knowne my loue to the happy and generous familie of the Gooderes, (to which I confeſſe my ſelfe to be beholding to, for the moſt part of my education) I wiſh you all happineſſe.
                  
                  
                     Michaell Drayton.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     Mary the French Queene, to Charles Brandon, Duke of Suffolke.
                  
                     The Argument.
                     
                        Mary, the daughter of that renowned Prince King Henry the ſeauenth being very yong at her fathers death, after by her brother King Henry the eight, was giuen in marriage to Lewes King of France, being a man olde and decrepit: This faire and beautiful Lady, long afore had pla
                        
                           •••
                        her affection on Charles Brandon, Duke of Suffolke, a braue and couragious yong Gentleman, and an eſpeciall fauorite of the King her brother, and a man raiſed vp by him. King Lewes, the husband of this beautifull Queene, liued not long after he was married; and Charles Brandon hauing commiſsion from the King to bring her backe into England, but being delaied by ſome ſiniſter meanes, the French Queene writeth this Epiſtle, to haſten the Duke forward on his intended voyage to France.
                  
                  
                     SVch health from heauen my ſelfe may wiſh to mee.
                     Such health from France, Queene Mary ſends to thee.
                     
                        Brandon, how long mak'ſt thou excuſe to ſtay,
                     And know'ſt how ill we women brooke delay?
                     If one poore channell thus can part vs two,
                     Tell me (vnkinde) what would an Ocean do?
                     
                        
                        Leander had an Helleſpont to ſwim,
                     Yet this from Hero could not hinder him?
                     His barke (poore ſoule) his breaſt, his armes, his oares,
                     But thou a ſhip, to land thee on our ſhores;
                     And oppoſite to famous Kent doth lie,
                     The pleaſant fields of flowrie Picardie,
                     VVhere our faire Callice, walled in her ſands,
                     In kenning of the cliffie Douer ſtands.
                     Heere is no Beldame Nurſe to powt or lower,
                     VVhen wantoning, we reuell in my Tower;
                     Nor neede I top my Turret with a light,
                     To guide thee to me, as thou ſwim'ſt by night;
                     Comparde with me, wert thou but halfe ſo kinde,
                     Thy ſighs ſhould ſtuffe thy ſailes, though wanting wind;
                     But thy breaſt is becalmd, thy ſighs be ſlacke,
                     And mine too ſtiffe, and blow thy broad ſailes backe.
                     But thou wilt ſay, that I ſhould blame the flood,
                     Becauſe the winde ſo full againſt thee ſtood;
                     Nay, blame it not it did ſo roughly blow,
                     For it did chide thee, for thou, waſt ſo ſlow;
                     For it came not to keepe thee in the Bay,
                     But came from me to bid thee come away.
                     But that thou vainely lett'ſt occaſion ſlide,
                     Thou mightſt haue wafted hether with the tide.
                     If when thou com'ſt, I knit mine angry brow,
                     Blame me not Brandon, thou haſt broke thy vow;
                     Yet if I meant to frowne, I might be dombe,
                     For this may make thee ſtand in doubt to come:
                     Nay come ſweete Charles, haue care thy ſhip to guide,
                     Come my ſweete hart, in faith I will not chide.
                     VVhenas my brother and his louely Queene
                     
                        
In ſad attire for my depart were ſeene,
                     The vtmoſt date expired of my ſtay,
                     when I from Douer did depart away,
                     Thou know'ſt what woe I ſuffered for thy ſake,
                     How oft I fain'd of thee my leaue to take;
                     God and thou know'ſt with what a heauie hart
                     I tooke my farewell when I ſhould depart;
                     And being ſhip'd, gaue ſignall with my hand,
                     Vp to the Cliffe, where I did ſee thee ſtand,
                     Nor could reframe in all the peoples view,
                     But cried to thee, ſweete Charles adiew, adiew.
                     Looke how a little infant that hath loſt,
                     The things wherewith it was delighted moſt,
                     weary with ſeeking, to ſome corner creepes,
                     And there (poore ſoule) it ſits it downe and weepes;
                     And when the Nurſe would faine content the mind,
                     Yet ſtill it mournes for that it cannot find:
                     Thus in my carefull Cabin did I lie,
                     whenas the ſhip out of the roade did flie.
                     Think'ſt thou my loue was faithfull vnto thee,
                     vvhen yong Caſtile to England ſu'd for mee?
                     Be iudge thy ſelfe, if it were not of power,
                     vvhen I refus'd an Empire for my dovver.
                     To Englands Court, when once report did bring,
                     How thou in Fraunce didſt reuell with the king,
                     vvhen he in triumph of his victorie,
                     Vnder a rich imbrodered Canapie,
                     E
                           〈…〉
                        d proud Tournay, which did trembling ſtand,
                     To
                           •
                        eg for mercie at his conquering hand;
                     To heare of his enderements, how I ioy'd?
                     But ſee, this calme vvas ſuddenly deſtroy'd.
                     
                        
When Charles of Caſtile there to banquet came,
                     With him his ſiſter that ambitious dame,
                     
                        Sauoyes prowd dutcheſle, knowing how long ſhe,
                     By her 
                           •
                        oue ſought to win my loue from me;
                     Fearing my abſence might thy vowes acquite,
                     To change thy Mary for a Margarite,
                     
                     When in king Henries tent of cloth of gold,
                     She often did thee in her armes enfold;
                     vvhere you were feaſted more deliciouſly,
                     Than Cleopatra did Marke Anthony,
                     
                     Where ſports all day did entertaine your ſight,
                     And then in maskes you paſſde away the night;
                     But thou wilt ſay, tis proper vnto vs,
                     That we by nature all are iealous.
                     I muſt confeſſe tis oft found in our ſex,
                     But who not loue, not any thing ſuſpects:
                     True loue dooth looke with pale ſuſpitious eie,
                     Take away loue, if you take iealouſie.
                     
                        Turwin and Turney when King Henry tooke,
                     For this great change who then did euer looke?
                     When Maximilian to thoſe warres addreſt,
                     Ware Englands Croſle on his imperiall breaſt,
                     And in our armie let his Eagle flie,
                     That viewd our enſignes with a wondring eie.
                     Little thought I when Bullen firſt was wonne,
                     VVedlocke ſhould end, what angry warre begunn
                           •
                        
                     
                     From which I vow, I yet am free in thought,
                     But this alone by Wolſeis wit was wrought.
                     To his aduiſe the King gaue free conſent,
                     That will I, nill I, I muſt be content.
                     My virgins right, my ſtate could not aduance,
                     
                        
But now enriched with the dower of France;
                     Then, but poore Suffolkes Dutcheſſe had I beene,
                     Now, the great Dowager, the moſt Chriſtian Qucent.
                     But I perceiue where all thy griefe doth lie,
                     
                        Lewes of France had my virginitie;
                     He had indeede but ſhall I tell thee what,
                     Beleeue me Brandon he had ſcarcely that;
                     Good feeble King he could not do much harme,
                     But age muſt needes haue ſomething that is warme;
                     Small drops (God knowes) do quench that hea
                           •
                        leſſe fire,
                     When all the ſtrength is onely in deſire.
                     And I could tell (if modeſly might tell)
                     There's ſomewhat elſe that pleaſeth louers well,
                     To reſt his cheeke, vpon my ſofter cheeke,
                     Was all he had, and more he did not ſeeke.
                     So might the little babie clip the nurſe,
                     And it content, ſhe neuer awhit the worſe;
                     Then thinke this Brandon, if that makes thee frowne,
                     For may denhead, he on my head ſet a Crowne,
                     who would exchange a kingdome for a kiſſe?
                     Hard were the hart that would not yeeld him this;
                     And time yet halfe ſo ſwiftly doth not paſſe,
                     Not full fiue months yet elder than I was.
                     When thou to Fraunce conducted was by fame,
                     With many knights which from all countries came,
                     Inſtalled at Saint Dennis in my throne,
                     Where Lewes held my coronation;
                     Where the prowd Dolphin, for thy valour ſake,
                     Choſe thee at tilt his princely part to take;
                     Whenas the ſtaues vpon thy caske did light,
                     Grieued there with, I turnd away my ſight;
                     
                        
And ſpake alowd, when I my ſelfe forgot,
                     T'is my ſwee
                           •
                        e Charles my Brandon, hurt him not:
                     But when I fearde the King perceiued this,
                     Good ſeely man, I pleaſde him with a kiſſe;
                     And to extoll his valiant ſonne began.
                     That Europe neuer bred a brauer man;
                     And when (poore King) he ſimply praiſed thee,
                     Of all the reſt I ask'd which thou ſhouldſt bee?
                     Thus I with him diſſembled for thy ſake,
                     Open confeſſion now amends muſt make.
                     Whilſt this old King vpon a pallet lies,
                     And onely holds a combat with mine eyes;
                     Mine eyes from his, by thy ſight ſtolne away,
                     Which might too wel their Miſtres thoughts bewray.
                     But when I ſaw thy prowd vnconquered Launce,
                     To beare the prize from all the flower of France,
                     To ſee what pleaſure did my ſoule imbrace,
                     Might eaſily be diſcerned in my face.
                     Looke as the dew vpon a damaske Roſe,
                     How through that liquide pearle his bluſhing ſhowes,
                     And when the ſoſt aire breathes vpon his top,
                     From the ſweet leaues falles eaſily drop by drop;
                     Thus by my cheeke, diſtilling from mine eyes,
                     One teare for ioy, anothers roome ſupplies.
                     Before mine eie (like touch) thy ſhape did proue,
                     Mine eie condemn'd my too too partiall loue;
                     But ſince by others I the ſame doe 
                           •
                        rie,
                     My loue condemnes my too too partiall eie.
                     The pretious ſtone moſt beautifull and rare,
                     When with it ſelfe we onely doe compare,
                     Wee deeme all other of that kinde to be,
                     
                        
As excellent as that we onely ſee;
                     But when we iudge of that with others by,
                     Too credulous we doe condemne our eie,
                     Which then appeares more orient and more bright,
                     As from their dimneſſe borrowing great light.
                     
                        Alanſoon, a fine timbered man, and tall,
                     Yet wants the ſhape thou arte adornd withall;
                     
                        Vandon, good carriage, and a pleaſing eie,
                     Yet hath not Suffolkes princely maieſtie;
                     Couragious Burbon a ſweete manly face,
                     But yet he wants my Brandons courtly grace.
                     Prowd Longauile, our Court iudgde had no peere,
                     A man ſcarce made (was thoght) whilſt thou waſt here.
                     
                        County S. Paule, brau'ſt man at armes in Fraunce,
                     
                     Would yeeld himſelfe a Squire to beare thy launce;
                     
                        Galleas and Bounearme, matchleſſe for their might,
                     Vnder thy towring blade haue cowcht in fight.
                     If with our loue, my brother angry be,
                     Ile ſay to pleaſe him, I firſt fancied thee.
                     And but to frame my liking to his minde,
                     Neuer to thee had I beene halfe ſo kinde.
                     Worthy my loue the vulgar iudge no man,
                     Except a Yorkiſt, or Lancaſtrian:
                     Nor thinke that my affection ſhould be ſet,
                     But in the line of great Plantaginet.
                     
                     I paſſe not what the idle Commons ſay,
                     I pray thee Charles make haſte and come away.
                     To thee whats England, if I be not there?
                     Or what to me is Fraunce, if thou not here?
                     Thy abſence makes me angry for a while,
                     But at thy preſence I muſt needſly ſmile,
                     
                        
When laſt of me his leaue my Brandon tooke,
                     He ſware an oath, (and made my lips the booke)
                     He would make haſt, which now thou doo'ſt denie:
                     Thou art forſworne, ô wilfull periuricl
                     Sooner would I with greater ſinnes diſpence,
                     Then by entreatie pardon this offence.
                     But yet I thinke, if I ſhould come to ſhriue thee,
                     Great were the fault that I ſhould not forgiue thee;
                     Yet wert thou heere, I ſhould reuenged bee,
                     But it ſhould be with too much louing thee.
                     
                        I, that is all that thou ſhalt feare to taſt,
                     
                        I pray thee Brandon come, ſweete Charles make haſt.
                  
                  
                     Notes of the Chronicle-Hiſtorie.
                     
                        The vtmoſt date expired of my ſtay,
                        When I for Douer did depart away.
                     
                     KIng Henry the 8. with the Queene and Nobles, in the 6. yeare of his raigne, in the moneth of September, brought this Ladie to Douer, where ſhe tooke ſhipping for Fraunce.

                           Think'ſt thou my loue was faithfull vnto thee,
                           When yong Caſtile to England ſu'd for me.
                        
                     
                     It was agreed and concluded betwixt Henry the ſeuenth, and Philip King of Caſtile, ſonne to Maximilian the Emperour, that Charles eldeſt ſonne of the ſaid Philip, ſhould marry the Ladie Mary, daughter to King Henry, when they came to age: which agreement was afterward in the eight yeare of Henry the eight annihilated.
                     
                        When he in triumph of his victorie,
                        Vnder a rich embrodered Canapie,
                        Entred proud Turney which did trembling ſtand. &c.
                     
                     
                        
                        Henry the 8. after the long ſiege of Turnay, which was deliuered to him vpon compoſition, entred the Citie in triumph, vnder a Canapie of cloth of gold, borne by foure of the chiefe and moſt noble Cittizens; the king himſelfe mounted vpou a gallant courſer barbed with the Armes of England, France and Ireland.
                     
                        When Charles of Caſtile there to banquet came,
                        With him his ſiſter; that ambitious Dame.
                        
                           Sauoys prowd Dutches,
                     
                     The King being at Turnay, there came to him the Prince of Caſtile, and the Lady Margaret Dutches of Sanoy his ſiſter, to whom King Henry gaus great entertainment.

                           
                              Sauoys proud Dutches, knowing how long ſhee
                           By her loue ſought to win my loue from mee.
                        
                     
                     At this time there was ſpeech of a marriage to be concluded, betweene Charles Brandron then Lord L
                              •
                           ſte, and the Dutches of Sauoy, the Lord L
                              •
                           ſ
                              •
                           e being highly fauoured, and exceedingly beloued of the Dutches.

                           When in King Henries Tent of cloth of gold,
                        
                     
                     The King cauſed a rich Tent of cloth of gold to bee erected, where he feaſted the Prince of Caſtile, and the Dutches, and entertained them with ſumptuous maskes and banquets during their aboad.

                           When Maximillian to thoſe wars addreſt
                           Were Englands Croſſe on his imperiall breaſt.
                        
                     
                     
                        Maximillian the Emperour with all his ſouldiers, which ſerued vnder king Henry, wore the Croſſe of S. George with the Roſe on their breaſts.

                           And in our Armie let his Eagle flie.
                        
                     
                     The blacke Eagle is the badge imperiall, which here is vſed for the diſplaying of his enſigne or ſtandard.

                           And had his pay from Henries treaſurie.
                        
                     
                     
                        Henry the 8. at his wars in France, retained the Emperor & al his ſouldiers in wages, which ſerued vnder him during thoſe warres,

                           But this alone by Wolſeys wit was wrought,
                        
                     
                     
                        Thomas Wolſey, the kings Almoner, then Biſhop of Lincolne, a man of great authoritie with the king, and afterward Cardinall, was the chiefe cauſe that the Lady Mary was married to the old

French King, with whom the French had dealt vnder-hand to befriend him in that match.

                           When the proud Dolphin for thy valour ſake,
                           Choſe thee at tilt his Princely part to take.
                        
                     
                     
                        Frauncis Duke of Valoyes, and Dolphin of Fraunce, at the mariage of the Lady Mary, in honour thereof proclaimed a Iuſts, where he choſe the Duke of Suffolke, and the Marques Dorſet for his aydes, at all martiall exerciſes.

                           
                              Galeas, and Bounarme, matchleſſe for their might,
                        
                     
                     This Countie Galeas at the Iuſts ran a courſe with a ſpeare, which was at the head fiue inches ſquare on euery ſide, and at the But nine inches ſquare, wherby he ſhewed his wōdrous force and ſtrength. This Bounarme, a Gentleman of Fraunce, at the ſame time came into the field armed at all poyntes with tenne Speares about him: in each ſtirrop three, vnder each thigh one, one vnder his left arme, and one in his hand, and putting his horſe to the careere, neuer ſtopped him till he had broken euerie ſtaffe.

                           Hall.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk, to Mary the French Queene.
                  
                     BVt that thy faith commaunds me to forbeare,
                     The fault thine owne, if I vnpacient were;
                     Were my diſpatch ſuch as ſhould be my ſpeede,
                     I ſhould want time thy louing lines to reede,
                     Heere in the Court, Camelion-like I fare,
                     And as that creature feed, vpon the ayre,
                     All day I waite, and all the night I watch,
                     And ſtarue mine eares to heare of thy diſpatch;
                     If Douer were th'Abydos of my reſt,
                     
                        
Or pleaſant Cal
                           〈…〉
                        ce were my Maries Ceſt,
                     Thou ſhouldſt not need, faire Queene, to blame me ſo,
                     Did not the diſtance to deſire ſay no:
                     Noted ous night from trauell ſhould be free,
                     T
                           •
                        ll through the wanes, with ſwimming vnto thee,
                     A ſnowy path I made vnto thy Bay,
                     So bright as is that Nectar-ſtained way
                     The reſtleſſe ſunne by trauelling doth weare,
                     Paſſing his courſe to finiſh vp the yeare.
                     But Paris lockes my loue within the maine,
                     And London yet my Brandon doth detaine,
                     Of thy firme loue thou putſt me ſtill in minde,
                     But of my faith, not one word can I finde.
                     When Longauile to Mary was affide,
                     And thou by him waſt made King Lewes bride,
                     How oft I wiſht that thou a prize mightſt bee,
                     That I in armes might combate him for thee,
                     And in the madneſſe of my loue diſtraught,
                     A thouſand times his murther haue ſore thought,
                     But that th'all-ſeeing powers which ſit a
                           〈…〉
                        ,
                     Regard not mad mens oathes, nor faults in loue,
                     And haue confirmde it by the graunt of heauen,
                     That Louers ſinnes on earth ſhould be forgiuen;
                     For neuer than is halfe ſo much diſtreſt,
                     As he that loues to ſee his loue poſſeſt.
                     Comming to Richmond after thy depart
                     
                        (Richmond where firſt thou ſtolſt away my heart)
                     Me thought it looke not as it did of late,
                     But wanting thee 
                           •
                        or lo
                           •
                        ne and deſolate,
                     In whoſe faire walkes thou often haſt bin ſeene,
                     To ſport with Katharine, Henries beauteous Queene,
                     
                        
Aſt
                           •
                        niſhing ſad winter with thy ſight,
                     As for thy ſake, the day hath put backe night;
                     That the ſmal birds, as in the pleaſant ſpring,
                     Forgot themſelues, and haue begun to ſing:
                     So oft I go by Thames, ſo oft returne,
                     Me thinkes for thee the riuer yet doth mourne,
                     Who I haue ſeene to let her ſtreame at large,
                     Which like a hand-maid waited on thy Barge;
                     And if thou hapſt againſt the flood to row,
                     Which way it ebd, it preſently would flow,
                     Weeping in drops vpon thy laboring oares,
                     For ioy that it had got thee from the ſhoares.
                     The Swans with muſicke that the Roothers make,
                     Ruffing their plumes, come gliding on the lake,
                     As the fleete Dolphins by Arion
                              •
                           
                         ſtrings,
                     Were brought to land with their ſweete rauiſhings,
                     The flockes and h
                           •
                        irdes that paſture neere the flood,
                     To gaze vpon thee, haue forborne their food,
                     And ſate downe ſadly mourning by the brim,
                     That they by nature were not made to ſwim.
                     Whenas the Poſt to Englands royall Court,
                     Of thy hard paſſage brought the true report,
                     How in a ſtorme thy well rigd ſhips were toſt,
                     And thou thy ſelfe in danger to be loſt,
                     I knew twas Venus loath'd that aged bed,
                     Where beautie ſo ſhould be diſhonoured;
                     Or fearde the Sea-Nimphs haunting of the lake,
                     If thou but ſeene, their Goddeſſe ſhould forſake.
                     And whirling round her Doue-drawne Coach about,
                     To view the Nauie now in lanching out,
                     Her ayrie mantle looſely doth vnbinde,
                     
                        
Which fanning forth a rougher gale of winde,
                     Wafted thy ſailes with ſpeede vnto the land,
                     And runnes thy ſhip on Bullins harboring ſtrand.
                     How ſhould I ioy of thy arriue to heare?
                     But as a poore ſea-faring paſſenger,
                     After long trauaile, tempeſt-torne and wrack'd,
                     By ſome vnpitting Pirat that is ſack'd;
                     Heares the falſe robber that hath ſtolne his wealth,
                     Landed in ſome ſafe harbour, and in health,
                     Enriched with invaluable ſtore,
                     For which he long hath trauailed before.
                     When thou to Abuile heldſt th' appointed day,
                     We heard how Lewes met thee on the way;
                     Where thou in glittering Tiſſue ſtrangely dight,
                     Appear'dſt vnto him like the Queene of light,
                     In cloth of ſiluer all thy virgin traine,
                     In beautie ſumptuous as the Northerne waine;
                     And thou alone the formoſt glorious ſtar,
                     Which lead'ſt the teame of that great Wagoner.
                     What could thy thought be, but as I do thinke,
                     When thine eyes taſted what mine eares did drinke?
                     A cripple King laid bed-rid long before,
                     Yet at thy comming crept out of the doore,
                     T'was well he rid, he had no legs to goe,
                     But this thy beautie forc'd his body to;
                     For whom a cullice had more fitter beene,
                     Then in a golden bed a gallant Queene.
                     To vſe thy beautie as the miſer gold,
                     Which hoards it vp but onely to behold,
                     Still looking on it with a iealous eye,
                     Fearing to lend, yet louing vſurie;
                     
                        
O Sacriledge (if beautie be diuine)
                     The prophane hand ſhuld touch the halowed ſhrine.
                     To 
                           〈◊〉
                         ſickneſſe on the ſound mans diet;
                     To rob content yet ſtill to liue vnquiet;
                     And hauing all, to be of all beguild,
                     And yet ſtill longing like a little child.
                     When Marques Dorſet and the valiant Graies,
                     
                     To purchaſe fame firſt croſt the narrow Seas,
                     With all the Knights that my aſſociates went,
                     In honour of thy nuptiall turnament;
                     Thinkſt thou I ioy'd not in thy beauties pride,
                     When thou in triumph didſt through Paris ride?
                     Where all the ſtreetes as thou didſt pace along,
                     With Arras, Biſſe, and Tapeſtry were hung;
                     Ten thouſand gallant Cittizens prepar'd,
                     In rich at
                           •
                        ire thy princely ſelfe to guard;
                     Next them, three thouſand choiſe 
                           〈…〉
                        igious men,
                     In golden veſtments followed on agen;
                     And in proceſſion as they came along,
                     With Hymeneus ſang thy marriage ſong.
                     Then fiue great Dukes as did their places fall,
                     To each of theſe, a princely Cardinall,
                     Then thou on thy imperiall Chariot ſet,
                     Crown'd with a rich imperled Coronet,
                     Whilſt the Perſian dames, as thy traine paſt,
                     Their pretious incence in abundance caſt.
                     As Cinthia from the waue-embatteld ſhrowdes,
                     Opening the Weſt, comes ſtreaming through the clowds,
                     With ſhining troupes of ſiluer-treſſed ſtars,
                     Attending on her as her torch-bearers,
                     And all the leſſer lights about her throne,
                     
                        
With admiration ſtand as lookers on;
                     Whilſt ſhe alone in height of all her pride,
                     The Queene of light, along her ſpheare doth glide,
                     When on thy tilt my horſe like thunder came,
                     No other ſignall had I but thy name;
                     Thy voyce my trumpet, and my guide thine eyes,
                     And but thy beautie, I eſteemde no prize.
                     That large-
                           〈…〉
                        d Almaine of the Giants race,
                     Which bare ſtrength on his breaſt, feare in his face,
                     Whoſe ſinewde armes, with his ſteele-temperd blade,
                     Through plate and male ſuch open paſſage made,
                     Vpon whoſe might the Frenchmens glory lay,
                     And all the hope of that victorious day;
                     Thou ſawe'ſt thy Brandon beate him on his knee,
                     Offring his ſhield a conquerd ſpoile to thee.
                     But thou wilt ſay perhaps I vainely boaſt,
                     And tell thee thee which thou already know'ſt.
                     No ſacred Queene, my valour I denie,
                     It was thy beautie, not my chiualrie;
                     One of thy treſſed curles which falling downe,
                     As loth to be impriſoned in thy crowne,
                     
                        I ſaw the ſoft ayre ſportiuely to take it,
                     
                        To diuers ſhapes and ſundry formes to make it,
                     Now parting it to foure, to three, to twaine,
                     Now twiſting it, and then vntwiſt againe;
                     Then make the thrids to dally with thine eye,
                     A ſunny candle for a golden flie.
                     At length from thence one little teare it got,
                     Which falling downe as though a ſtar had ſhot,
                     My vp-turnde eye purſues it with my ſight,
                     The which againe redoubleth all my might.
                     
                        
Tis but in vaine of my deſcent to boaſt,
                     When heauens lampe ſhines, all other lights be loſt,
                     Faulcons gaze not, the Eagle ſitting by,
                     Whoſe broode ſuruaies the ſunne with open eye;
                     Elſe might my blood finde iſſue from his force,
                     In Boſworth plaine beate Richard from his horſe,
                     Whoſe puiſſant armes, great Richmond choſe to wield,
                     His glorious colours in that conquering field;
                     And with his ſword in his deere Soueraignes fight,
                     To his laſt breath, ſtood faſt in Henries right;
                     Then beauteous Empreſſe, thinke this ſafe delay,
                     Shall be the euen to a ioyfull day;
                     Fore-ſight doth ſtill on all aduantage lie,
                     Wiſe-men muſt giue place to neceſſitie;
                     To put backe ill, our good we muſt forbeare,
                     Better firſt feare, then after ſtill to feare.
                     T'were ouer-ſight in that at which we aime,
                     To put the hazard on an after-game;
                     With patience then let vs our hopes attend,
                     And till I come, receiue theſe lines I ſend.
                  
                  
                     ¶ Notes of the Chronicle-Hiſtorie.
                     
                        When Longauile to Mary was affied.
                     
                     THe Duke of Longauile, which was priſonet in England vpon the peace to be concluded betweene England and France, was deliuered, and married the Princeſſe Mary, for Lewes the French King his Maiſter.

                           How in a ſtorme thy well rigg'd ſhips were toſt,
                           And thou, &c.
                        
                     
                     As the Queene ſailed for France, a mighty ſtorme aroſe at ſea, ſo that the Nauy was in great danger, and was ſeuered, ſome driuen vpon the coaſt of Flanders, ſome on Brittaine: the ſhip

wherein the Queene was, was driuen into the hauen at Bullen with very great danger.

                           When thou to Abuile heldſt th'appointed day.
                        
                     
                     King Lewes met her by Abuile, neere to the Forreſt of Arders, and brought her into Abuile with great ſolemnitie.

                           Appear'dſt vnto him like the Queene of light.
                        
                     
                     Expreſſing the ſumptuous attire of the Queene & her train, attended by the chiefe of the Nobility of England, with 36. Ladies, al in cloth of ſiluer, their horſes trapped with crimſon veluet.

                           A cripple King laid bed-rid long before.
                        
                     
                     King Lewes was a man of great yeeres troubled much with the gowt, ſo that he had long time before little vſe of legs.

                           When Marques Dorſet, and the valiant Graies,
                           
                        
                     
                     The Duke of Suffolke when the proclamation came into England, of iuſts to be holden in France at Paris, he for the Queenes ſake his Miſtris, obtained of the King to go thither: with whom went the Marqueſſe Dorſet and his foure brothers, the Lord Clinton, Sir Edward Neuell, Sir Giles Chappell, Tho: Cheyney, which went all ouer with the Duke as his aſſiſtants.

                           When thou in triumph didſt through Paris ride.
                        
                     
                     A true deſcription of the Queenes entring into Paris, after her coronation performed at S. Dennis.

                           Then fiue great Dukes as did their places fall.
                        
                     
                     The Dukes of Alanſoon, Burbon, Vandome, Longauile, Suffolke, with fiue Cardinalls.

                           That large-limd Almaine of the Giants race.
                        
                     
                     
                        Francis Valoys, the Dolphin of France, enuying the glory that the Engliſhmen had obtained at the Tilt, brought in an Almaine ſecretly, a man thought almoſt of incomparable ſtrength, which encountred Charles Brandon at Barriers, but the Duke grapling with him, ſo beate him about the head with the pumell of his ſword, that the blood came out of the ſight of his Caske.

                           Elſe might my blood finde iſſue from his force.
                           In Boſworth, &c.
                        
                     
                     Sir William Brandon Standard-bearer to the Earle of Richmond, (after Henry the 7.) at Boſworth field, a braue and gallant Gentleman, who was ſlaine by Richard there; this was father to this Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolke.
                  
                  FINIS.
               
               
                  
                  To my moſt deere friend Maiſter Henry Lucas, ſonne to Edward Lucas Eſquire.
                  
                     SIR, to none haue I beene more beholding, then to your kinde parents, for (I muſt truly confeſſe) aboue the meaſure of my deſerts: Many there be in England of whom for ſome particularity I might iuſtly chalenge greater merit had I not beene borne in ſo euill an howre, as to be poiſoned with that gaule of ingratitude: to your ſelfe am I ingaged for many more curteſies then I imagined could euer haue beene found in one of ſo few yeeres: nothing doe I more deſire, then that thoſe hopes of your toward and vertuous youth, may proue ſo pure in the fruit, as they are faire in the bloome: long may you liue to their comfort that loue you moſt, and may I euer wiſh you the encreaſe of all good fortunes.
                  
                  
                     Yours euer,
Mich: Drayton.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     Henry Howard Earle of Surrey to Geraldine
                  
                  
                     The Argument.
                     
                        Henry Howard, that true noble Earle of Surrey, and excellent Poet, falling in loue with Geraldine, deſcended of the noble family of the Fitzgeralds of Ireland, a faire and modeſt Lady, and one of the honourable maides to Queene Katherine Dowager: eternizeth her praiſes in many excellent Poemes, of rare and ſundry inuentions: and after ſome few yeares being determined to ſee that famous Italy, the ſource and Helicon of all excellent Arts; firſt viſiteth that renowned Florence, from whence the Geralds challenge their deſcent, from the antient family of the Geraldi; there in honour of his Miſtreſſe be aduanceth her picture, and challengeth to maintaine her beautie by deedes of Armes, againſt all that durſt appeare in the liſts; where after the proofe of his braue and incomparable valour, whoſe arme crowned her beauty with eternall memory, he writeth this Epistle to his deereſt Miſtreſſe.
                  
                  
                     FRom learned Florence (long time rich in fame)
                     From whence thy race, thy noble grandſires came,
                     To famous England, the kinde nurſe of mine,
                     Thy Surrey ſends to heauenly Geraldine;
                     
                     Yet let not Thuſcan thinke I do her vvrong,
                     
                        
That I from thence write in my natiue tongue,
                     That in theſe harſh-tun'd cadences I ſing,
                     Sitting ſo neare the Muſes ſacred ſpring,
                     But rather thinke her ſelfe adorn'd thereby,
                     That England reades the praiſe of Italie.
                     Though to the Thuſcan, I the ſmoothnes grant,
                     Our dialect no Maieſtie doth want,
                     To ſet thy prayſes in as hie a key,
                     As Fraunce, or Spaine, or Germanie, or they.
                     That day I quit the Fore-land of faire Kent,
                     And that my ſhip her courſe for Flanders bent;
                     Yet thinke I with how many a heauie looke,
                     My leaue of England and of thee I tooke,
                     And did intreat the tide (if it might be)
                     But to conuey me one ſigh backe to thee,
                     Vp to the decke a billow lightly skips,
                     Taking my ſigh, and downe againe it ſlips;
                     Into the gulfe it ſelfe, it headlong throwes,
                     And as a poſt to England-ward it goes;
                     As I ſit wondring how the rough ſeas ſtird,
                     I might farre off perceiue a little bird,
                     Which as ſhe faine from ſhore to ſhore would flie
                     Hath loſt her ſelfe in the broad vaſtie skie,
                     Her feeble wing beginning to deceiue her,
                     The ſ
                           •
                        a
                           •
                         of life ſtill gaping to bereaue her;
                     Vnto the ſhip ſhe makes which ſhe diſcouers,
                     And there (poore foole) a while for refuge houers,
                     And when at length her flagging pinion failes
                     Panting ſhe hangs vpon the ratling ſailes,
                     And being forc'd to looſe her hold with paine,
                     Yet beaten off, ſhe ſtraight lights on againe,
                     
                        
And toſſt with flaws, with ſtorms, with wind, with wether,
                     Yet ſtill departing thence, ſtil turneth thether,
                     Now with the poope, now with the prow doth beare,
                     Now on this ſide, now that, now here, now there,
                     Me thinkes theſe ſtormes ſhould be my ſad depart,
                     The ſeely helpleſſe bird is my poore bart,
                     The ſhip, to which for ſuccour it repaires,
                     That is your ſelfe (regardleſſe of my cares)
                     Of euery ſurge doth fall, or waue doth riſe,
                     To ſome one thing I ſit and moralize.
                     When for thy loue I left the Belgicke ſhore,
                     Diuine Eraſmus, and our famous Moore,
                     
                     Whoſe happy preſence gaue me ſuch delight;
                     As made a minute of a winters night;
                     With whom a while I ſtaide at Roterdame;
                     
                     Now ſo renowned by Eraſmus name.
                     Yet euery houre did ſeeme a world of time;
                     Till I had ſeene that ſoule-reuiuing clime,
                     And thought the foggy Netherlands vnfit,
                     A watry ſoyle to clogge a fiery wit;
                     And as that wealthy Germany I paſt,
                     Comming vnto the Emperours court at laſt,
                     Great learnd Agrippa, ſo profound in Art,
                     Who the infernall ſecrets doth impart,
                     When of thy health I did deſire to know,
                     Me in a glaſſe my Geraldine did ſhew,
                     Sicke in thy bed, and for thou couldſt not ſleepe,
                     By a waxe tap
                           •
                        r ſet thy light to keepe;
                     I doe remember thou didſt reade that Ode,
                     Sent backe whilſt I in Thanet made abode,
                     Where as thou cam'ſt vnto the word of loue,
                     
                        
Euen in thine eies I ſawe how paſſion ſtroue;
                     That ſnowy lawne which couered thy bed,
                     Me thought lookt white, to ſee thy cheeke ſo red,
                     Thy roſie cheeke oft changing in my ſight,
                     Yet ſtill was red, to ſee the lawne ſo white;
                     The little Taper which ſhould giue thee light,
                     Me thought waxt dim, to ſee thy eie ſo bright;
                     Thine eie againe ſupplies the Tapers turne,
                     And with his beames doth make the taper burne,
                     The ſhrugging ayre about thy Temple hurles,
                     And wraps thy breath in little clowded curles,
                     And as it doth aſcend it ſtrait doth ceaze it,
                     And as it ſinks, it preſently doth raiſe it;
                     Canſt thou by ſicknes baniſh beautie ſo?
                     Which if put from thee, knowes not where to goe,
                     To make her ſhift, and for her ſuccour ſeeke,
                     To euery riueld face, each bankrupt cheeke,
                     If health preſeru'd, thou beautie ſtill dooſt cheriſh,
                     If that neglected, beauty ſoone doth periſh.
                     Care drawes on care, woe comforts woe againe,
                     Sorrow breeds ſorrow, one griefe brings forth twaine,
                     If liue or die, as thou dooſt, ſo doe I,
                     If liue, I liue, and if thou die, I die,
                     One hart, one loue, one ioy, one griefe, one troth,
                     One good, one ill, one life, one death to both,
                     If Howards blood, thou holdſt as but too vile,
                     Or not eſteemſt of Norſfolkes Princely ſtile,
                     If Scotlands coate no marke of fame can lend,
                     That Lion placde in our bright ſiluer bend,
                     Which as a trophie beautifies our ſhield,
                     Since Scottiſh bloud diſcoloured Floden field;
                     
                        
When the prowd Cheuiot our braue Enſigne beare,
                     As a rich iewell in a Ladies haire,
                     And did faire Bramſtons neighbouring valies choke,
                     With clouds of Canons, fire diſgorged ſmoke,
                     Or Surreys Earledom inſufficient be,
                     And not a dower ſo well contenting thee;
                     Yet am I one of great Apollos heires,
                     The ſacred Muſes chalenge me for theirs.
                     By Princes, my immortall lines are ſung,
                     My flowing verſes grac'd with euery tung;
                     The little children when they learne to go,
                     By painfull mothers daded to and fro,
                     Are taught by ſ
                           •
                        gred numbers to 
                           ••
                        hea
                           •
                        ſ
                           •
                        ,
                     And haue their ſweet-lips ſeaſon'd with my verſe;
                     When heauen would ſtriue to do the beſt it can,
                     And put an Angels ſpirit into a man;
                     The vtmoſt power in that great worke doth ſpend,
                     When to the world a Poet it doth intend,
                     That little difference twixt the Gods and vs,
                     (By them confirm'd) diſtinguiſh'd onely thus;
                     Whom they in birth, ordaine to happie dayes,
                     The Gods commit their glorie to our prayſe,
                     To eternall life when they diſſolue their breath,
                     We likewiſe ſhare a ſecond power by death:
                     When time ſhall turne thoſe Amber colours to gray,
                     My verſe againe ſhall guild and make them gay,
                     And tricke them vp in knotted curles anew,
                     And in the Autumne giue a Summers hew;
                     That ſacred power, that in my Inke remaines,
                     Shall put freſh blood into thy wither'd vaines,
                     And on thy red decay'd, thy whitenes dead,
                     
                        
Shall ſet a white, more white, a red, more red;
                     When thy dim ſight thy glaſſe cannot deſcry.
                     Thy crazed mirrour cannot ſee thine eie;
                     My verſe to tell, what eie, what mirrour was,
                     Glaſse to thine eie, an eie vnto thy glaſſe,
                     Where both thy mirrour and thine eie ſhall ſee,
                     What once thou ſawſt, in that, that ſaw in thee,
                     And to them both ſhall tell the ſimple trueth,
                     What that in pureneſſe was, vvhat thou in youth.
                     If Florence once ſhould looſe her olde renovvne,
                     As famous Athens, novv a fiſher tovvne,
                     My lines for thee a Florence ſhall erect,
                     Which great Apollo euer ſhall protect,
                     And with the numbers from my penne that falls,
                     Bring marble mines to re-erect thoſe walls;
                     Nor beauteous Stanhope, whom all tongues report,
                     To be the glory of the Engliſh Court,
                     Shall by our nation be ſo much admirde,
                     If euer Surrey truely were inſpirde.
                     And famous Wyat, who in numbers ſings,
                     To that inchanting Thracian harpers ſtrings,
                     To whome Phoebus (the Poets god) did drinke,
                     A bowle of Nectar filld vnto the brinke,
                     And ſweet-tongd Bryan, (whom the Muſes kept,
                     And in his Cradle rockt him whilſt he ſlept,)
                     In ſacred verſes (ſo diuinely pend)
                     Vpon thy praiſes euer ſhall attend.
                     What time I came vnto this famous towne,
                     And made the cauſe of my arriuall knovvne,
                     Great Medices a liſt (for triumphs) built,
                     Within the vvhich, vpon a 
                           •
                        ree of gilt,
                     
                        
With thouſand ſundry rare deuiſes ſet,)
                     I did erect thy louely counterfet,
                     To anſwer thoſe Italian dames deſire,
                     Which daily came thy beautie to admire.
                     By which my lion in his gaping jawes
                     Holdeth my launce, and in his dreadfull pawes,
                     Reacheth my gauntlet vnto him that dare
                     A beauty with my Geraldines compare.
                     Which when each manly valiant arme aſſaies,
                     After ſo many braue triumphant daies,
                     The glorious prize vpon my launce I bare,
                     By Heralds voyce proclaimde to be thy ſhare;
                     The ſhiuered ſtaues here for thy beautie broke,
                     with fierce encounters paſt at euery ſhocke,
                     when ſtormie courſes anſwered cuffe for cuffe,
                     Denting prowde Beuers with the counter-buffe,
                     Vpon an altar burnt with holy flame,
                     And ſacrifi
                           •
                        de as enſence to thy fame.
                     Where, as the Phoenix from her ſpiced f
                           •
                        me,
                     Renues herſelfe in that ſhe doth conſume;
                     So from theſe ſacred aſhes liue we both,
                     Euen as that one Arabian wonder dooth.
                     When to my chamber I my ſelfe retire,
                     Burnt with the ſparkes that kindled all this fire,
                     Thinking of England which my hope containes,
                     The happy Ile where Geraldine remaines,
                     
                        Of Hunſdon, where thoſe ſweete celeſtiall eyne,
                     At firſt did pierce this tender breaſt of mine;
                     
                        Of Hampton Court, and Windſore, where abound
                     All pleaſures that in Paradiſe werefound;
                     Neere that faire Caſtle is alittle groue,
                     
                        
With hanging rockes all couered from aboue,
                     Which on the bancke of louely Thames doth ſtand,
                     Clipt by the water from the other land,
                     vvhoſe buſhy top doth bid the Sun for beare,
                     And checkes thoſe provvde beames that would enter there,
                     vvhoſe leaues ſtill muttring as the ayre doth breathe;
                     vvith the ſvveet bubling of the ſtreame beneathe,
                     Doth rocke the ſenſes (whilſt the ſmall birds ſing,)
                     Lulled aſleepe vvith gentle murmuring,
                     vvhere light-ſoote Fairies ſport at priſon baſe,
                     No doubt there is ſome povver frequents the place,
                     There the ſoft poplar and ſmoothe beech doe beare,
                     Our names together carued euery where,
                     And Gordian knots doe curiouſly entwine,
                     The names of Henry, and of Geraldine.
                     
                     Olet this Groue in happy times to come,
                     Be calld, The Louers bleſſde Elizium,
                     
                     Whither my Miſt
                           •
                        is vvonted to reſort,
                     In ſummers heate in pleaſant ſhades to ſport,
                     A thouſand ſundry names I haue it giuen,
                     And calld it Wonder-hider, Couer-heauen,
                     The roofe vvhere Beautie her rich Court doth keepe,
                     Vnder vvhoſe compaſſe all the Starres doe ſleepe.
                     There is one tree vvhich now I call to minde,
                     Doth beare theſe verſes carued in his rinde:
                     
                        When Geraldine ſhall ſit in thy faire ſhade,
                     
                     
                        Fanne her ſweete treſſes with perfumed aire,
                     
                     
                        Let thy large bonghes a Canopie be made,
                     
                     
                        To keepe the Sunne from gazing on my faire,
                     
                     
                        And when thy ſpredding braunched armes be ſuncke,
                     
                     
                        And thou no ſap nor pith ſhalt more retaine,
                     
                     
                        
                        Eu'n from the duſt of thy vnweldy Truncke,
                     
                     
                        I will renue thee Phoenix like againe,
                     
                     
                        And from thy drie decayed roote will bring,
                     
                     
                        Anew-borne Stem, another Aeſons ſpring.
                     
                     I finde no cauſe, nor iudge I reaſon why
                     My country ſhould giue place to Lombardy,
                     
                     As goodly flowers on Thamiſis doe growe,
                     As beautifie the bankes of wanton Po;
                     
                     As many Nymphs as haunt rich Arnus ſtrand,
                     By ſiluer Sabrine tripping hand in hand,
                     Our ſhades as ſweete, though not to vs ſo deere,
                     Becauſe the ſunne hath greater power heere.
                     This diſtant place but giues me greater woe,
                     Farre off, my ſighs the farther haue to goe,
                     Ah abſence! why thus ſhouldſt thou ſeeme ſo long?
                     Or wherefore ſhouldſt thou offer Time ſuch wrong?
                     Summer ſo ſoone, ſhould ſteale on winters colde,
                     Or winters blaſts, ſo ſoone make ſummer olde?
                     Loue did vs both with one ſelfe arrow ſtrike,
                     Our wounds both one, our cure ſhould be the like,
                     Except thou haſt found out ſome meane by art,
                     Some powrefull medicine to withdraw the darte,
                     But mine is fixt, and abſents phyſicke proued,
                     It ſtickes too faſt, it cannot be remoued.
                     Adiew, adew, from Florence when I goe,
                     By my next letters Geraldine ſhall know,
                     Which if good fortune ſhall my courſe direct,
                     From Venice by ſome meſſenger exſpect,
                     Till when, I leaue thee to thy hearts deſire,
                     By him that liues thy vertues to admire.
                  
                  
                     
                     ¶ Notes of the Chronicle Hiſtorie.
                     
                        From learned Florence, long time rich in fame.
                     
                     FLorence a Citty of Thuſcan, ſtanding vpon the Riuer Arnus, (celebrated by Dante Petrarch, and other the moſt noble wits of Italie) was the originall of the familie, out of which this Geral line did ſpring, as Ireland the place of her birth, which is intimated by theſe verſes of the Earle of Surrey.
                     
                        From Thuſcan came my Ladies worthy race,
                        Faire Florence was ſometime her ancient ſeate,
                        The Weſterne Ile, whoſe pleaſant ſhore doth face
                        Wilde Cambers cliffs, did giue her liuely heate.
                     
                     
                        Great learn'd Agrippa, ſo profound in Art.
                     
                     
                        Cornelius Agrippa, a man in his time ſo famous for Magicke (which the bookes publiſhed by him, concerning that argument, do partly proue) as in this place needes no further remembrance. Howbeit, as thoſe abſtruſe and gloomy Arts are but illuſions: ſo in the honour of ſo rare a Gentleman as this Earle, (and therewithall ſo noble a Poet) (a quality, by which his other titles receiue their greateſt luſtre) inuention may make ſomewhat more bold with Agrippa aboue the barren truth.

                           That Lion ſet in our bright ſiluer bend.
                        
                     
                     The blazon of the Howards honorable armour, was Gules betweene ſix croſſelets Fitches abend Argent, to which afterwards was added by atchieuement, In the Canton point of the bend an eſcutcheon, or within the Scottiſh treſſure, a Demi-lion rampant Gules, &c. as Maiſter Camden now Clerenceaulx from authoritie noteth. Neuer ſhall time nor bitter enuie be able to obſcure the brightneſſe of ſo great a victory as that, for which this addition was obtained. The Hiſtorian of Scotland George Bucchanan reporteth, that the Earle of Surrey gaue for his badge a Siluer Lion, (which from antiquitie belonged to that name) tearing in peeces A Lion proſtrate Gules; and withall, that this which he termes inſolencie, was puniſhed in him and his poſteritie, as if it were fatall to the Conquerour,

to doe his Soueraigne ſuch loyall ſeruice as a thouſand ſuch ſeuere cenſurers were neuer able to performe.

                           Since Scottiſh blood diſcoloured Floden field.
                        
                     
                     The batttle was fought at Bramſtone neere Floden hill, being a part of the Cheuiot, a mountaine that exceedeth all the mountaines in the North of England for bigneſſe, in which the wilfull periurie of Iames the fifth was puniſhed from heauen by the Earle of Surrey, being left by King Henry the eight (then in France before Turwin) for the defence of his Realme.

                           Nor beauteous Stanhope, whom all tongues report
                           To be the glory, &c.
                        
                     
                     Of the beautie of that Lady, he himſelfe teſtifies in an Elegie which he writ of her, refuſing to daunce with him, which hee ſeemeth to alegorize vnder a Lion and a Wolfe. And of himſelfe he ſaith:

                           A Lion ſaw I late, as white as any ſnow,
                        
                     
                     And of her.
                     
                        I might perceiue a Wolfe as white as Whales bone,
                        A fairer beaſt, of freſher hue, beheld I neuer none,
                        But that her lookes were coy, and froward was her grace.
                     
                     
                        And famous Wyat who in numbers ſings.
                     
                     Sir Thomas Wyat the elder, a moſt excellent Poet, as his Poems extant doe witneſſe, beſides certaine Encomions written by the Earle of Surrey vppon ſome of Dauids Pſalmes, by him tranſlated.

                           What holy graue, what worthy Sepulchre,
                           To Wyats Pſalmes ſhall Chriſtians purchaſe then.
                        
                     
                     And afterward vpon his death the ſaid Earle writeth thus:
                     
                        What vertues rare were tempred in thy breaſt?
                        Honour that England ſuch a iewell bred,
                        And kiſſe the ground whereas thy corpes did reſt.
                     
                     
                        At Honſdon, where thoſe ſweete cel-ſtiall eyne,
                     
                     It is manifeſt by a Sonnet written by this noble Earle, that the firſt time he beheld his Lady, was at Hunſdon.

                           
                              Hunſdon did firſt preſent her to mine eyne.
                        
                     
                     Which Sonnet being altogether a deſcription of his loue, I do alleadge in diuers places of this gloſſe, as proofes of what I write.

                           
                           Of Hampton Court and Windſor, where abound
                           All pleaſures, &c.
                        
                     
                     That he enioyed the preſence of his faire and vertuous Miſtris, in thoſe two places, by reaſon of Queene Katherines vſuall aboad there, (on whom this Lady Geraldine was attending) I proue by theſe verſes of his:

                           
                              Hampton me tanght to wiſh her firſt for mine,
                           
                              Windſor alas doth chaſe me from her ſight.
                        
                     
                     And in another Sonnet following:

                           When Winſor walls ſuſtainde my wearied arme,
                           My hand my chin, to eaſe my reſtleſſe head.
                        
                     
                     And that his delight might draw him to compare Winſor to Paradice, an Elegy may proue, where he remembreth his paſſed pleaſures in that place.

                           With a Kings ſonne my childiſh yeeres I paſs'd,
                           In greater feaſt then Priams ſonne of Troy.
                        
                     
                     And againe in the ſame Elegie;
                     
                        Thoſe large greene Courts, where we were wont to roue
                        With eyes caſt vp vnto the maidens Tower,
                        With eaſie ſighs, ſuch as men draw in loue.
                     
                     And againe in the ſame:

                           The ſtately ſeates, the Ladies bright of hue,
                           The dances ſhort, long tales of ſweete delight.
                        
                     
                     And for the pleaſantneſſe of the place, theſe verſes of his may teſtifie in the ſame Elegie before recited.

                           The ſecret groues which we haue made reſound,
                           With ſiluer drops the meads yet ſpread for ruth.
                        
                     
                     
                        As goodly flowers from Thamiſis doe growe, &c.
                     
                     I had thought in this place not to haue ſpoken of Thames, being ſo oft remembred by mee before, in ſundry other places on this occaſion: but thinking of that excellent Epigram, which, as I iudge, either to bee done by the ſaid Earle, or Sir Frauncis Brian: for the worthineſſe thereof I will heere inſert, which, as it ſeemes to me, was compiled at the Authors being in Spaine.
                     
                        
                        Tagus farewell, which Weſtward with thy ſtreames,
                        Turn'ſt vp the graines of gold already tride,
                        For I withſpur and ſaile go ſeeke the Thames,
                        Againſt the Sunne that ſhewes her wealthy pride;
                        And to the towne that Brutus ſought by dreames,
                        Like bended Moone that leanes her luſty ſide,
                        To ſeeke my Country now, for whom I liue,
                        O mighty Ioue, for this the windes me giue.
                     
                  
                  FINIS.
               
               
                  
                     Geraldine to Henry Howard Earle of Surrey.
                  
                     SVch greeting as the noble Surrey ſends,
                     The ſame to thee thy Geraldine commends;
                     A maidens thoughts do checke my trembling hand,
                     On other termes, or complements to ſtand,
                     Which (might my ſpeech be as my heart affords)
                     Should come attired in farre richer vvords;
                     But all is one, my faith as firme ſhall proue,
                     As hers that makes the greateſt ſhevv of loue.
                     In Cupids Schoole I neuer read thoſe bookes.
                     vvhoſe lectures oftvve practiſe in our lookes,
                     Nor euer did ſuſpitions riuall eye,
                     Yet lie in vvaite my fauours to eſpie,
                     My virgine thoughts are innocent and meeke,
                     As the chaſte bluſhes ſitting on my cheeke:
                     
                        
As in a feuer I do ſhiuer yet,
                     Since firſt my pen was to the paper ſet.
                     If I do erre, you know my ſexe is weake,
                     Feare proues a fault, where maids are forc'd to ſpeake;
                     Do I not ill? ah ſooth me not heerein,
                     O, if I doe, reproue me of my ſin,
                     Chide me infaith, or if my fault you hide,
                     My tongue will teach my ſelfe, my ſelfe to chide.
                     Nay noble Surrey, blot it if thou wilt,
                     Then too much boldneſſe ſhould returne my guilt;
                     For that ſhould be euen from our ſelues concealde,
                     Which is diſcloſde, if to our thoughts reuealde,
                     For the leaſt motion, more the ſmalleſt breath,
                     That may impeach our modeſtie, is death;
                     The page that brought thy letters to my hand,
                     (Me thinks) ſhould meruaile at my ſtrange demand,
                     For till he bluſh'd I did not yet eſpie,
                     The nakedneſſe of my immodeſtie,
                     Which in my face he greater might haue ſeene,
                     But that my ſanne I quickly put betweene;
                     Yet ſcarcely that my inward guilt could hide,
                     Feare ſeeing all, feares it of all eſpide.
                     Like to a taper lately burning bright,
                     Now wanting matter to maintaine his light.
                     The blaze aſcending forced by the ſmoke,
                     Liuing by that which ſeekes the ſame to choke;
                     The flame ſtill hanging in the ayre, doth burne,
                     Vntill drawne downe, it backe againe returne.
                     Then cleere, then dim, then ſpreadeth, & then cloſeth,
                     Now getteth ſtrength, and now his brightneſſe loſeth.
                     As well the beſt diſcerning eye may doubt,
                     
                        
Whether it yet be in, or whether out:
                     Thus in my cheeke my diuers paſſions ſhew'd,
                     Now aſhy pale, and now againe it glow'd;
                     If in your verſe there be a power to moue,
                     It's you alone, who are the cauſe I loue,
                     It's you bewitch my boſome by mine eare,
                     Vnto that end I did not place you there.
                     Ayres to aſſwage the bloody ſouldiers minde,
                     Poore women, we are naturally kinde.
                     Perhaps you'le thinke that I theſe termes enforce,
                     For that in Court this kindeneſſe is of courſe,
                     Or that it is that honny-ſteeped gall,
                     We oft are ſaid to bait our loues withall,
                     That in one eye we carry ſtrong deſire,
                     The other drops which quickly quench the fire;
                     Ah, what ſo falſe can Enuy ſpeake of vs,
                     But ſhall finde ſome too vainely credulous?
                     
                        I do not ſo, and to adde proofe thereto,
                     
                        I loue in faith, in faith ſweete Lord I do;
                     Nor let the enuie of enuenom'd tongues,
                     Which ſtill is grounded on poore Ladies wrongs,
                     Thy noble breaſt diaſterly poſſeſſe,
                     By any doubt to make my loue the leſſe:
                     My houſe from Florence I do not pretend,
                     Nor from Giraldi claime I to deſcend,
                     Nor hold thoſe honours inſufficient are,
                     That I receiue from Deſmond or Kyldare;
                     
                     Nor adde I greater worth vnto my blood,
                     Than Iriſh milke to giue me infant food,
                     Nor better ayre will euer boaſt to breathe,
                     Then that of Lemſter, Mounſter, or of Meathe,
                     
                     
                        
Nor craue I other forraine farre alies,
                     Then Windſor or Fitz-geralds families.
                     It is enough to leaue vnto my heires,
                     If they will but acknowledge me for theires.
                     To what place euer did the Court remoue,
                     But that the howſe giues matter to my loue,
                     At Windſor ſtill I ſee thee ſit and walke,
                     There mount thy Courſer, there deuiſe, there talke:
                     The roabes, the garter, and the ſtate of Kings,
                     Into my thoughts thy hoped greatnes brings;
                     Non ſuch, the name imports (me thinks) ſo much,
                     None ſuch as thou, nor as my Lord, none ſuch,
                     In Hamptons great magnificence I finde,
                     The liuely image of thy princely minde,
                     Faire Richmonds Towers like goodly pillars ſtand,
                     Rearde by the power of thy victorious hand;
                     White-halls triumphing galleries are yet
                     Adornde with rich deuiſes of thy wit,
                     In Greenewich yet as in a glaſſe I view,
                     Where laſt thou badſt thy Geraldine adiew,
                     VVith euery little gentle breath that blowes,
                     How are my thoughts confuſde with ioyes & woes,
                     As through a gate, ſo through my longing eares,
                     Paſſe to my hart whole multitudes of feares;
                     O in a map that I might ſee thee ſhow,
                     The place where now in danger thou dooſt goe!
                     VVhilſt we diſcourſe to trauaile with our eye,
                     Romania, ruſcaine, and faire Lumbardy,
                     Or with thy pen exactly to ſet downe,
                     The modell of that Tempell, or that Towne,
                     And to relate at large where thou haſt beene,
                     
                        
And there, and there, and what thou there haſt ſeene.
                     Or to deſcribe by figure of thy hand,
                     There Naples lies, and there doth Florence ſtand;
                     Or as the Grecians finger dip'd in wine,
                     Drawing a Riuer in a little line,
                     And with a drop, a gulfe to figure out,
                     To modell Venice moted round about;
                     Then adding more, to counterfet a Sea,
                     And draw the front of ſtately Genoa.
                     
                     Theſe from thy lips were like harmonious tones,
                     Which now do found like Mandrakes dreadful grones.
                     Some trauell hence t'enrich their mindes with skill,
                     Leaue heere their good, and bring home others ill:
                     VVhich ſeeme to like all Countries but their owne,
                     Affecting moſt where they the leaſt are knowne.
                     Their leg, their thigh, their back, their neck, their head,
                     As they had been in ſeuerall Countries bred;
                     In their attire, their jeſture, and their gate,
                     Fond in each one, in all Italionate.
                     So well in all deformitie in faſhion,
                     Borrowing a limbe on euery ſeuerall Nation,
                     And nothing more then England hold in ſcorne,
                     So liue as ſtrangers where as they were borne.
                     But thy returne in this I do not reede,
                     Thou art a perfect Gentleman indeede;
                     O God forbid that Howards noble line,
                     From ancient vertue ſhould ſo farre decline,
                     The Muſes traine (whereof your ſelfe are chiefe)
                     Onely with me participate their griefe:
                     To ſooth their humors, I do lend them eares,
                     He giues a Poet, that his verſes heares,
                     
                        
Till thy returne, by hope they onely liue;
                     Yet had they all, they all avvay would giue:
                     The world and they, ſo ill according be,
                     That wealth and Poets neuer can agree.
                     Few liue in Court that of their good haue care,
                     The Muſes friends are euery where ſo rare;
                     Some praiſe thy worth (that it did neuer know,)
                     Onely becauſe the better ſort doe ſo,
                     Whoſe iudgement neuer further doth extend,
                     Then it doth pleaſe the greateſt to commend,
                     So great an ill vpon deſert doth chaunce,
                     When it doth paſſe by beaſtly ignoraunce.
                     Why arte thou ſlacke whilſt no man puts his hand
                     To raiſe the mount vvhere Surreys tovvers muſt ſtand▪
                     
                     Or who the groundſill of that worke doth lay
                     Whilſt like a wandrer thou abroade dooſt ſtray?
                     Clipt in the armes of ſome laſciuious dame,
                     When thou ſhouldſt reare an 
                           ••
                        on to thy name.
                     When ſhall the Muſes by faire Norwhich dvvell,
                     To be the Cittie of the learned VVell?
                     Or Phoebus altars there with incenſe heapt,
                     As once in Cyrrha, or in Thebe kept?
                     Or vvhen ſhall that faire hoofe-plowd ſpring diſtill
                     From great mount Surrey, out of Leonards hill;
                     Till thou returne, the Court I will exchange
                     For ſome poore cottage, or ſome countrey Grange,
                     Where to our diſtaues as we ſit and ſpin,
                     My maide and I will tell of things haue bin,
                     Our Lutes vnſtrung ſhall hang vpon the wall,
                     Our leſſons ſerue to wrap our Towe withall,
                     And paſſe the night, whiles winter tales we tell,
                     
                        
Of many things that long ago befell;
                     Or tune ſuch homely Carrols as were ſung
                     In Countrey ſports when we our ſelues were yung.
                     In prettie R
                           •
                        ddles to bewray our loues,
                     In queſtions, purpoſe, or in drawing gloues.
                     The nob eſt ſpirits to vertue moſt inclind,
                     Theſe heere in Court thy greateſt want do find.
                     Other there be, on which we feede our eye,
                     Like Arras worke or ſuch like Imagerie;
                     Many of vs deſire Queene Katherines ſtate,
                     
                        
                           •
                        ut very few her vertues imitate.
                     Then, as Vlyffes wife vvrite I to thee,
                     Make no reply, but come thy ſelfe to me.
                  
                  
                     ¶ Notes of the Chronicle Hiſtorie.
                     
                        Then Windſore, or Fitzgeralds families.
                     
                     THE coſt of many Kings, which from time to time haue adorned the Caſtle at Windſor with their princely magnificence, 
                           •
                        at
                           •
                         made it more noble then that it need to hee ſpoken of now, as though obſcure, and I hold it more meet to referre you to our 
                           〈◊〉
                         monuments for the founders and finiſhers thereof, then to meddle with matter nothing neere to the purpoſe. As for the family of the Fitz-gerald, of whence this excellent Lady was line
                        
                           •
                        lly diſcended, the original was Engliſh, though the branches did pr
                           ••
                        d themſelues into diſtant places & names nothing cōſonant, 
                           〈◊〉
                         in former times it was vſual to denominate themſelues of their 
                           •
                        nanours o
                           •
                         
                        
                           •
                        orenames: as may partly appeare in that which en
                        
                           •
                        u
                           •
                        th the light whereof proceeded from my learned and verie 
                           〈◊〉
                         friend, Maiſter Francis Thinne, Walter of Windſor, the 
                           •
                        onne of Oterus, had iſſue William, of whom Henry now Lord Windſor is diſcended, and Robert of Windſor, of whom Robert
                        
the now Earle of Eſſex, and Gerald of Windſor his third ſonne, who married the daughter of R
                              •
                           es the great Prince of Wales, of whom came Neſta, para
                           •
                        our to Henry the firſt. Which Gerald had iſſue Maurice Fitz-gerald, aunceſtor to Thomas Fitz-maurice, Iuſtice of Ireland buried at Trayly; leauing iſſue Iohn his eldeſt ſonne, firſt Earle of Kildare, anceſtor to Geraldine, and Maurice his ſecond ſonne, firſt earle of Deſ
                           •
                        oond.

                           To raiſethe mount where Surreys Towers muſt ſtand,
                        
                     
                     Alludeth to the ſumptuous houſe which was afterward builded by him vpon Leonards hill right againſt Norwich, which in the rebellion of Norffolke vnder Ket, inking Edward the 6. time, was much defaced by that impure rabble. Betvvixt the hil and the Citie, as Alexander Neuill deſcribes it, the riuer of Yarmouth runs, hauing Weſt and South thereof a wood, and a little Village called Thorpe, and on the North, the paſtures of Mouſholl, which containes about ſixe miles in length and breadth. So that beſides the ſtately greatnes of Mount-Surrey, which was the houſes name: the proſpect and ſite thereof was paſſing pleaſant and commodious; and no where elſe did that encreaſing euill of the Norffolke furie enk
                           •
                        nnell it ſelfe but then there, as it were for a manifeſt token of their intent, to debaſe all high things, and to prophaneall holy.

                           Like Arras worke, or other imagerie.
                        
                     
                     Such was he whom 
                           
                              ••
                           uenall taxeth in this manner.
                     
                        —truncoque ſimilimus Hermae
                        Nullo quippe al
                              •
                           o vineis diſcrimine quamquod,
                        Illi marmoreum caput eſt, tua v
                              ••
                           it image.
                     
                     Being to be borne for nothing elſe but apparell and the outward appearance, intituled Complement, with whom theridiculous fable of the Ape in Eſope ſorteth fitly, who comming into a Caruers houſe, and viewing many Marble workes, tooke vp the head of a man very cunningly wrought, who greatly in prayſing did ſeeme to pittie it, that hauing ſo comely an outſide, it had nothing within, like emptie figures walke and talke in euery place, at whom the noble Geraldine modeſtly glanceth.
                  
                  Finis.
               
               
                  
                  To the virtuous Lady, the Lady Francis Goodere, wife to ſir Henry Goodere, Knight.
                  
                     MY very gratious and good Miſtris, the loue and duety I bare unto your father whilſt he liued, now after his deceaſe is to your hereditarie; to whome by the bleſſing of your birth he left his vertues. Who bequeathed you thoſe which were his, gaue you whatſoeuer good is mine, as deuoted to his, he being gone, whome I honoured ſo much whileſt he liued; which you may iustly challenge by all lawes of thankefulneſſe. My ſelfe hauing beene a witneſſe of your excellent education, and milde diſpoſition (as I may ſay) euer from your Cradle, dedicate this Epiſtle of this vertuous and godly Lady to your ſelfe; ſo like her in all perfection, both of wiſedome and learning, which I pray you accept, till time ſhall enable me to leaue you ſome greater monument of my loue.
                  
                  
                     M. Drayton.
                  
               
               
                  
                  The Lady Jane Gray to the Lord Gilford Dudley.
                  
                  
                     The Argument.
                     After the death of that vertuous young Prince King Edward the ſixt, the ſonne of that famous King Henry the eight, Iane the daughter of Henry Gray, Duke of Suffolke by the conſent of Iohn Dudley Duke of Northumberland, was proclaimed Queene of England, being married to Gilford Dudley, the fourth ſonne of the fore-ſaid Duke of Northumberland; which match was concluded by their ambitious fathers, who went about by this meanes, to bring the Crowne vnto their children and to diſpoſſeſſe the Princeſſe Mary eldeſt daughter to King Henry the eight, heire to King Edward her brother. Queene Mary riſing in Armes to claime her rightfull Crowne, taketh the ſaide Iane Gray and the Lord Gilford her husband, being lodged in the Tower for their more ſafetie, which place being laſtly their Pallace, by this meanes became their priſon, where being ſeuered in ſundry priſons, they write theſe Epiſtles one to another.
                  
                  
                     MIne own deere Lord, ſith thou art lockt frō mee,
                     In this diſguiſe my loue muſt ſteale to thee,
                     Since to renue all loues, all kindneſſe paſt,
                     This refuge ſcarcely left, yet this the laſt.
                     
                        
My Keeper comming, I of thee enquire,
                     Who with thy greeting anſwers my deſire,
                     Which my tongue willing to returne againe,
                     Griefe ſtops my words, and I but ſtriue in vaine;
                     Wherewith amazde, away in haſte he goes,
                     When throgh my lips, my hart thruſts forth my woes,
                     Whenas the dores that make a dolefull ſound,
                     Driue backe my words, that in the noiſe are drownd,
                     Which ſomewhat huſh'd, the Eccho doth record,
                     And twice or thrice reiterates my word;
                     When like an aduerſe winde in Iſis courſe,
                     Againſt the tide bending his boiſtrous force;
                     But when the flood hath wrought it ſelfe about,
                     He following on, doth head-long thruſt it out;
                     Thus ſtriue my fighes with teares e're they begin,
                     And breaking out, againe ſighes driue them in.
                     A thouſand formes preſent my troubled thought,
                     Yet proue abortiue when they forth are brought,
                     The depth of woe with words wee hardely ſound,
                     Sorrow is ſo inſenſibly profound:
                     As teares do fall and riſe, ſighes come and goe,
                     So do theſe numbers ebbe, ſo do they flow.
                     Theſe briny teares do make my incke looke pale,
                     My incke clothes teares in this ſad mourning vaile,
                     The letters mourners, weepe with my dim eye,
                     The paper pale, grieu'd at my miſery.
                     Yet miſerable our ſelues, why ſhould we deeme,
                     Sith none is ſo, but in his owne eſteeme?
                     Who in diſtreſſe from reſolution flies,
                     Is rightly ſaid, to yeelde to miſeries;
                     They which begot vs, did beget this ſin,
                     
                        
They firſt begun, what did our griefe begin,
                     we taſted not, t'was they which did rebell,
                     Not our offence, but in their fall we fell;
                     They which a crowne would to my Lord haue linckt,
                     All hope of life and liberty extinct;
                     A ſubiect borne, a Soueraigne to haue beene,
                     Hath made me now, nor ſubiect, nor a Queene.
                     Ah vile ambition, how dooſt thou deceiue vs,
                     which ſhew'ſt vs heauen and yet in hell dooſt leaue vs?
                     Seldome vntouch'd doth innocence eſcape,
                     when error commeth in good counſailes ſhape,
                     A lawfull title countercheckes prowd might,
                     The weakeſt things become ſtrong props to right.
                     Then my deere Lord, although affliction grieue vs,
                     Yet let our ſpotleſſe innocence relieue vs.
                     Death but an acted paſſion doth appeare,
                     where truth giues courage, and the conſcience cleere,
                     And let thy comfort thus conſiſt in mine,
                     That I beare part of whatſoe're is thine;
                     As when we liude vntouch'd with theſe diſgraces,
                     whenas our kingdome was our deere embraces;
                     At Durham Pallace, where ſweete Hymen ſang,
                     whoſe buildings with our nuptiall muſicke rang:
                     when Prothalamions praiſde that happy day,
                     wherein great Dudley match'd with noble Gray,
                     
                     when they deuiſde to lincke by wedlockes band,
                     The houſe of Suffolke to Northumberland;
                     Our fatall Dukedome to your Dukedome bound,
                     To frame this building on ſo weake a ground.
                     For what auailes a lawleſſe vſurpation,
                     which giues a Scepter, but not rules a Nation?
                     
                        
Onely the ſurfet of a vaine opinion,
                     What giues content, giues what exceedes dominion.
                     When firſt mine eares were pierced with the fame,
                     Of Iane proclaimed by a Princeſſe name,
                     A ſuddaine fright my trembling heart appalls,
                     The feare of conſcience entreth yron walls.
                     Thrice happy for our fathers had it beene,
                     If what we fearde, they wiſely had fore-ſeene,
                     And kept a meane gate in an humble path,
                     To haue eſcapde the heauens impetuous wrath,
                     The true-bred Eagle ſtrongly beares the winde,
                     And not each bird that's neere vnto their kinde,
                     That like a King, doth from the clowdes command,
                     The fearefull fowle that moues but neere the Land,
                     Though Mary be from mighty Kings deſcended,
                     My blood not from Plantaginet pretended;
                     My granſire Brandon did our houſe aduance,
                     By princely Mary, Dowager of France;
                     The fruit of that faire ſtocke which did combine,
                     And Yorkes ſweete branch with Lancaſters entwine,
                     And in one ſtalke did happily vnite,
                     The pure vermilion Roſe, with purer white;
                     I the vntimely ſlip of that rich ſtem,
                     Whoſe golden bud brings forth a Diadem.
                     But oh forgiue me Lord, it is not I,
                     Nor do I boaſt of this, but learne to die,
                     Whilſt we were as our ſelues conioyned then,
                     Nature to nature, now an alien.
                     The pureſt blood, polluted is in blood,
                     Neerenes contemn'd, if ſoueraignty withſtood;
                     A Diadem once dazeling the eye,
                     
                        
The day too darke to ſee affinitie;
                     And where the arme is ſtretch'd to reach a Crowne,
                     Friendſhip is broke, the deereſt thing throwne downe;
                     For what great Henry moſt ſtroue to auoide,
                     The heauens haue built, where earth would haue deſtroide,
                     And ſeating Edward on his regall throne,
                     He giues to Mary, all that was his owne,
                     By death aſſuring what by life is theirs,
                     The lawfull claime of Henries lawfull he
                           •
                        res.
                     By mortall lawes the bound may be diuorc'd,
                     But heauens decree by no meanes can be forc'd:
                     That rules the caſe, when men haue all decreed,
                     Who tooke him hence, fore-ſaw who ſhould ſucceed,
                     For we in vaine relie on humaine lawes,
                     Whē heauen ſtands forth to plead the righteous cauſe,
                     Thus rule the heauens in their continuall courſe,
                     That yeeldes to fate, that doth not yeelde to force.
                     Mans wit doth build for time but to deuoure,
                     But vertue's free from time and fortunes powre;
                     Then my kinde Lord, ſweete Gilford be not grieu'd,
                     The ſoule is heauenly, and from heauen relieu'd;
                     And as we once haue plighted troth together,
                     Now let vs make exchange of mindes to either;
                     To thy faire breaſt take my reſolued minde,
                     Armde againſt blacke diſpaire, and all her kinde,
                     And to my boſome breathe that ſoule of thine,
                     There to be made as perfect as is mine;
                     So ſhall our faith as firmely be approued,
                     As I of thee, or thou of me beloued.
                     This life no life, were thou not deere to mee,
                     Nor this no death, were I not woe for thee.
                     
                        
Thou my deere husband, and my Lord before,
                     But truely learne to die, thou ſhalt be more.
                     Now liue by prayer, on heauen fixe all thy thought,
                     And ſurely finde, what e're by zeale is ſought;
                     For each good motion that the ſoule awakes,
                     A heauenly figure ſees, from whence it takes
                     That ſweete reſemblance, which by power of kinde,
                     Formes (like it ſelfe) an image in the minde,
                     And in our faith the operations bee,
                     Of that diuineneſſe which through that we ſee;
                     Which neuer erres, but accidentally,
                     By our fraile fleſhes imbecillitie;
                     By each temptation ouer-apt to ſlide,
                     Except our ſpirit becomes our bodies guide;
                     For as theſe Towers our bodies do incloſe
                     Their priſons, ſo vnto our ſoules ſuppoſe
                     Our bodies, ſtopping that celeſtiall light,
                     As theſe do hinder our exterior ſight;
                     Whereon death ſeaſing, doth diſcharge the debt,
                     And vs at bleſſed liberty doth ſet.
                     Then draw thy forces all vnto thy heart,
                     The ſtrongeſt fortreſſe of this earthly part,
                     And on theſe three let thy aſſurance lie,
                     On faith, repentance, and humilitie;
                     By which to heauen aſcending by degrees,
                     Perſiſt in prayer vpon your bended knees;
                     Whereon if you aſſuredly be ſtaide,
                     You neede in perill not to be diſtnaide,
                     Which ſtill ſhall keepe you that you ſhall not fall,
                     For any perill that you can appall;
                     The key of heauen thus will
                           •
                         you, you ſhall beare,
                     
                        
And grace you guiding, giue you entrance there,
                     And you of thoſe celeſtiall ioyes poſſeſſe,
                     Which mortal tongue's vnable to expreſſe.
                     Then thanke the heauen, preparing vs this roome,
                     Crowning our heads with glorious martiredome,
                     Before the blacke and diſmall daies beginne,
                     The daies of all idolatry and ſinne,
                     Not ſuffering vs to ſee that wicked age,
                     When perſecution vehemently ſhall rage,
                     When tyranny n
                           •
                        w tortures ſhall inuent,
                     Inflicting vengeance on the innocent.
                     Yet heauen forbids, that Maries wombe ſhall bring,
                     Englands faire Scepter to a forraigne King,
                     But vnto faire Elizabeth ſhall leaue it,
                     Which broken, hurt, and wounded, ſhall receiue it;
                     And on her temples hauing placde the Crowne,
                     Roote out the dregs Idolatry hath ſowne;
                     And Syons glory ſhall againe reſtore,
                     Laid ruine, waſte, and deſolate before;
                     And from blacke ſinders, and rude heapes of ſtones,
                     Shall gather vp the Martires ſacred bones,
                     And ſhall extirpe the power of Rome againe,
                     And caſt aſide the heauie yoke of Spaine.
                     Farewell ſweete Gilford, know our end is neere,
                     Heauen is our home, we are but ſtrangers heere.
                     Let vs make haſte to goe vnto the bleſt,
                     Which from theſe weary worldly labours reſt,
                     And with theſe lines my deereſt Lord I greete thee,
                     Vntill in heauen thy Iane againe ſhall meet thee.
                  
                  
                     
                     ¶ Notes of the Chronicle Hiſtorie.
                     
                        They which beg
                              •
                           t vs did beget this ſi
                              •
                           ne.
                     
                     SHewing the ambition of the two Dukes their Fathers, whoſe pride was the cauſe of the vtter ouerthrow of their children.

                           At Durham Pallace where ſweete Hymen ſang,
                           The buildings, &c.
                        
                     
                     The Lord Gilford Dudley, fourth ſonne to Iohn Dudley Duke of Northumberland, married the Lady Iane Grey, daughter to the Duke of Suffolke at Durham houſe in the Strand.

                           When firſt mine eares were pierced with the fame,
                           Of Iane proclaimed by a princes name
                        
                     
                     Preſently vpon the death of King Edward, the Lady Iane was taken as Queene, conueyed by water to the Tower of London for her ſafetie, and after proclaimed in diuers parts of the realme, as ſo ordained by king Edwards Letters-pattents, and his will.

                           My Grandſire Brandon did our houſe aduaunce
                           By princely Mary, dowager of Fraunce.
                        
                     
                     
                        Henry Gray, duke of Suffolk, married Frauncis the eldeſt daughter of Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolke, by the French Queene, by which Frauncis he had this Lady Iane: this Mary the French Queene, was daughter to king Henry the ſeuenth, by Elizabeth his Queene, which happie mariage conioyned the two noble families of Lancaſter and Yorke.

                           For what great Henry moſt ſtroue to auoyde,
                        
                     
                     Noting the diſtruſt that King Henry the eight euer had in the Princeſſe Mary his daughter, fearing ſhe ſhould alter the ſtate of Religion in the land, by matching with a ſtranger, confeſſing the right that King Henries iſſue had to the Crowne.

                           And vnto faire Elizabeth ſhall leaue it.
                        
                     
                     A prophecie of Queene Maries barrenneſſe, and of the happie and glorious raigne of Queene Elizabeth, her reſtoring of Religion, the aboliſhing of the Romiſh ſeruitude, and caſting aſide the yoke of Spaine.
                  
               
               
                  
                  ¶ Gilford Dudley to Iane Gray.
                  
                     AS the Swanne ſinging at his dying howre,
                     So I reply from my impriſning towre:
                     O could there be that powre but in my verſe,
                     To expreſſe the griefe my wounded heart doth pierce!
                     The very walles that ſtraitly thee incloſe,
                     Would ſurely weepe at reading of my woes;
                     Let your eies lend, Ile pay you euery teare,
                     And giue you intreſt, if you doe forbeare,
                     Drop for a drop, and if youle needes haue lone,
                     I will repay you franckly, two for one.
                     Perhaps youle thinke (your ſorrowes to appeaſe)
                     That words of comfort fitter were than theſe:
                     True, and in you when ſuch perfection liueth,
                     As in moſt griefe moſt comfort alwaies giueth:
                     And thinke not (Iane) that cowardly I faint,
                     To begge mans mercy by my ſad complaint,
                     That death ſo much my courage can controule,
                     At the departing of my liuing roule.
                     For if one life a thouſand liues could bee,
                     All thoſe too few to conſummate with thee,
                     When thou this croſſe ſo patiently dooſt beare,
                     As if thou wert incapable of feare,
                     And dooſt no more this deſolution flie,
                     Than if long age conſtrained thee to die:
                     
                        
Yet it is ſtrange thou arte become my foe,
                     And onely now add'ſt moſt vnto my woe,
                     Not that I loathe, that moſt did me delight,
                     But that ſo long depriued of thy ſight;
                     For when I ſpeake, and would complaine my wrong.
                     Straitwayes thy name poſſeſſeth all my tong,
                     As thou before me ouermore didſt lie
                     The preſent obiect to my longing eie.
                     No ominous ſtarte did at thy birth tide ſhine,
                     That might of thy ſad deſtiny diuine;
                     Tis onely I that did thy fall perſwade,
                     And thou by me a ſacrifice arte made,
                     As in thoſe countries where the louing wiues
                     With their kinde husbands end their happy liues,
                     And crownd with garlands in their Brides attire,
                     Burne with his body in the funerall fire;
                     And ſhe the worthieſt reckned is of all,
                     Whome loaſt the perill ſeemeth to appall.
                     I boaſt not of Northumberland great name,
                     Nor of Ket conquered, adding to our fame,
                     When he to Norffolke with his armies ſped,
                     And thence in chaines the rebells captiue led;
                     And brought ſafe peace returning to our dores,
                     Yet ſoread his glory on the eaſterne ſhores,
                     Not of my brothers, from whoſe naturall grace,
                     Vertue may ſpring to beautifie our Race,
                     Not of Grates match my children borne by thee,
                     Of the great blood indoubtedly to bee,
                     But of thy vertues onely doe I boaſt,
                     That wherein I may iuſtly glory moſt:
                     I crau'd no kingdomes though I thee did craue,
                     
                        
It might ſuffice thy onely ſelfe to haue,
                     Yet let me ſay how-euer it befell,
                     Me thinkes a Crowne ſhould haue become thee well:
                     For ſure thy wiſedome merited (or none)
                     To haue beene heard with wonder from a throne.
                     When from thy lippes the counſell to each deede,
                     Doth as from ſome wiſe oracle proceede,
                     And more eſteemd thy vertues were to mee,
                     Then all that elſe might euer come by thee;
                     So chaſte thy loue, ſo innocent thy life,
                     As being a virgine when thou wert a wife,
                     So great a gift the heauen on me beſtow'd,
                     As giuing that it nothing could haue ow'd,
                     Such was the good I did poſſeſſe of late,
                     Ere worldly cares diſturbde our quiet ſtate,
                     Ere trouble did in euery place abound,
                     And angry warre our former peace did wound.
                     This is all that ambition vs affordes,
                     One crowne is guarded with a thouſand ſwords,
                     To meane eſtates, meane ſorrowes are out ſhowne,
                     But crowns h
                           〈…〉
                         cares whoſe workings be vnknowne,
                     When Dudley led his armies to the eaſt,
                     Of our whole forces generally poſſeſt,
                     What then was thought his enter priſe could let,
                     Whome a graue counſell freely did abet,
                     That had the iudgement of the powrefull lawes,
                     In euery poynt to iuſtifie the cauſe,
                     The holy Church a helping hand that layde,
                     Who would haue thought that theſe could not haue ſwayde:
                     But what alas can parlements auaile,
                     Where Maries right muſt Edwards Act
                           〈…〉
                        
                     
                     
                        
When Suffolkes powre doth Suffolkes hopes withſtand,
                     
                        Northumberland doth leaue Northumberland;
                     
                     And they that ſhould our greatnes vndergoe,
                     Vs, and our actions onely ouerthrow,
                     Ere greatnes gain'd we giue it all our hart,
                     But being once come, could wiſh it would depart,
                     And indeſcreetly follow that ſo faſt,
                     Which ouertaken puniſheth our haſte;
                     If any one doe pitty our offence,
                     Let him be ſure that it be farre from hence:
                     Heere is no place for any one that ſhall,
                     So much as (once) commiſerate our fall;
                     And we of mercy vainely ſhould but thinke,
                     Our timeleſſe teares th'inſatiate earth doth drinke.
                     All lamentations vtterly forlorne,
                     Dying before they fully can be borne.
                     Mothers that ſhould their woefull children rue,
                     Fathers in death too kindely bid adue.
                     Friends their deare farewell louingly to take,
                     The faithfull ſeruant weeping for our ſake.
                     Brothers and ſiſters waiting on our beere,
                     Mourners to tell what we were liuing heare:
                     But we alas depriued are of all,
                     So fatall is our miſerable fall,
                     And where at firſt for ſafety we were ſhut
                     Now in darke priſon wofully are put,
                     And from height of our ambitious ſtate,
                     Lie to repent our arrogance too late,
                     To thy perſwaſion thus I then reply,
                     Holde on thy courſe reſolued ſtill to die,
                     And when we ſhall ſo happily be gone,
                     
                        
Leaue it to heauen to giue the rightfull throne,
                     And with that health regreet I thee againe,
                     Which I of late did gladly entertaine.
                  
                  
                     Notes of the Chronicle Hiſtorie.
                     
                        Not of Ket conquered adding to our fame;
                     
                     
                        IOhn Duke of Northumberland, when before he was Earle of Warwike in his expedition againſt Ket, ouerthrew the rebels of Norfolke and Suffolke, encamped at Mount-Surrey in Norfolke.

                           Nor of my brothers from whoſe naturall grace,
                        
                     
                     
                        Gilford Dudley as remembring in this place the towardneſſe of his brothers, which were all likely indeed to haue raiſed that houſe of the Dudleys, of which he was a fourth brother, if not ſuppreſſed by their fathers ouerthrow.

                           Nor of Grayes match my children borne by thee,
                        
                     
                     Noting in this place the aliance of the Lady Iane Gray, by her mother, which was Francis the daughter of Charles Brandon, by Mary the French Queene, daughter to Henry the ſeuenth, and ſiſter to Henry the eight.

                           To haue beene heard with wonder from a throne.
                        
                     
                     Seldome hath it euer beene knowne of any woman endued with ſuch wonderfull gifts, as was this Ladie, both for her wiſdome and learning, of whoſe skill in the tongues one reporteth by this Epigram.
                     
                        Miraris Ianam Graio, ſermone valere,
                        Quo 
                              •••
                           mum nata est tempore Graia fuit.
                        When Dudley led his armies to the Eaſt.
                     
                     The Duke of Northumberland prepared his power at London for his expedition againſt the Rebels in Norfolke, and making haſte away, appoynted the reſt of his forces to meete him at

Newmarket Heath: of whom this ſaying is reported, that paſſing through Shorditch, the Lord Gray in his companie, ſeeing the people in great numbers came to ſee him, he ſayd, the people preſſe to ſee vs, but none bid God ſpeed vs.

                           Whom a graue Councell freely did abet.
                        
                     
                     
                        Iohn Dudley Duke of Northumberland, when he went out againſt Queene Mary, had his commiſſion ſealed for the generalſhip of the Army, by the conſent of the whole Councell of the land; inſomuch that paſſing through the Councell chamber at his departure, the Earle of Arundell wiſhed that hee might haue gone with him in that expedition, and to ſpend his blood in the quarrell.

                           When Suffolks power doth Suffolks hopes withstand,
                           Northumberland doth leane Northumberland.
                           
                        
                     
                     The Suffolke men were the firſt that euer reſorted to Queene Mary in her diſtreſſe, repayring to her ſuccours, whilſt ſhee remained both at Keningall, and at Fermingham Caſtell, ſtill increaſing her aydes, vntill the Duke of Northumberland, was leſt forſaken at Cambridge.
                  
                  Finis.
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  
                     THE worlds faire Roſe, and Henries froſtie fire,
                     
                        Iohns tiranny; and chaſte Matilda's wrong,
                     Th'inraged Queene, and furious Mortimer,
                     
                     The ſcourge of Fraunce, and his chaſte loue I ſong,
                     Depoſed Richard, Iſabell exil'd,
                     The gallant Tudor, and faire Katherine,
                     
                     Duke Humfrey, and old Cobhams hapleſſe child,
                     Couragious Pole, and that braue ſpritfull Queene,
                     
                        Edward, and the delicious London Dame,
                     
                        Brandon, and that rich dowager of Fraunce,
                     
                        Surrey, with his faire paragon of fame,
                     
                        Dudleys miſhap, and vertuous Grayes miſchaunce;
                     Their ſeuerall loues ſince I before haue ſhowne,
                     Now giue me leaue, at laſt to ſing mine owne.
                  
               
               
                  
                  To the Reader of his Poems. Sonet. 1.
                  INto theſe loues who but for paſſion lookes,
                  At this firſt ſight, heere let them lay them by,
                  And ſeeke elſe-where in turning other bookes,
                  Which better may his labour ſatisfie,
                  No far-fetch'd ſigh ſhall euer wound my breaſt,
                  Loue from mine eye, a teare ſhall neuer w
                        •
                     ing,
                  Nor in ah-mees my whining Sonnets dreſt,
                  (A Libertine) fantaſtickly I ſing;
                  My verſe is the true image of my mind,
                  Euer in motion, ſtill deſiring change,
                  The choiſe of all varietie inclin'd,
                  And in all humors ſportiuely I range,
                  My actiue Muſe is of the worlds right ſtraine,
                  That cannot long one faſhion entertaine.
               
               
                  The ſecond to the Reader. Sonet. 2
                  MAny there be excelling in this kind,
                  Whoſe wel trick'd rimes with al inuention ſwel;
                  Let each commend as beſt ſhall like his mind,
                  Some Sidney, Conſtable, ſome Daniell.
                  
                  That thus their names familiarly I ſing,
                  Let none thinke them diſparaged to be,
                  Poore men with reuerence may ſpeake of a King,
                  And ſo may theſe be ſpoken of by me;
                  My wanton verſe nere keepes one certaine ſtay,
                  But now, at hand; then, ſeekes inuention far,
                  And with each little motion runnes aſtray,
                  Wilde, madding, iocund, and irregular;
                  Like me that luſt, my honeſt merry rimes,
                  Nor care for Criticke, nor regard the times.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  IDEA.
                  
                     Sonnet 1.
                     THine eies taught me the alphabet of loue,
                     To kon my croſſe-row ere I learnd to ſpell,
                     For I was apt, a Scholler like to proue,
                     Gaue me ſweete lookes whenas I learned well,
                     Vowes were my vowells when I then begunne,
                     At my firſt leſſon in thy ſacred name,
                     My conſonants the next when I had done,
                     Words conſonant, and ſounding to thy fame;
                     My liquids then, were liquide criſtall teares,
                     My cares, my mutes, ſo mute to craue reliefe,
                     My dolefull dipthongs, were my lifes diſpaires,
                     Redoubling ſighs, the accents of my griefe;
                     My loues Schoole-miſtris now hath taught me ſo,
                     That I can reade a ſtorie of my woe.
                  
                  
                     
                     Sonnet. 2.
                     MY hart was ſlaine, and none but you and I,
                     who ſhould I thinke the murther ſhould cōmit?
                     Since but your ſelfe, there was no creature by
                     But onely I, guiltleſſe of murthring it.
                     It ſlew it ſelfe; the verdict on the view
                     Doe quit the dead, and me not acceſſary;
                     Well, well, I feare it will be prou'd by you,
                     The euidence ſo great a proofe doth carry.
                     But O, ſee, ſee, we neede enquire no further,
                     Vpon your lips the ſcarlet drops are found,
                     And in your eye, the boy that did the murther,
                     Your cheeks yet pale ſince firſt they gaue the wound.
                     By this, I ſee, how euer things be paſt,
                     Yet heauen will ſtill haue murther out at laſt.
                  
                  
                     Sonnet 3.
                     TAking my penne, with words to caſt my woes,
                     Duely to count the ſumme of all my cares,
                     I finde, my griefe innumerable growes,
                     The recknings riſe to millions of diſpaires,
                     And thus diuiding of my fatall houres,
                     The payments of my loue I reade, and croſſe
                     Subſtracting, ſet my ſweets vnto my ſowers,
                     My ioyes arerage leades me to my loſſe;
                     And thus mine eyes a debtour to thine eye,
                     Which by extortion gaineth all their lookes,
                     My heart hath payd ſuch grieuous vſurie,
                     That all his wealth lies in thy beauties bookes.
                     And all is thine which hath beene due to mee,
                     And I a Bankrupt, quite vndone by thee.
                  
                  
                     
                     An alluſion to Narciſſus. Sonnet. 4.
                     BEautie ſometime in all her glorie crowned,
                     Paſſing by that cleare fountaine of thine eye,
                     Her ſun-ſhine face there chauncing to eſpie,
                     Forgot herſelfe, deeming ſhe had beene drowned,
                     And thus whileſt beautie, on her beautie gazed,
                     Whothen (yet liuing) thought ſhe had beene dying,
                     And yet in death ſome hope of life eſpying,
                     With her owne rare perfections ſo amazed,
                     Twixt ioy and griefe, yet with a ſmiling frowning,
                     The glorious ſun-beames of her eyes bright ſhining,
                     And ſhe on her owne deſtenie diuining,
                     Caſt her ſelfe, to ſaue herſelfe by drowning;
                     The well of Nectar, pau'd with pearle and gold,
                     Where ſhe remaines for all eyes to behold.
                  
                  
                     Sonnet. 5.
                     NOthing but no and I, and I and no,
                     How falls it out ſo ſtrangely you reply?
                     I tell ye (Faire) ile not be aunſwered ſo,
                     With this affirming no, denying I,
                     I ſay I loue, you ſlender aunſwere I,
                     I ſay you loue, you pule me out a no;
                     I ſay I die, you eccho me with I,
                     Saue me I cry, you ſigh me out a no:
                     Muſt woe and I, haue naught but no and I,
                     No I am I, if I no more can haue,
                     Aunſwere no more, with ſilence make reply,
                     And let me take my ſelfe what I do craue;
                     Let no and I, with I and you be ſo,
                     Then aunſwere no, and I, and I, and no.
                  
                  
                     
                     To Harmonie. Sonnet. 6.
                     
                     LOue once would daunce within my Miſtreſſe eye.
                     And wanting muſique fitting for the place,
                     Swore that I ſhould the inſtrument ſupply,
                     And ſodainely preſents me with her face;
                     Straitwaies my pulſe play liuely in my vaines,
                     My panting breath doth keepe a meaner time,
                     My q
                           •
                        au'ring artires be the tenours ſtraines,
                     My trembling ſinewes ſerue the counterchime,
                     My hollow ſighs the deepeſt b
                           •
                        ſe doe beare,
                     True diapaſon in diſtincted ſound;
                     My panting hart the trebble makes the aire,
                     And desken
                           •
                        s fineli
                           •
                         on the muſikes ground;
                     Thus like a Luteor Viall did I he,
                     Whilſt he prowd ſlaue dauncde galliards in her eie.
                  
                  
                     Sonnet 7.
                     LOue in an humor plaide the prodigall,
                     And bids my ſences to a ſolemne feaſt,
                     Yet more to grace the companie withall,
                     Inuit
                           •
                        s my ha
                           •
                        t to be the chiefeſt gueſt;
                     No other drinke would ſerue this gluttons turne,
                     But pretious teares diſtilling from mine eine,
                     Which with my ſighs this Epicure doth burne,
                     Quaffing carowſes in this coſtly wine,
                     Where, in his cups o'recome with foule exceſſe,
                     Beginnes to play a ſwaggering ruffins part,
                     And at the banquet, in his drunkennes
                     S
                           〈…〉
                         my deere friend, his kinde and trueſt hart;
                     A gent
                           •
                        e warning friends, thus may you ſee,
                     What tis to keepe a drunkard companie.
                  
                  
                     
                     To the Moone. Sonct. 8
                     
                     
                        PHoebe looke downe, and heere behold in mee,
                     The elements within thy ſphere incloſed,
                     How kindely Nature plac'd them vnder thee,
                     And in my world, ſee how they are diſpoſed;
                     My hope is earth, the loweſt, cold and dry,
                     The groſſer mother of deepe melancholie,
                     Water my teares, coolde with humidity,
                     Wan, flegmaticke, inclinde by Nature wholy;
                     My ſighes, the ayre, hote, moiſt, aſcending higher,
                     Subtile of ſanguine, dyde in my ha
                           •
                        ts dolor,
                     My thoughts they be the element of fi
                           •
                        e,
                     Hote, dry, and piercing, ſtill inclinde to choler,
                     Thine eye the Orbe vnto all theſe, from whence
                     Proceedes th'effects of powerfull influence.
                  
                  
                     To Lunacie. Sonnet. 9.
                     
                     AS other men, ſo I my ſelfe do muſe.
                     Why in this ſorte I wreſt inuention ſo,
                     And why theſe giddy metaphors I vſe,
                     Leauing the path the greater part do goe;
                     I will reſolue you; I am lunaticke,
                     And euer this in mad-men you ſhall finde,
                     What they laſt thoght on when the braine grew ſicke,
                     In moſt diſtraction keepe that ſtill in minde.
                     Thus talking idely in this bedlam fit,
                     Reaſon and I (you muſt conceiue) are twaine,
                     Tis nine yeeres now, ſince firſt I loſt my wit,
                     Beare with me then, though troubled be my braine;
                     With diet and correction, men diſtraught,
                     (Not too farre paſt) may to their wits be brought.
                  
                  
                     
                     Sonnet. 10.
                     TO nothing fitter can I thee compare,
                     Then to the ſonne of ſome rich penny father,
                     Who hauing now brought on his end with care,
                     Leaues to his ſonne all he had heap'd together;
                     This new rich nouice, lauiſh of his cheſt,
                     To one man giues, and on an other ſpends,
                     Then heere he riots, yet amongſt the reſt,
                     Haps to ſend ſome to one true honeſt friend.
                     Thy gifts thou in obſcuritie dooſt waſte,
                     Falſe friends thy kindenes, borne but to deceiue thee,
                     Thy loue, that is on the vnworthy plac'd,
                     Time hath thy beautie, which with age will leaue thee;
                     Onely that little which to me was lent,
                     I giue thee backe, when all the reſt is ſpent.
                  
                  
                     Sonnet. 11.
                     YOu not alone, when you are ſtill alone,
                     O God from you that I could priuate be,
                     Since you one were, I neuer ſince was one,
                     Since you in me, my ſelfe ſince out of me,
                     Tranſported from my ſelfe into your being,
                     Though either diſtant, preſent yet to either,
                     Senceleſſe with too much ioy, each other ſeeing,
                     And onely abſent when we are together.
                     Giue me my ſelfe, and take your ſelfe againe,
                     Deuiſe ſome meanes but how I may forſake you,
                     So much is mine that doth with you remaine,
                     That taking what is mine, with me I take you;
                     You do bewitch me, O that I could flie,
                     From my ſelfe you, or from your owne ſelfe I.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     To the Soule. Sonnet. 12.
                     
                     THat learned father, which ſo firmely proues
                     The Soule of man immortall and diuine,
                     And doth the ſeuerall offices define:
                     
                        Anima Giues her that name as ſhe the body moues,
                     
                        Amor Then is ſhe loue imbracing Charitie,
                     
                        Animus Mouing a will in vs, it is the minde,
                     
                        Mens Retaining knowledge, ſtill the ſame in kinde;
                     
                        Memoria As intellectuall it is the memory,
                     
                        Ratio In iudgeing, Reaſon onely is her name,
                     
                        Senſus In ſpeedie apprehenſion it is ſence,
                     
                        Conſcientia In right or wrong, they call her conſcience:
                     
                        Spiritus The ſpirit, whē it to Godward doth inflame.
                     Theſe of the ſoule the ſeuerall functions bee,
                     Which my heart lightned by thy loue doth ſee.
                  
                  
                     To the Shaddow. Sonnet. 13.
                     
                     LEtters and lines we ſee are ſoone defaced,
                     Mettells do waſte, and fret with cankers ruſt,
                     The Diamond ſhall once conſume to duſt;
                     And freſheſt colours with fowle ſtaines diſgraced,
                     Paper and incke, can paint but naked words,
                     To write with blood, offorce offends the ſight,
                     And if with teares, I finde them all too light,
                     And ſighes and ſignes, a ſeely hope affords.
                     O ſweeteſt ſhadow, how thou ſeru'ſt my turne,
                     Which ſtill ſhalt be, as long as there is ſunne,
                     Nor whilſt the world is, neuer ſhall be done,
                     Whilſt Moone ſhall ſhine, or any fire ſhall burne:
                     That euery thing whence ſhadow doth proceede,
                     May in his ſhadow, my loues ſtory reede,
                  
                  
                     
                     Sonnet. 14.
                     IF hee from heauen that filch'd that liuing fire,
                     Condemn'd by Ioue to end leſle torment be,
                     I greatly meruaile how you ſtill go free,
                     That farre beyond Prometheus did aſpire?
                     The fire he ſtole although of heauenly kinde,
                     Which from aboue he craftily did take,
                     Of liueleſſe clods vs liuing men to make,
                     Againe beſtow'd in temper of the minde.
                     
                        
                           •
                        ut vou brok into heauens immortall ſtore,
                     Where vertue, honour, wit and beauty lay,
                     Which taking thence, you haue eſcap'd away,
                     Yet ſtand as free as e're you did before;
                     But old Prometheus puniſh'd for his rape,
                     Thus poore theeues ſuffer, when the greater ſcape.
                  
                  
                     Sonnet. 15.
                     VIewing the glaſſe of my youthes miſeries,
                     
                        I ſee the face of my deformed eares,
                     With withered browes, all wrinckled with diſpaires,
                     That for my youth the teares fall from mine eyes,
                     Then in theſe teares the mirrors of theſe eyes,
                     Thy faireſt youth and be 
                           〈…〉
                        y do I ſee,
                     Imprinted there by looking ſtill on thee;
                     Thus midſt my woes, ten thouſand ioyes ariſe.
                     Yet in theſe ioyes the ſhadowes of my good,
                     In this fa
                           •
                        e limmed ground as white as ſnow,
                     Painted the blackeſt image of my woe,
                     With murthring hands imbrude in mine owne blood;
                     And in this image his darke clowdy eyes,
                     My life, and loue, I heere anatomi
                           •
                        e.
                  
                  
                     
                     To the Phoeniae. Sonnet 16.
                     VVIthin the compaſſe of this ſpatious round,
                     Amongſt all birds the Phoenix is alone,
                     Which but by you could neuer haue beene knowne.
                     None like to that, none like to you is found,
                     Heape your owne vertues ſeaſoned by their ſunne,
                     On heauenly top of your diuine deſire;
                     Then with your beautie ſet the ſame on fire,
                     So by your death, your life ſhalbe begunne.
                     Your ſelfe thus burned in this ſacred flame,
                     With your owne ſweetnes all the heauens perfuming,
                     And ſtill encreaſing as you are conſuming,
                     Shall ſpring againe from th'aſhes of your fame,
                     And mounting vp ſhall to the heauens aſcend,
                     So may you liue, paſt world, paſt fame, paſt end.
                  
                  
                     To Time. Sonnet. 17.
                     STay, ſtay, ſweete Time, behold or e're thou paſſe,
                     From world to world, thou long haſt fought to ſee,
                     That wonder now wherein all wonders bee,
                     Where heauen beholds her in a mortall glaſſe:
                     Nay looke thee Time in this celeſtiall glaſſe,
                     And thy youth paſt, in this ſuite mirrour ſee,
                     The firſt worlds beautie in the infancie,
                     What it was then, what thou before it was.
                     Now paſſe on Time, to af
                           •
                        r-worlds tell this:
                     (And yet ſhalt tell) but truely what hath beene,
                     That they may ſay what former time hath ſeene,
                     And heauen may ioy to thinke on paſt worlds blis:
                     Heere make a period Time, and ſay for me,
                     She was, whoſe like againe ſhall neuer be.
                  
                  
                     
                     To the Celeſtiall numbers. Sonnet. 18.
                     VNto the world, to learning, and to heauen,
                     Three nines there are, to euerie one a nine,
                     One number of the earth, the other both diuine,
                     One woman now makes three odde numbers euen:
                     Nine orders firſt of Angells be in heauen,
                     Nine Muſes do with learning ſtill frequent,
                     Theſe with the Gods are euer reſident;
                     Nine worthy ones vnto the world were giuen:
                     My worthy one to theſe nine worthies addeth,
                     And my faire Muſe, one Muſe vnto the nine,
                     And my good Angell in my ſoule diuine,
                     With one more order, theſe nine orders gladdeth:
                     My Muſe, my worthy, and my Angell then,
                     Makes euery one of theſe three nines a ten.
                  
                  
                     To Humour. Sonnet. 19.
                     YOu cannot loue my pretty heart and why?
                     There was a time you told me that you would,
                     But now againe you will the ſame denie,
                     If it might peaſe you, would to God you could;
                     What will you hate? nay that you will not neither,
                     Nor loue, nor hate, how then? what will you doe,
                     What will you keepe a meane then betwixt eyther?
                     Or will you loue me, and yet hate me too?
                     Yet ſerues not this, what next, what other ſhift?
                     You will, and will not, what a coyle is heere?
                     I ſee your craft, now I perceiue your drift,
                     And all this while I was miſtaken there:
                     Your loue and hate is this, I now do proue you,
                     You loue in hate, by hate to make me loue you.
                  
                  
                     
                     Sonnet. 20.
                     AN euill ſpirit your beautie haunts me ſtill,
                     Wherewith (alas) I haue beene long poſſeſt,
                     Which ceaſeth not to tempt me vnto ill,
                     Nor giues me once but one poore minutes reſt:
                     In me it ſpeakes whether I ſleepe or wake,
                     And when by meanes to driue it out I trie,
                     With greater torments then it me doth take,
                     And tortures me in moſt extreamitie,
                     Before my face, it laies all my diſpaires,
                     And haſtes me on vnto a ſuddaine death;
                     Now tempting me to drowne my ſelfe in teares,
                     And then in ſighing to giue vp my breath;
                     Thus am I ſtill prouokde to euery euill,
                     By this good wicked ſpirit, ſweete Angell diuell.
                  
                  
                     To the Spheares. Sonnet. 21.
                     THou which dooſt guide this little world of loue,
                     Thy planets manſions heere thou maiſt behold,
                     My brow the ſpheare where Saturne ſtill doth moue,
                     wrinckled with cares, withered, dry and cold;
                     Mine eyes the Orbe where Iupiter doth trace,
                     Which gently ſmile becauſe they looke on thee,
                     
                        Mars in my ſwartie viſage takes his place,
                     Made leane with loue, where furious conflicts bee:
                     
                        Sol in my breaſt with his hote ſcorching flame,
                     But in my heart alone doth Venus raigne;
                     
                        Mercury my hands, the Organs of my fame,
                     
                        Luna my wauering and vnconſtant vaine;
                     The ſtarry heauen thy praiſe by me expreſt,
                     Thou the firſt mouer, guiding all the reſt.
                  
                  
                     
                     To Folly. Sonnet. 22.
                     
                     WIth fooles & children good diſcretion beares,
                     Then honeſt people beare with Loue & me,
                     Nor older yet, nor wiſer made by yeares,
                     Amongſt the reſt of fooles and children be,
                     Loue's ſtill a baby, places with gawdes and ioyes,
                     And like a wanton, ſports with euery feather,
                     And ideots ſtill are running after boyes,
                     Then fooles and children fitt'ſt to go together,
                     He ſtill as young as when he firſt was borne,
                     No wiſer I, then when as young as he,
                     You that be hold vs laugh vs not to ſcorne,
                     Giue Nature thankes you are not ſuch as we:
                     Yet fooles and children ſometimes tell in play,
                     Some wiſe in ſhew, more fooles indeede then they.
                  
                  
                     Sonnet. 23.
                     LOue baniſh'd heauen, in earth was held in ſcorne.
                     Wandring ab
                           •
                        oad in neede and beggery,
                     And wanting friends, though of a God deſſe borne,
                     Yet crau'de the almes of ſuch as paſſed 
                           •
                        y,
                     
                        I like a man, douote and charitable;
                     Clothed the naked, lodg'd this wandring gueſt,
                     With ſighes and teares ſtill furniſhing his table,
                     With what might make the miſerable bleſt;
                     But this vngratefull for my good deſart.
                     Enticde my thoughts againſt me to conſpire,
                     Who gaue conſent to ſteale away my heart.
                     And ſet my breaſt his lodging on a fire:
                     Well, well, my friends, when beggars grow thus bold,
                     No meruaile then though charity grow cold.
                  
                  
                     
                     Sonnet 24.
                     I Heare ſome ſay, this man is not in loue,
                     Who, can he loue? a likely thing they ſay:
                     Reade but his verſe, and it will eaſly proue,
                     O iudge not raſhly (gentle Sir) I pray,
                     Becauſe I looſely trifle in this ſort,
                     As one that fame his ſorrows would beguile:
                     You now ſuppoſe me, all this time in ſport,
                     And pleaſe your felfe with this conceit the while.
                     You ſhallow cenſures, ſometime ſee you not
                     In greateſt perills ſome men pleaſant be,
                     Where fame by death is onelie to be got;
                     They reſolute, ſo ſtands the caſe with me;
                     Where other men in depth of paſſion crie,
                     I laugh at Fortune, as in jeaſt to die.
                  
                  
                     Sonnet 25.
                     O Whie ſhould nature niggardly reſtraine.
                     The Southerne nations relliſh not our tongue,
                     Elſe ſhould my lines glide on the waues of R
                              〈…〉
                           ,
                     
                     And crowne the Pirens with my liuing ſong;
                     But bounded thus to Scotland get you forth,
                     Thence take you wing vnto the Orcades,
                     
                     There let my verſe get glorie in the north,
                     Making my ſighs to thawe the frozen ſeas,
                     And let the Bards within that Iriſh ile,
                     To whome my Muſe with firi
                           •
                         wings ſhall paſſe,
                     Call backe the ſtiffe neckt rebells from exile,
                     And mollifie the ſlaughtring Galliglaſſe;
                     And when my flowing numbers they reherſe,
                     Let wolues and beares be charmed with my verſe.
                  
                  
                     
                     To Deſpaire. Sonnet 26.
                     
                     I Euer loue, where neuer hope appeares,
                     Yet hope drawes on my neuer-hoping care,
                     And my lifes hope would die but for diſpaire,
                     My neuer-certaine ioy, breeds euer-certaine feares,
                     Vncertaine-dread, giues wings vnto my hope,
                     Yet my hopes wings are loaden ſo with feare,
                     As they cannot aſcend to my hopes ſpheare,
                     Yet feare giues them more than a heauenly ſcope;
                     Yet this large roome is bounded with diſpaire,
                     So my loue is ſtill fettered with vaine hope,
                     And libertie depriues him of his ſcope,
                     And thus am I impriſond in the aire;
                     Then ſweet deſpaire, a while holde vp thy head,
                     Or all my hope for ſorrow will be dead.
                  
                  
                     To Fantaſie. Sonnet 27.
                     
                     I Gaue my faith to Loue, Loue his to me,
                     That he and I ſworne brothers ſhould remaine,
                     Thus faith receiu'd, faith giuen backe againe,
                     Who would imagine bond more ſure could be?
                     Loue flies to her, yet holdes he my faith taken,
                     As from my vertue raiſing my offence,
                     Making me guiltie by mine innocence;
                     And onelie bond by being ſo forſaken,
                     He makes her aske what I before had vow'd,
                     Giuing her that, which he had giuen mee,
                     
                        I bound by him, and he by her made free.
                     Who euer ſo hard breach of faith allowd?
                     Speake you that ſhould of right & wrong diſcuſſe,
                     Was right ere wrongd, or wrong ere righted thus?
                  
                  
                     
                     Sonnet 28.
                     TO ſuch as ſaie, thy loue I ouer-priſe,
                     And doe not ſticke to terme my praiſes follie,
                     Againſt theſe folkes that thinke themſelues ſo wiſe,
                     
                        I thus appoſe my force of reaſon wholie,
                     Though I giue more, then well affords my ſtate,
                     In which expenſe the moſt ſuppoſe me vaine,
                     Would yeeld them nothing at the caſieſt rate,
                     Yet at this price, returnes me trebble gaine,
                     The value not vnskilfull how to vſe,
                     And I giue much, becauſe I gaine thereby,
                     
                        I that thus take, or they that thus refuſe,
                     Whether are theſe deceiued then, or I?
                     
                     In eu'rie thing I holde this maxime ſtill,
                     The circumſtance doth make it good or ill.
                  
                  
                     To the Sences. Sonnet 29.
                     
                     WHen conqu'ring loue did firſt my hart aſſaile,
                     Vnto mine aide I ſommond euerie ſence,
                     Doubting if that prowde tirant ſhould preuaile,
                     My hart ſhould ſuffer for mine eies offence;
                     But he with beautie firſt corrupted ſight,
                     My hearing bribde with her tongues harmonie,
                     My taſte by her ſweete lippes drawne with delight,
                     My ſmelling wonne with her breaths ſpicerie;
                     But when my touching came to plaie his part,
                     (The King of ſences, greater than the reſt)
                     He yeeldes loue vp the keis vnto my hart,
                     And tells the other how they ſhould be bleſt:
                     And thus by thoſe of whome I hopde for aide,
                     To cruell loue my ſoule was firſt betraide.
                  
                  
                     
                     To the Vestalls. Sonnet 30.
                     THoſe Prieſts which firſt the Veſtall fire begun,
                     Which might be borrowed from no earthly flame,
                     Deuiſde a veſ
                           •
                        ell to receiue the Sunne,
                     Being ſtedfaſtly oppoſed to the ſame;
                     Where, with ſweete wood, laide curiouſly by Ar
                           ••
                        ,
                     Whereon the Sunne might by reflexion beate,
                     Receiuing ſtrength from euerie ſecret part,
                     The fuell kindled with coleſtiall heate.
                     Thy bleſſed eies, the Sunne which lights this fire,
                     My holie thoughts, they be the Veſtall flame,
                     The precious odours be my chaſte deſire,
                     My breaſt the fuell which includes the ſa;
                     Thou arte my Veſta, thou my goddeſſe art,
                     Thy halowed temple one lie is my hart.
                  
                  
                     Sonnet 31.
                     ME thinkes I ſee ſome crooked Mimicks jeere,
                     And 
                           •
                        axe my Muſe with this fantaſticke grace,
                     Turning my papers, askes, what haue we heere?
                     Making withall, ſome filthie an
                           •
                        ike face;
                     I feare no cenſure, nor what thou canſt ſay,
                     Nor ſhall my ſpirit one jo
                           •
                        e of vigor loſe,
                     Thinkſt thou my wit ſhall keepe the packe-horſe way,
                     That eu'rie d
                           •
                        dgen lowe inuention goes?
                     Since Sonnets thus in bundles are impreſt,
                     And eu'rie drudge doth dull our ſa
                           •
                        iate e
                           •
                        re?
                     Thinkſt thou my Loue ſhall in thoſe ragges be dreſt,
                     That eu'rie dowdie, eu'rie t
                           •
                        ull doth wea
                           •
                        e?
                     Vnto my pitch no common iudgement flies,
                     I ſcorne all earthlie dung-bred ſcarabies.
                  
                  
                     
                     To the riuer Ankor. Sonnet 32.
                     OVr floudes Queene Thames; for ſhips & ſwans is crowned,
                     And ſtately Seuerne for her ſhoares is praiſed,
                     The criſtall Trent, for Foords and Fiſh renowned,
                     And Anons fame, to Albions cliues is raiſed.
                     
                        Carlegion Chester, vaunts her holie Dee,
                     
                     
                        Yorke manie wonders of her Owſe can tell,
                     The Peake her Doue, whoſe bankes ſo fertile bee,
                     And Kent will ſaie, her Medway doth excell,
                     
                        Cotſwold commends her Iſis and her Tame,
                     
                     Our northerne borders boaſt of Tweedes faire floud,
                     Our weſterne parts extoll her Wilis fame,
                     And olde Legea brags of Daniſh bloud;
                     
                        Ardens ſweete Ankor let thy glorie bee,
                     That faire Idea ſhe doth liue by thee.
                  
                  
                     To Imagination. Sonnet 33.
                     WHilſt yet mine eies doe ſurfet with delight,
                     My wofull hart impriſond in my breſt,
                     Wiſheth to be transformed in my ſight,
                     That it like thoſe, by looking might be bleſt,
                     But whilſt mine eies thus greedily doe gaze,
                     Finding their obiects ouer-ſoone departe,
                     Theſe now the others happines doe praiſe,
                     Wiſhing themſelues that they had bin my hart;
                     That eies were hart, or that the hart were eies,
                     As couetous the others vſe to haue;
                     But finding reaſon, their requeſt denies,
                     This to each other mutually they craue;
                     That ſince the one cannot the other bee,
                     That eies could thinke, or that my hart could ſee.
                  
                  
                     
                     To Admiration. Sonnet 34.
                     MAruell not Loue, though I thy power admire,
                     Rauiſht a world beyond the fartheſt thought,
                     That knowing more than euer hath bin taught,
                     That I am onelie ſta
                           •
                        u'd in my deſire;
                     Maruell not Loue, though I thy power admire,
                     Aiming at things exceeding all perfection,
                     To wiſedomes ſelfe to miniſter direction,
                     That I am onelie ſtaru'd in my deſire;
                     Maruell not Loue, though I thy power admire,
                     Though my conceit I further ſeeme to bend,
                     Than poſſibly inuention can extend,
                     And yet am onelie ſtaru'd in my deſire;
                     If thou wilt wonder, heere's the wonder Loue,
                     That this to me doth yet no wonder proue,
                  
                  
                     To Miracle. Sonnet 35.
                     SOme misbelieuing, and prophane in loue,
                     When I doe ſpeake of miracles by thee,
                     May ſay that thou art flattered by mee,
                     Who onelie write, my skill in verſe to proue.
                     See miracles, ye vnbeleeuing ſee,
                     A dumb-borne Muſe, made to expreſſe the minde,
                     A cripple hand to write, yet lame by kinde,
                     One by thy name, the other touching thee;
                     Blinde were mine eies, till they were ſeene of thine,
                     And mine eares deafe, by thy fame healed be,
                     My vices curde, by vertues ſprung from thee,
                     My hopes reuiu'd which long in graue had liue:
                     All vncleane thoughts, foule ſpirits caſt out in mee,
                     Onely by vertue that proceedes from thee.
                  
                  
                     
                     To Wonder. Sonnet 36.
                     REading ſometime, my ſorrowes to beguile,
                     I finde olde Poets hills and floods admire,
                     One, he doth wonder monſter breeding Nyle,
                     
                     Another maruells ſulphure Aetn
                              •
                           es fire.
                     Now broad-brimd Indus, then of Pindus height,
                     
                        Pe
                              •
                           ion and Oſſa, froſtie Cauc
                              •
                           ſe olde,
                     The Delian Cinthus, then Olympus weight,
                     Slow Arrer, franticke Gallus, Cydnus colde.
                     Some Ganges, Ister, and of Tagus tell,
                     Some whirle-poole Po, and ſliding Hypaſis,
                     
                     Some olde Pernaſſus where the Muſes dwell,
                     Some Helicon, and ſome faire Simois;
                     
                     A fooles thinke I, had you Idea ſeene,
                     Poore brookes and bankes, had no ſuch woonders beene
                  
                  
                     Sonnet 37.
                     DEere, why ſhould you commaund me to my 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                     
                     When now the night doth ſommon all to ſleepe?
                     Me thinkes this time becommeth Louers beſt,
                     Night was ordaind together friends to keepe,
                     How happie are all other liuing things,
                     Which though the daie disjoyne by ſeuerall flight,
                     The quiet euening yet together brings,
                     And each returnes vnto his loue at night.
                     O thou that art
                           •
                         ſo cu
                           ••
                        eous vnto all,
                     Whie ſhouldſt thou Night abuſe me onelie thus,
                     That euerie crea
                           •
                        ure to his kinde dooſt call,
                     And yet tis thou dooſt onelie ſeuer vs:
                     Well could I wiſh it would be euer daie,
                     If when night comes you bid me goe awaie.
                  
                  
                     
                     Sonnet 38.
                     SItting alone, Loue bids me goe and write,
                     Reaſon pluckes backe, commanding me to ſtaie,
                     Boaſting that ſhe dooth ſtil direct the waie,
                     Or elſe loue were vnable to indite;
                     Loue growing angrie, vexed at the ſpleene,
                     And ſcorning Reaſons maimed argument,
                     Strait taxeth Reaſon, wanting to inuent,
                     Where ſhe with Loue conuerſing hath not beene,
                     Reaſon reproched with this coy diſdaine,
                     Diſpiteth Loue, and laugheth at her follie,
                     And Loue contemning Reaſons reaſon wholie,
                     Thought it in weight too light by manie a graine.
                     Reaſon put backe, doth out of ſight remoue,
                     And Loue alone findes reaſon in my loue.
                  
                  
                     Sonnet 39.
                     SOme, when in time they of their loues doe tell,
                     With flames and lightning their exordiums paint,
                     Some call on heauen, ſome inuocate on hell,
                     And Fates and Furies with their woes acquaint,
                     
                        Elizium is too high a ſeate for me,
                     I will not come in Stix or Phlegiton,
                     
                     The thriee three Muſes but too wanton be,
                     Like they that luſt, I care not, I wil none.
                     Spitefull Errinis frights me with her lookes,
                     My manhoode dares not with foule Ate mell,
                     
                        I quake to looke on Heccats charming bookes,
                     
                        I ſtil feare bug-beares in Apolloes Cell.
                     
                        I paſſe not for Minorua, nor Aſtrea,
                     
                     Onelie I call vpon diuine Idea.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Sonnet. 40.
                     MY heart the a
                           •
                        uile where my thoughts do beate,
                     My words the hammers faſhioning my deſire,
                     My breaſt the forge, including all the heate,
                     Loue is the fuell which maintaines the fire:
                     My ſighes the bellowes which the ſame encreaſeth,
                     Filling mine eares with noiſe and nightly groning,
                     Toiling with paine, my labour neuer ceaſeth,
                     In grieuous paſſions my woes ſtill bemoning:
                     Mine eyes with teares againſt the fire ſtriuing,
                     Whoſe ſcorching gleed my heart to cinders turneth;
                     But with thoſe drops, the flame againe reuiuing,
                     Still more and more vnto my torment burneth:
                     With Siſiphus thus do I role the ſtone,
                     And turne the wheele with damned Ixion.
                     
                  
                  
                     Sonnet. 41.
                     WHy do I ſpeake of ioy, or write of loue,
                     When my heart is the very den of horror,
                     And in my ſoule the paines of hell I proue,
                     With all his torments and infernall terror?
                     What ſhould I ſay, what yet remaines to do?
                     My braine is drie with weeping all too long,
                     My ſighes be ſpent in yttring of my woe,
                     And I want words wherewith to tell my wrong:
                     But ſtill diſtracted in Loues lunacie,
                     And bedlam-like thus rauing in my griefe,
                     Now raile vpon her haire, now on her eye,
                     Now call her Goddeſſe, then I call her theefe;
                     Now I deny her, then I do confeſſe her,
                     Now do I curſe her, then againe I bleſſe her.
                  
                  
                     
                     Sonnet. 42.
                     SOme men there be which like my method well,
                     And do commend the ſtrangenes of my vaine,
                     Some ſay, I haue a paſſing pleaſing ſtraine,
                     Some ſay, that in my humor I excell:
                     Some, who not kindely reliſh my conceit,
                     They ſay (as Poets doe) I vſe to faine,
                     And in bare words paint out my paſſions paine.
                     Thus ſundry men their ſundry mindes repeate;
                     I paſſe not I, how men affected be,
                     Nor who commends, or diſcommends my verſe,
                     It pleaſeth me, if I my woes rehearſe,
                     And in my lines, if ſhe my loue may ſee:
                     Onely my comfort ſtill conſiſts in this,
                     Writing her praiſe, I cannot write amiſſo.
                  
                  
                     Sonnet. 43.
                     VVHy ſhould your faire eyes with ſuch ſoueraine grace,
                     Diſpearſe their raies on euery vulgar ſpirit,
                     Whilſt I in darkenes in the ſelfe ſame place,
                     Get not one glance to recompence my merit:
                     So doth the plow-man gaze the wandring ſtarre,
                     And onely reſts contented with the light,
                     That neuer learnd what conſtellations are,
                     Beyond the bent of his vnknowing fight.
                     O why ſhould beautie (cuſtome to obey)
                     To their groſſe ſence applie her ſelfe ſo ill?
                     Would God I were as ignorant as they,
                     When I am made vnhappy by my skill;
                     Onely compeld on this poore good to boaſt,
                     Heauens are not kind to the that know them moſt.
                  
                  
                     
                     Sonnet. 44.
                     VVHilſt thus my pen ſtriues to eternize thee,
                     Age rules my lines with wrinckles in my face,
                     Where in the map of all my miſerie,
                     Is modeld out the worlde of my diſgrace,
                     Whilſt in deſpight of tyrannizing times,
                     
                        Medea-like I make thee yong againe,
                     Prowdly thou ſcoruſt my world-outwearing rimes,
                     And murther'ſt Vertue with thy coy diſdaine;
                     And though in youth my youth vntimely periſh,
                     To keepe thee from obliuion and the graue,
                     Enſuing ages yet my rimes ſhall cheriſh,
                     When I entomb'd my better part ſhall ſaue;
                     And though this earthly bodie fade and die,
                     My name ſhall mount vpon eternitie.
                  
                  
                     Sonnet. 45.
                     MVſes which ſadly ſit about my chaire,
                     Drownd in the teares extorted by my lines,
                     With heauie ſighes whilſt thus I breake the aire,
                     Painting my paſſions in theſe ſad diſſignes;
                     Since ſhe diſdaines to bleſſe my happie verſe,
                     The ſtrong-built Trophies to her liuing fame,
                     Euer henceforth my boſome be your hearſe,
                     Wherein the world ſhall now entombe her name;
                     Encloſe my muſicke you poore ſenſeleſſe walls,
                     Sith ſhe is deafe and will not heare my mones,
                     Soften your ſelues with euerie teare that falls,
                     Whilſt I like Orpheus ſing to trees and ſtones;
                     Which with my plaint ſeeme yet with pittie moued,
                     Kinder then ſhe who I ſo long haue liued.
                  
                  
                     
                     Sonnet. 46.
                     PLain path'd Experience the vnlearneds guide,
                     Her ſimple followers euidently ſhewes,
                     Sometime what ſchoolemen ſcarcely can decide,
                     Nor yet wiſe Reaſon abſolutely knowes:
                     In making triall of a murther wrought,
                     If the yile actor of the he
                           •
                        nous deede,
                     Neere the dead bodie happily be brought.
                     Oft hath been prou'd the breathleſſe coarſe will bleed;
                     She comming neere that my poore hart hath ſlaine,
                     Long ſince departed (to the world no more)
                     The auncient wounds no longer can containe,
                     But fall to bleeding as they did before:
                     But what of this? ſhould ſhe to death be led.
                     It furthers iuſtice, but helpes not the dead.
                  
                  
                     Sonnet. 47.
                     IN pride of wit, when high deſire of fame
                     Gaue life and courage to my labouring 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                     
                     And firſt the ſound and vertue of my name,
                     Won grace and credite in the eares of men;
                     With thoſe the througed Theaters that preſſe.
                     I in the circuite for the Lawrell ſtroue,
                     Where the full praiſe I freely muſt confeſſe,
                     In heate of blood and modeſt minde might moue:
                     With ſhowts and claps at euerie little pawſe,
                     When the prowd round on euerie ſide hath rung.
                     Sadly I ſit vnmou'd with the applawſe,
                     As though to me it nothing did belong:
                     No publique glorie vainely I purſue.
                     The praiſe I ſtriue, is to eternize you.
                  
                  
                     
                     Sonnet. 48.
                     
                        CUpid, dumbe I doll, peeuiſh faint of Loue,
                     No more ſhalt thou nor ſaint nor idoll be,
                     No god art thou, Loues goddeſſe ſhe doth proue,
                     Of all thine honour ſhe hath robbed thee:
                     Thy bow olde broke, is peecde with halfe deſire,
                     Her bow is beautie with ten thouſand ſtrings,
                     And euery one of pureſt golden wire;
                     The leaſt, of force to conquer hoaſts of Kings:
                     Thy ſhafts be ſpent, and ſhe (to war appoynted)
                     Hides in thoſe Criſtall quiuers of her eyes,
                     More arrowes with hart-piercing mettle pointed,
                     Then there be ſtarres at mid-night in the skies:
                     With theſe ſhe ſteales mens harts for her releefe,
                     Yet happie he that's robd of ſuch a theefe.
                  
                  
                     Sonnet. 49.
                     THou leaden braine which cenſur'ſt what I write
                     And ſaiſt my lines be dull, and do not moue.
                     I maruaile not thou feel'ſt not my delight,
                     Which neuer feltſt my fierie tuch of loue:
                     But thou whoſe pen hath like a Packe-horſe ſeru'd,
                     Whoſe ſtomacke vnto gaule hath turnd thy food,
                     Whoſe ſenſes like poore priſners hunger-ſtaru'd.
                     Whoſe greefe hath parch'd thy body, dride thy blood;
                     Thou which haſt ſcorned life, and hated death,
                     And in a moment mad, ſober, glad and ſorie,
                     Thou which haſt bann'd thy thoughts, and curſt thy birth
                     With thouſand plagues more then in purgatory,
                     Thou thus whoſe ſpirit Loue in his fire refines,
                     Come thou and reade, admire and plawd my lines.
                  
                  
                     
                     Sonnet. 50.
                     AS in ſome Countries far remote from hence,
                     The wretched creature deſtined to die,
                     Hauing the iudgement due to his offence,
                     By Surgeons begg'd, their Art on him to trie:
                     Which on the liuing worke without remorce,
                     Firſt make inciſion on each maiſtring vaine,
                     Then ſtanch the bleeding, then tranſperce the coarſe,
                     And with their balmes recure the wounds againe,
                     Then poiſon and with Phiſicke him reſtore,
                     Not that they feare the hopeleſſe man to kill,
                     But their experience to encreaſe the more;
                     Euen ſo my Miſtreſſe works vpon my ill,
                     By curing me, and killing me each howre,
                     Onely to ſhew her beauties ſoueraigne powre.
                  
                  
                     Sonnet. 51.
                     CAlling minde ſince firſt my loue begunne,
                     Th'incertaine times oft varying in their courſe,
                     How things ſtill vnexpectedly haue runne,
                     As pleaſe the fates, by their reſiſtleſſe force:
                     Laſtly, mine eyes amazedly haue ſeene,
                     
                        Eſſex great fall, Tyroue his peace to gaine,
                     The quiet end of that long-liuing Queene,
                     This Kings faire entrance, and our peace with Spaine,
                     
                     We and the Dutch at length our ſelues to ſeuer,
                     Thus the world doth, and euermore ſhall reele,
                     Yet to my goddeſſe am I conſtant euer;
                     How ere blind fortune turne her giddie wheele:
                     Though heauen & earth proue both to me vntrue,
                     Yet am I ſtill inuiolate to you.
                  
                  
                     
                     An aluſion to Dedalus and Icarus. Sonnet 52.
                     MY heart impriſoned in a hopeleſſe Ile,
                     Peopled with Armies of pale jealous eyes,
                     The ſhores beſet with thouſand ſecret ſpies,
                     Muſt paſſe by ayre, or elſe die in exile;
                     He framde him wings with feathers of his thought,
                     Which by their nature learnd to mount the skie,
                     And with the ſame he practiſed to flie,
                     Till he himſelfe this Eagles Art had taught:
                     Thus ſoaring ſtill, not looking once below,
                     So neere thine eyes celeſtiall ſunne aſpired,
                     That with the raies his wafting pineons fired:
                     Thus was the wanton cauſe of his owne woe,
                     Downe fell he in thy beauties Ocean drenched,
                     Yet there he burnes in fire that's neuer quenched.
                  
                  
                     Another to the Riuer Ankor. Sonnet 53.
                     CLeere Ankor, on whoſe ſiluer-ſanded ſhore,
                     My ſoule-ſhrin'd ſaint, my faire Idea lies,
                     O bleſſed brooke, whoſe milke-white ſwans adore
                     That criſtall ſtreame refined by her eyes,
                     Where ſweet mirth-breathing Zephire in the ſpring,
                     Gently diſtills his Nectar-dropping ſhowers,
                     Where Nightingales in Arden ſit and ſing,
                     Amongſt the daintie dew-impearled flowers;
                     Say thus faire Brooke, when thou ſhalt ſee thy Queene,
                     Loe heere thy ſheep heard ſpent his wandring yeeres;
                     And in theſe ſhades deere Nimph he oft hath beene.
                     And heere to thee he ſacrifizde his teares:
                     Faire Arden, thou my Tempe art alone,
                     And thou ſweete Ankor art my Helicon.
                  
                  
                     
                     Sonnet. 54.
                     YEt reade at laſt the ſtory of my woe,
                     The drery abſtracts of my endleſſe cares,
                     With my like ſorrow enterlined ſo,
                     Smokde with my ſighes, and blotted with my teares;
                     The ſad memorialls of my miſeries,
                     Pend
                           •
                        n the griefe of mine afflicted ghoſt;
                     My lifes complaint in dolefull Elegies,
                     With ſo pure loue as time could neuer boaſt:
                     Receiue the incence which I offer heere,
                     By my ſtrong faith aſcending to thy fame,
                     My zeale, my hope, my vowes, my praiſe, my praier,
                     My ſoules oblations to thy ſacred name:
                     Which name my Muſe to higheſt heauen ſhal raiſe,
                     By chaſte deſire, true loue, and vertues praiſe.
                  
                  
                     Sonnet 55.
                     MY Faire, if thou wilt regiſter my loue,
                     More then worlds volumes ſhall thereof ariſe;
                     Preſerue my teares, and thou thy ſelfe ſhalt proue,
                     A ſecond flood downe raining from mine eyes:
                     Note but my ſighes, and thine eyes ſhall behold,
                     The ſun-beames ſmothered with immortall ſmoke;
                     And if by thee my praiers may be enrold,
                     They heauen and earth to pittie ſhall prouoke;
                     Looke thou into my breaſt, and thou ſhalt ſee,
                     Chaſte holy vowes for my ſoules ſacrifice,
                     That ſoule (ſweete Maide) which ſo hath honored thee,
                     Erecting Trophies to thy ſacred eyes;
                     Thoſe eyes to my hart ſhining euer bright,
                     When darkenes hath obſcurde each other light.
                  
                  
                     
                     An alluſion to the Aegl
                           •
                        ts. Sonnet 56.
                     MY thoughts bred vp with Eagle-birds of loue,
                     And for their vertues I deſirde to know;
                     Vpon the neaſt I ſet them forth, to proue
                     If they were of the Eagles kinde, or no.
                     But they no ſooner ſawe my ſunne appeare,
                     But on her raies with gazing eyes they ſtoode,
                     Which proou'd my birds delighted in the aire,
                     And that they came of this rare kingly broode.
                     But now their plumes full ſummde with ſweete deſire,
                     To ſhew their kinde, beganne to clime the skies:
                     Doe what I could, my Eglets would aſpire,
                     Strait mounting vp to thy celeſtiall eies.
                     And thus (my Faire) my thoughts away be flowne,
                     And from my breaſt into thine eies be gone.
                  
                  
                     Sonnet 57.
                     YOu beſt diſcern'd of my interior eies,
                     And yet your graces outwardly diuine,
                     Whoſe deare remembrance in my boſome lies,
                     Too rich a relique for ſo poore a ſhrine:
                     You in whome Nature choſe herſelfe to view,
                     When ſhe her owne perfection would admire,
                     Beſtowing all her excellence on you;
                     At whoſe pure eies Loue lights his halowed fire,
                     Euen as a man that in ſome traunce hath ſeene,
                     More than his wondring vttrance can vnfolde,
                     That rapt in ſpirite in better worlds hath beene,
                     So muſt your praiſe diſtractedly be tolde;
                     Moſt of all ſhort, when I ſhould ſhew you moſt,
                     In your perfections altogether loſt.
                  
                  
                     
                     Sonnet 58.
                     IN former times, ſuch as had ſtore of coyne,
                     In warres at home, or when for conqueſts bound,
                     For feare that ſome their treaſures ſhould purloyne,
                     Gaue it to keepe to ſpirites within the ground;
                     And to attend it, them ſo ſtrongly tide,
                     Till they return'd, home when they neuer came,
                     Such as by art to get the ſame haue tride,
                     From the ſtrong ſpirite by no means get the ſame,
                     Neerer you come, that further flies away,
                     Striuing to holde it ſtrongly in the deepe:
                     Euen as this ſpirit, ſo ſhe alone doth play,
                     With thoſe rich Beauties heauen giues her to keepe:
                     Pitty ſo left, to coldenes of her blood,
                     Not to auaile her, nor doe others good.
                  
                  
                     To Prouerb. Sonnet 59.
                     
                        AS Loue and I, late harbourde in one Inne,
                     
                     
                        With Proueths thus each other entertaine;
                     
                     In loue there is no lacke, thus I beginne:
                     Faire wordes makes fooles, replieth he againe:
                     That ſpares to ſpeake, doth ſpare to ſpeede (quoth I)
                     As well (ſaith he) too forward as too ſlowe.
                     Fortune aſſistes the boldest, I reply:
                     A hastie man (quoth he) ne're wanted woe.
                     Labour is light, where loue (quoth I) doth pay,
                     (Saith he) light burthens heauy, if farre borne:
                     (Quoth I) the maine lost, cast the by away:
                     You haue ſpunne a faire thred, he replies in ſcorne.
                     
                        And hauing thus a while each other thwarted,
                     
                     
                        Fooles as we met, ſo fooles againe we parted.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Sonnet 60.
                     DEfine my loue, and tell the ioyes of heauen,
                     Expreſſe my woes, and ſhew the paines of hell,
                     Declare what fate vnluckie ſtarres haue giuen,
                     And aske a world vpon my life to dwell.
                     Make knowne that faith, vnkindnes could not moue;
                     Compare my worth with others baſe deſart,
                     Let vertue be the tuch-ſtone of my loue,
                     So may the heauens reade wonders in my hart;
                     Beholde the cloudes which haue eclipſde my ſunne,
                     And view the croſſes which my courſe doth let;
                     Tell me, if euer ſince the world begunne,
                     So faire a riſing had ſo foule a ſet:
                     And by all meanes, let foule vnkindnes proue,
                     And ſhew a ſecond to ſo pure a loue.
                  
                  
                     Sonnet 61.
                     WHen firſt I ended, then I firſt beganne,
                     The more I trauell, further from my reſt,
                     Where moſt I loſt, there moſt of all I wanne,
                     Pined with hunger, riſing from a feaſt.
                     Me thinkes I flee, yet want I legs to goe,
                     Wiſe in conceit, in act a very ſot,
                     Rauiſht with ioy amidſt a hell of woe,
                     What moſt I ſeeme, that ſureſt am I not.
                     
                        I build my hopes a world aboue the skie,
                     Yet with the Mole I creepe into the earth,
                     In plenty am I 
                        
                           ••
                        aru'd with penurie,
                     And yet I ſurffet in the greateſt dearth:
                     
                        I haue, I want, diſpaire, and yet deſire,
                     Burn'd in a ſea of ice, and drown'd amidſt a fire.
                  
                  
                     
                     Sonnet 62.
                     TRuce gentle Loue, a parlee now I craue,
                     Me thinks tis long ſince firſt theſe warres begun,
                     Nor thou nor I, the better yet can haue:
                     Bad is the match where neither party wonne.
                     
                        I offer free conditions of faire peace,
                     My heart for hoſtage, that it ſhall remaine,
                     Diſcharge our forces heere, let malice ceaſe,
                     So for my pledge, thou giue me pledge againe.
                     Or if nothing but death will ſerue thy turne,
                     Still thirſting for ſubuerſion of my ſtate;
                     Doe what thou canſt, raze, maſſacre, and burne,
                     Let the world ſee the vtmoſt of thy hate:
                     
                        I ſend defiance, ſince if ouerthrowne,
                     Thou vanquiſhing, the conqueſt is mine owne.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Certaine other Sonnets to great and worthy Perſonages.
                  
                  
                     To the high and mightie Prince, Iames king of Scots. Sonnet 61.
                     NOt thy graue Counſells, nor thy ſubiects loue,
                     Nor all that famous Scottiſh royaltie,
                     Or what thy ſoueraigne greatnes may approue,
                     Others in vaine doe but hiſtorifie,
                     When thine owne glory from thy ſelfe doth ſpring,
                     As though thou didſt all meaner praiſes ſcornee
                     Of Kings a Poet, and the Poets King,
                     They Princes, but thou Prophets dooſt adorne;
                     Whilſt others by their Empires are renown'd,
                     Thou dooſt enrich thy Scotland with renowne,
                     And Kings can but with diadems be crown'd,
                     But with thy laurell thou dooſt crowne thy Crowne;
                     That they whoſe pens (euen) life to Kings do giue,
                     In thee a King, ſhall ſeeke themſelues to liue.
                  
                  
                     
                     To Lucy Counteſſe of Bedford. Son. 61.
                     GReat Lady, eſſence of my chiefeſt good,
                     Of the moſt pure and fineſt tempred ſpirit,
                     Adorn'd with gifts ennobled by thy blood,
                     Which by deſcent true vertue dooſt inherit:
                     That vertue which no fortune can depriue,
                     Which thou by birth tak'ſt from thy gratious mother,
                     Whoſe royall mindes with equall motion ſtriue,
                     Which moſt in honour ſhall excell the other;
                     Vnto thy fame my Muſe herſelfe ſhall taske,
                     Which rainſt vpon me thy ſweete golden ſhowers,
                     And but thy ſelfe, no ſubiect will I aske,
                     Vpon whoſe praiſe my ſoule ſhall ſpend her powers.
                     Sweet Lady yet, grace this poore Muſe of mine,
                     whoſe faith, whoſe zeal, whoſe life, whoſe al is thine.
                  
                  
                     To the Lady Anne Harington. Sonnet. 62.
                     MAdam, my words cannot expreſſe my minde,
                     My zealous kindnes to make knowne to you,
                     When your deſerts all ſeuerally I finde;
                     In this attempt of me do craue their due:
                     Your gratious kindenes firſt doth claime my hart,
                     Your bounty bids my hand to make it knowne,
                     Of me your vertues each doe challenge part,
                     And leaue me thus the leaſt that is mine owne:
                     What ſhould commend your modeſty and wit,
                     Is by your wit and modeſty commended,
                     And ſtandeth dumbe, in moſt admiring it,
                     And where it ſhould begin, is onely ended;
                     Returning this your praiſes onely due,
                     And to your ſelfe, ſay you are onely you.
                  
                  
                     
                     To the Lady L. S. Sonet 63.
                     BRight ſtarre of Beauty, on whoſe cie-lids ſit,
                     A thouſand Nymph-like and enamoured graces,
                     The goddeſſes of memorie and wit,
                     which in due order take their ſeuerall places,
                     In whoſe deere boſome, ſweete delicious loue,
                     Layes downe his quiuer, that he once did beare,
                     Since he that bleſſed Paradice did proue,
                     Forſooke his mothers lap to ſport him there.
                     Let others ſtriue to entertaine with wordes,
                     My ſoule is of another temper made;
                     I holde it vile that vulgar wit affords,
                     Deuouring time my faith ſhall not inuade:
                     Still let my praiſe be honoured thus by you,
                     Be you moſt worthie, whilſt I be moſt true.
                  
                  
                     To ſir Anthonie Cooke. Sonet 64.
                     VOuchſafe to grace theſe rude vnpolliſht rimes,
                     Which but for you had ſlept in ſable night,
                     And come abroade now in theſe glorious times,
                     Can hardly brooke the purenes of the light.
                     But ſith you ſee their deſtenie is ſuch,
                     That in the world their fortune they muſt try,
                     Perhaps they better ſhall abide the tuch,
                     Wearing your name their gracious liuerie.
                     Yet theſe mine owne, I wrong not other men,
                     Nor traffike further then this happy clime,
                     Nor filch from Portes, not from Petrarchs pen,
                     A fault too common in this latter time;
                     Diuine ſir Philip, I auouch thy writ,
                     I am no picke-purſe of anothers wit.
                  
                  Finis.
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  The Legend of Robert Duke of Normandie.
                  
                  
                     WHat time ſoft night had ſilently begunne,
                     To ſteale by minutes on the long-liu'd daies,
                     The furious dogge purſuing of the ſunne,
                     Whoſe noyſome breath addes feruor to his raies,
                     That to the earth ſends many a ſad diſeaſe:
                     Which then inflam'd with his intemprate fires,
                     Her ſelfe in light habiliments attires.
                  
                  
                     When the rathe morning newly but awake,
                     Scarſe with freſh beautie burniſhed her browes,
                     Her ſelfe beholding in the generall Lake,
                     (To which ſhe paies her neuer-ceaſing vowes,)
                     With the new day me willingly to rowze;
                     Downe to faire Thames I ſoftly tooke my way,
                     Where the milde windes continually do play.
                  
                  
                     Striuing to fancie his chaſte breaſt to moue,
                     Whereas all pleaſures plentifully flowe,
                     When him along the wanton tide doth 
                           •
                        houe,
                     And to keepe backe they eaſily doe blow,
                     Still meete him comming, thinking him too ſlowe:
                     He forcing waues to checke their hote imbrace,
                     They fanning breath vpon his criſtall face.
                  
                  
                     
                     Still forward ſallying from his bounteous 
                           •
                        ource,
                     Along the ſhores laſciuio
                           •
                        ſly doth ſtraine,
                     And often times retreating in his courſe,
                     As to his fountaine he would backe againe,
                     Or turnde to looke vpon his ſiluer 
                           〈◊〉
                        ;
                     With coy regards the goodly ſoile he greetes,
                     Till with faire Medway happily he meetes.
                  
                  
                     Steering my compaſſe by the wandring ſtreame,
                     whoſe flight might teach me 
                           〈…〉
                        es ne'r-turning howrs,
                     Delighted thus as in a pretty dreame,
                     Where pleaſure wholly had poſſeſt my powres;
                     Yet looking backe on Londons c
                           〈…〉
                        g Towres,
                     So Troy, thought I, her ſtately head did reare,
                     Whoſe crazed ribs the furrowing plow doth eire.
                  
                  
                     Wearie at length, a willow-tree I found,
                     Which on the banke of this great torrent ſtood,
                     Whoſe roote, with rich graſſe greatly did abound,
                     (Forc'd by the moiſture of the ſurging flood)
                     Ordain'd it ſeemde to ſport her Nimphiſh brood;
                     Whoſe curled top denied the heauens great eye,
                     To view the ſtocke he was maintained by.
                  
                  
                     The Larke that learnes obſeruance to the Sunne,
                     Quauers her cleere notes in the quiet ayre,
                     That on the riuers murmuring baſe doth runne,
                     And the pl
                           〈…〉
                        ſde heauens, their faireſt liuery ware,
                     The place ſuch pleaſure gently doth prepare;
                     The flowers my ſcent, the flood my taſte to ſteepe,
                     Each ſence thus ſ
                           •
                        ted, 
                           〈…〉
                        ed me aſleepe.
                  
                  
                     
                     When in a dreame it ſeemed vnto me,
                     Triumphall muſicke from the flood aroſe,
                     As when the Soueraigne we embargde do ſee,
                     And by faire London for his pleaſure rowes,
                     whoſe tender welcome the glad Cittie ſhowes;
                     The people ſwarming thicke vpon the ſhores,
                     And the curlde water ouer-ſpread with oa
                           •
                        es.
                  
                  
                     A troupe of Nimphs came ſuddainely on land,
                     In the full end of this triumphall ſound,
                     And me incompaſt, taking hand in hand,
                     Caſting themſelues about me in a round,
                     And ſo downe ſet them on the eaſie ground;
                     Their ſober eyes caſt with a modeſt grace,
                     Vpon my ſwarth and melancholy face.
                  
                  
                     Next, twixt two Ladies came a goodly Knight,
                     As newly brought from ſome diſtreſſefull place,
                     To me who ſeemed ſome right worthy wight,
                     Though his attire were miſerable baſe,
                     Many deepe furrowes in his manly face;
                     And though cold age had froſted his faire haires,
                     It rather ſeemde with ſorrow then with yeares.
                  
                  
                     The one a Lady of a p
                           •
                        incely port,
                     Leading this ſad Lord, ſcarcely that could ſtand,
                     The other fleering in diſdainefull ſort,
                     with ſcornefull ieſtures drew him by the hand,
                     who lame and blinde, yet bound with many a band;
                     which (I perceiued nearer as they came)
                     That this was Fortune, that more conſtant fame.
                  
                  
                     
                     Fame on the right hand in a robe of golde,
                     whoſe traine old Time obſequiouſly did beare,
                     whereon in rich Embraudry was enrolde,
                     The acts of all the worthies euer weare,
                     which all might reade depainted liuely there,
                     Set downe in loftie well compoſed verſe,
                     Fi
                           •
                        ſt the great deedes of Heroes to rehearſe.
                  
                  
                     On her faire breaſt ſhe two broad Tablets wore,
                     Of criſtall th'one, the other Ebony,
                     where were ingrauen all the names of yore,
                     In the large Toombe of laſting memory,
                     Or the blacke booke of endleſſe obloquy;
                     The firſt with Poets and with Conquerours pilde,
                     That with baſe worldlings euery where defilde.
                  
                  
                     And in her words appeared (as a wonder)
                     Her inſtant force and after-during might,
                     which ſoftly ſpoke, farre off were heard to thunder,
                     About the world that quickly tooke their flight,
                     And brought the moſt obſcureſt things to light:
                     That ſtill the farther off, the greater ſtill
                     Did ſound our good, or manifeſt our ill.
                  
                  
                     Fortune, as blinde as he whom ſhe did leade,
                     Her feature often changing in an hower,
                     Fantaſtically carying her head,
                     Soone would ſhe ſmile, and ſodainely would lower,
                     And with one breath, her words both ſweete & ſower
                     Vpon her foes ſhe amorouſly would glance,
                     And on her followers coily looke askance.
                  
                  
                     
                     About her necke in manner of a chaine,
                     Torne diadems and broken ſcepters hung,
                     If any on her ſtedfaſtly did leane,
                     Them to the ground di
                           •
                        dainefully ſhe flung;
                     And in this order as ſhee paſſt along,
                     Great bags of gold out of her boſome drew,
                     Which to the vnworthieſt euermore ſhe threw.
                  
                  
                     A duskie vaile which hid her ſightleſſe eyes,
                     Like clowdes that couer our vncertaine liues,
                     wherein were portraide direfull tragedies,
                     Fooles wearing Crownes, and wiſe-men clogg'd in giues,
                     All things how ſhe prepoſterouſly contriues;
                     That as a map her regency diſcouers,
                     In Camps, in Courts, and in the fate of louers.
                  
                  
                     An eaſie bancke neere to this place there was,
                     A ſeate faire Flora vſde to ſit vpon,
                     Curling her faire lockes in this liquid glaſſe,
                     Putting her rich gems and attirings on,
                     Fitter then this about vs was there none;
                     Heere ſet they downe this poore diſtreſſed man,
                     And in this ſort prowd Fortune thus began.
                  
                  
                     Behold this Duke of Normandie quoth ſhee,
                     The heire of William, Conqueror of this Ile,
                     Appealing to be iuſtifi'd by thee,
                     (whoſe tragedy this Poet muſt compile)
                     He of all other that I hold moſt vile,
                     His birth being markde with my vnluckie brand,
                     For whom I ſee thou com'ſt preparde to ſtand.
                  
                  
                     
                     What art thou but a tumor of the minde,
                     A bubble blowne vp with deceitfull breath,
                     Which neuer yet exactly wert definde,
                     In whom no wiſe man t'rerepoſed faith,
                     Speaking of few well vntill after death,
                     That from looſe humor haſt thy timeleſſe birth,
                     Vnknowne to heauen, and leſſe eſteemde on earth?
                  
                  
                     Firſt in opinion hadſt thou thy creation,
                     On whom thou ſtill dooſt ſeruilely attend,
                     Like whom thou long retainſt not any faſhion,
                     But with the world vncertainely dooſt wend,
                     Which as a poſte, doth vp and downe thee ſend;
                     Without prophane tongs, thou could'ſt neuer riſe,
                     Nor be vpholden, were it not with lies.
                  
                  
                     In euery corner prying like a theefe,
                     And through each cranny ſubtilely dooſt creepe,
                     Apt to report, and eaſie of beleefe:
                     What's he whoſe counſell thou didſt euer keepe,
                     That into cloſſets ſawcily darſte peepe
                           •
                        
                     
                     Telling for truth, what thou canſt but ſuppoſe,
                     And that divulging, thou ſhouldſt not diſcloſe.
                  
                  
                     With extreame toile and labour thou art ſought,
                     The way is danger leadeth to thy Cell,
                     Onely with blood thy fauour muſt be bought,
                     And who would haue thee, fetcheth thee from hell,
                     Where thou impalde with fire and ſword doſt dwell,
                     And when thou art in all this perill found,
                     What art thou? onely but a tinckling ſound.
                  
                  
                     
                     Such as the world holds (of all other) baſe,
                     And of the reſt reproachfully doth ſcorne,
                     That amongſt men ſit in the ſeruilſt place,
                     Theſe be the creatures which thou dooſt ſubborne,
                     Thoſe waite on fame, whoſe weedes be neerely worne,
                     Yet theſe poore wretches come not vnto thee,
                     Vnleſſe preferrde and dignifide by mee.
                  
                  
                     Thy trumpe ſuch men ſuppoſed to aduance,
                     Is but as thoſe fantaſtically deeme,
                     Whom folly, youth, or vanity intrance,
                     Onely to ſound ſufficing but to ſeeme,
                     (Which the wiſe ſort a dotage but eſteeme;)
                     And with this toy the humerous abuſing,
                     Their wilfull error, and thy fault excuſing.
                  
                  
                     Except in perill thou dooſt not appeare,
                     And yet not then, but with intreates and wooing.
                     Flying oft times when thou art very neare
                     At hand, diminiſhd and augmented going,
                     On ſlighteſt things the greateſt coſt beſtowing;
                     In promiſing their loſſes to repaire,
                     When the performance is but onely ayre.
                  
                  
                     On balefull hearſes as the fitteſt grounds,
                     (Written with blood) thy ſad memorialls lie,
                     Whoſe letters are immedicable wounds,
                     Onely fit obiects for the weeping eye,
                     And from the duſt thou worth dooſt only try;
                     And what ſometime thou falſly didſt depraue,
                     Thou dooſt acknowledge onely in the graue.
                  
                  
                     
                     The mighty Orbe is witneſſe of my power,
                     And how I raigne with the eternall fates,
                     With whom I ſit in councell euery howre,
                     On th'alterations of the times and ſtates,
                     Them ſetting downe their changes and their dates,
                     In fore-apointing euery thing to come,
                     Vntill the great and vniuerſall doome.
                  
                  
                     The ſtarres to me an euerlaſting booke,
                     In that eternall regiſter the skie,
                     Whoſe mighty volumes I do ouer-looke,
                     Still turning o're the leaues of deſtinie;
                     which man I to inuiolate, denie,
                     And his fraile will imperiouſly controle,
                     By ſuch ſtrong clauſes as I there enrole.
                  
                  
                     Predeſtination giuing me a being,
                     whoſe depth mans wit could neuer throughly ſound,
                     Into thoſe ſecrets haue I onely ſeeing,
                     wherein wiſe Reaſon doth herſelfe confound,
                     Searching where doubts do more and more abound;
                     where ſacred texts vnlocke the way to mee,
                     To lighten thoſe that will my glory ſee.
                  
                  
                     What names old Poets to their gods did giue,
                     were ouely figures to expreſſe my might,
                     To ſhew the vertues that in medo liue,
                     And my great power in this all-moouing wight,
                     And all their altars vnto me were dight;
                     Vp alterations euermore did bring,
                     Matter whereon, continually they ſing.
                  
                  
                     
                     Still moſt vncertaine varying in my courſe,
                     Yet in all changes aime one certaine end,
                     Croſſing mans fore-caſt (he may know my force)
                     Still foe to none, to none a perfect friend,
                     To him leaſt thought of, ſooneſt I do ſend;
                     That all ſhould finde I worthily beſtow,
                     Nor reaſonvrge, but that I hold it ſo.
                  
                  
                     Forth of my lap I powre aboundant bliſſe,
                     All good proceedes from my all-giuing hand,
                     By me, man happy or vnhappy is;
                     For whom I ſticke, or whom I doe with ſtand,
                     And it is I am friendſhips onely band;
                     And vpon which, all greedily take hold,
                     VVhich being broke, loue ſuddainely growes cold.
                  
                  
                     Pawſing, ſhe frownes, when ſuddainely withall,
                     A fearefull noiſe ariſeth from the ſtood,
                     As when a tempeſt furiouſly doth fall,
                     within the thicke waſte of ſome antient wood,
                     That in amazement euery mortall ſtoode;
                     As though her words ſuch powerfulneſſe did beare,
                     That euery thing her minaces did feare.
                  
                  
                     VVhen fame yet ſmiling, mildely thus replies,
                     Alas quoth ſhe, what labor thou haſt loſt,
                     what wond'rous miſts thou caſts before our eyes?
                     Yet will the gaine not countervaile the coſt;
                     what wouldſt thou ſay if thou hadſt cauſe to boaſt,
                     which ſett'ſt thy ſtate forth in ſuch wond'rous ſort,
                     VVhich but thy ſelfe, none euer could report
                           •
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     A thing conſtrained onely by euent,
                     Breeding in ſome a tranſitory terror;
                     A, what men will, that comes by accident,
                     And onely named to excuſe their error.
                     What then is Fortune? or who doth preferre her?
                     Or who to thee ſo fooliſh is to leane,
                     Which weake tradition onely doth maintain?
                  
                  
                     A toy whereon the doting world doth dreame,
                     Soothed by that vncertaine obſeruation
                     Of all attempts, that being the extreame,
                     Faſtneth thereby on weake imagination;
                     Yet notwithſtanding all this vſurpation,
                     Vnto thy ſelfe art incidently loathing
                     Moſt, when thou woldſt be, that art rightly nothing.
                  
                  
                     That ſlightly by inſinuating thus,
                     And vnder ſo allowable pretence,
                     Cloſely incroacheth on mans Genius,
                     
                     In good and euill taking refidence,
                     And hauing got ſome ſmall preheminence,
                     Vnto thy ſelfe a being that wouldſt frame,
                     Findes in concluſion only but a name.
                  
                  
                     Thoſe ignorant which made a god of Nature,
                     And Natures God diuinely neuer knew,
                     Were thoſe to Fortune did direct a ſtature,
                     From whom thy worſhip ignorantly grew,
                     Which being adored fooliſhly by few,
                     Grounded thy looſer and vncertaine lawes,
                     Vpon ſo weake and indigent a cauſe.
                  
                  
                     
                     Firſt, ſtouth did beare thee in her ſleepy cell,
                     And thee with eaſe diſhonourably fed,
                     Deliuering thee with Cowardice to dwell,
                     Which with baſe thoughts continually thee bred.
                     By ſuperſtition idely being led:
                     A lewd impoſture after did thee make,
                     Whom for a goddeſſe fooles doe onely take.
                  
                  
                     And as thy followers, nothing dooſt forecaſt.
                     And as thou arte improuident, as light;
                     And this the chiefeſt property thou haſt,
                     That againſt vertue thou bendſt all thy might,
                     With whom thou wageſt a continuall fight;
                     The yeelding ſpirite in fetters thou dooſt binde,
                     But weake and ſlauiſh to the conſtant minde.
                  
                  
                     Such is thy froward and malignant kinde,
                     That thou dooſt all things croſſely in deſpight,
                     Thou art inamored of a barbarous hinde,
                     Whome thou dooſt make thy onely fauorite,
                     None but the baſe in baſeneſſe doth delight;
                     For wert thou heauenly; thou in loue wouldſt bee,
                     with that which neereſt doth reſemble thee.
                  
                  
                     But I alone the herauld am of heauen,
                     Whoſe ſpacious kingdome ſhetcheth farre and wide,
                     To euery coaſt as ſwift as lightning driuen,
                     And on the ſunne-beames gloriouſly I ride;
                     Now mount I vp, now downe againe I ſlide:
                     I regiſter the worlds eternall howres,
                     That know the hid will of th'immortall powres.
                  
                  
                     
                     Men to the ſtarres, me guiding them, do clime,
                     That all dimenſions perfectly expreſſe,
                     And I alone the vanquiſher of time,
                     Bearing that ſweere that cures deaths bitterneſſe,
                     That doe all labour plentifully bleſſe,
                     That all obſtruſe profundities impart,
                     Leading man through the tedious wayes of Arte.
                  
                  
                     My pallace placed betwixt earth and skies,
                     Which many a Tower ambitiouſly vpheares,
                     Whereof the windowes are compoſde of eies,
                     The walles as ſtrongly edifide of eares,
                     where euery thing in heauen and earth appeares,
                     Nothing ſo ſoftly whiſpered in the round,
                     But through my pallace preſently doth ſound.
                  
                  
                     And vnder-foote floor'd all about with drummes,
                     The rafters trumpets admirably cleere,
                     Sounding alowde each name that thither comes,
                     The crannies tongues, and talking euery where,
                     And all things paſt doe in remembrance beare:
                     The doores vnlocke with euery little breath,
                     And open wide with euery word man ſaith.
                  
                  
                     And throwout hung with armes & conquer'd ſpoiles,
                     The poſtes whereon the goodly roofe doth ſtand,
                     Are Pillars grauen with Herculian toiles,
                     Th'atchieuements great of many a warrelike hand,
                     Both in the chriſten'd and in heathen land;
                     Done by thoſe Nobles that are moſt renown'd,
                     Which there by me immortally are crown'd.
                  
                  
                     
                     Here in the bodies likenes whilſt it liues,
                     Appeare the thoughts proceeding from the minde,
                     To which the place a glorious habite giues,
                     When vnto me they freely are reſignde,
                     To be preſeru'd there, by my power refinde;
                     That when the body by plae death doth periſh,
                     Then doth this place the minds true Image cheriſh.
                  
                  
                     My beautie neuer Fades, but as new borne,
                     As yeares increaſe, ſo euer waxing yong,
                     My ſtrength is not diminiſhed, nor worne,
                     What weakeneth all things, makes me onely ſtrong,
                     Nor am I ſubiect vnto worldly wrong,
                     The rape of time I careleſly defie,
                     Nor am I awde by all his tyrannie.
                  
                  
                     The brow of heauen my monuments containe,
                     which is the mighty regiſter of Fame,
                     which there in firie characters remaine,
                     The gorgeous ſeeling of th'immortall frame,
                     The Conſtellations publiſhing my name
                     where my memorialls euermore abide,
                     In thoſe pure bodies highly glorifide.
                  
                  
                     F
                           〈…〉
                         hauing ended, Fortune next beganne,
                     Further to vrge what ſhe before had ſaid,
                     when (loe quoth ſhe) duke Robert is the man,
                     which as my priſners I in bondes do leade,
                     For whome thou comſt againſt me heere to pleade,
                     Whome I alone deprined of his crowne,
                     Who can raiſe him that Fortune will haue downe?
                  
                  
                     
                     A fitter inſtance (Fame replying) none,
                     Then is Duke Robert, Fortune do thy worſt,
                     Greater to man thy might was neuer ſhowne,
                     Doing on him what euer Fortune durſt;
                     And ſince thy turne allotted thee the firſt,
                     Proceede; ſee which the Norman Duke ſhall haue,
                     Whether that Fame, or Fortune and the graue.
                  
                  
                     Quoth Fortune then, I found th'vnſtedfaſt ſtarre,
                     Whoſe luckleſſe working limited his fate,
                     That mark'd his ſad natiuitie with warre,
                     And brothers moſt vnnaturall debate,
                     Publique ſedition and with priuate hate,
                     And on that good his father him begunne,
                     Grounded the wracke and downe fal of this ſonne.
                  
                  
                     What bounteous nature franckly did beſtow,
                     Wherein her beſt ſhe ſtrained her to trie,
                     Thereby, himſelfe I made him ouerthrow,
                     Aboue you both ſo powerfull am I;
                     His breaſt to all ſo openly did lie,
                     Iudg'd from his faſhion differing ſo farre,
                     For peace too milde, too mercifull for warre.
                  
                  
                     And yet the courage that he did inherit,
                     And from the greatneſſe of his blood did take,
                     Though ſhrowded in ſo peaceable a ſpirit,
                     When now his wrong ſo roughly did awake,
                     Forthwith ſuch furie violently brake,
                     As made the world impartially to ſee,
                     All humane actions managed by mee.
                  
                  
                     
                     That till reuenge was wholly him bere
                           •
                        t,
                     Oppoſde againſt ſo abſolute a powre,
                     And him to leane on nothing being left,
                     when danger moſt him threatned to deuoure,
                     Vnto the period of the vtmoſt howre;
                     Him flattering ſtill with promiſe of my loue,
                     Did make him all extreamities to proue.
                  
                  
                     That whilſt his father with the Norman ſword,
                     On fruitfull England proſprous entrance made,
                     I caſt the proiect that this youthfull Lord,
                     In the meane time ſhould Normandie inuade;
                     And with as prou'd and powerfull a blade,
                     Him I perſwaded (conſtantly by this)
                     To make his owne yet doubtfull to be his.
                  
                  
                     That Robert daily in diſgrace might runne,
                     As ſtill the Conqueror towards his end did grow,
                     who well in yeeres, thus vexed by his ſonne,
                     which now his will ſo openly did ſhow;
                     His ſtate deuiſed wiſely to beſtow,
                     For his owne ſafety that his daies to cloſe.
                     He might himſelfe more quietly repoſe.
                  
                  
                     And that leſt time might coole his weakned blood,
                     This luckleſſe warre by lingring I ſupplide,
                     That whilſt Duke Robert iuſtly cenſured ſtood,
                     Vnder the weight of his vnnaturall pride;
                     In heate of all, this Conqueror William dide,
                     Setting young Rufus on th'vnrightfull throne,
                     Leauing h
                           〈…〉
                         ſtrugling for his owne.
                  
                  
                     
                     Which in ſmall time ſo many miſchiefes bred,
                     As ſundry plagues on Williams of-ſprings ſent,
                     Attaining to ſo violent a head,
                     which pollicie not after could preuent;
                     when to deſtruction all things head-long went,
                     And in the end, as conſumating all,
                     Was Roberts irrecouerable fall.
                  
                  
                     When none could proſprous Nonmandie diſſwade,
                     From ſending enſignes to the Engliſh field,
                     Brother oppoſde the brother to inuade,
                     Sword againſt ſword, ſhield menaced to ſhield,
                     whoſe equall worth to other ſcorne to yield;
                     One arme a front, the others furious ſtroke,
                     Scepter with ſepter violently broke.
                  
                  
                     Theſe ſundry ſoiles, in both of which was ſowne,
                     By ſo approu'd and fortunate a hand,
                     The ſeede to both might proſprouſly haue growne,
                     By their 
                           〈◊〉
                         in a mutuall band;
                     Now when theſe Princes oppoſite do ſtand;
                     what them ſhould foſter, greater wounds them lent,
                     Then the prowd'ſt powre that Europe could haue ſent.
                  
                  
                     Hauing my ſelfe wonne William in his life,
                     This conquered Realme to Rufus that did giue,
                     Getting by ſtrength what he did leaue in ſtrife,
                     Thoſe to moleſt that after him ſhould liue;
                     In this aduantage cunningly I driue,
                     T'afflict his iſſue with a generall ill,
                     Yet th'extreame in Robert to fulfill.
                  
                  
                     
                     As when ſtowt Odo (that with William held,
                     Daily prickt forward by prowd Lanfrancks ſpight,
                     Both powerfull Prelates rigorouſly compeld,
                     
                        Rufus to leaue abetting Roberts right,
                     Drawing both Mortaines and Mongomeries might,
                     Mangling the Ile with many a greeuous ſcarre,
                     Scarcely yet cured of the former warre.
                  
                  
                     That being ſet in ſo direct a way,
                     Strong friends at hand his enterprize to becke,
                     Ready before him when his entrance lay,
                     Of all ſupplide that he did lately lacke,
                     Him I perſwade the remedy to ſlacke,
                     Stopping the courſe which he did lately runne,
                     All to vndoe that he had euer done.
                  
                  
                     Thus did I ſtirre vp that vnkindely rage,
                     That did ſo farre preuaile vpon his blood,
                     And at my pleaſure did againe aſſwage,
                     When now this heate in ſted might him haue ſtood;
                     Thus with his humour altred I my mood,
                     That firſt by Armes his vigor he might loſe,
                     Which then laid down gaue ſtrength vnto his foes.
                  
                  
                     That by concluding this vntimely peace,
                     I might thereby a lingring warre beginne,
                     That whil'ſt theſe tumults did a little ceaſe,
                     Craft more aduantage cunningly might winne;
                     Thus let I treaſon ſecretly in,
                     Giuing deceitfull Pollicie the kay,
                     To the faire cloſet where his councells lay,
                  
                  
                     
                     Thus reconciling outwardly a friend,
                     I drew an inward and a dangerous foe,
                     That all his wit ambitiouſly did lend,
                     To clothe his treaſons in a vertuous ſhow;
                     Which were contriued 
                           •
                        ſo currantly to goe,
                     That ſecret mallice ſtrengthned more and more,
                     Laſtly, ſhould proue more dangerous then before.
                  
                  
                     And now poore Fame, my power to thee addreſt,
                     And thee mine onely inſtrument I made,
                     That whilſt theſe brothers at this paſſe do reſt,
                     Him to the warres I wonne thee to perſwade,
                     With thoſe that now were going to inuade,
                     With great Duke Godfrey preſſing for his bands,
                     From Pagans power t'regaine the holy lands.
                  
                  
                     His youthfull humour finely thus I feed,
                     The meane moſt fit to draw him forth abroad,
                     When now at home his preſence moſt ſhould neede,
                     In forraine lands to faſten his aboad,
                     Him in this order onely I beſtow'd;
                     That William dying, Robert being gone,
                     
                        Henry might ſeate him on his brothers throne.
                  
                  
                     So ſweete the ſounds of theſe aduent'rous Armes,
                     And euery ſence ſo ſtrougly they do binde,
                     That he hath now no feeling of his harmes,
                     So farre away tranſported is his minde,
                     Declaring well the greatneſſe of his kinde;
                     That him ſo high and forcibly doth beare,
                     As when moſt cauſe, he leaſt his ill doth feare.
                  
                  
                     
                     Him hauing throwne into eternall thrall,
                     Wiſely fore-caſting how the ſame ſhould bee,
                     When euery thing made fit vnto his fall,
                     Which none could hinder, though the moſt fore-ſee,
                     For which I made an inſtrument of thee;
                     For where deſtruction ſadly I pretend,
                     Miſchiefe like lines, all to their centre bend.
                  
                  
                     He gone, and William yeelded vp the breath,
                     The younger Henry couetous of raigne,
                     Offered ſo fairely by his brothers death,
                     whilſt Robert doth in Paleſtine remaine,
                     And now a Kingdome eaſily might gaine;
                     what by his power and ſcience to perſwade,
                     Himſelfe a Monarch abſolutely made.
                  
                  
                     Whilſt this great Duke imbraced is by thee,
                     which thou as thine dooſt abſolutely claime,
                     Finding meere ſhadowes onely miſſing mee,
                     And idle Caſtles in the ayre doth frame;
                     Lot, ſuch a mighty Monarcheſſe is Fame,
                     That what ſhe giues, ſo eaſie is to beare,
                     As none therefore needes violence to feare.
                  
                  
                     Vntill returning from thoſe holy warres,
                     So highly honored with the Pagans flight,
                     From forraigne battells vnto ciuill 
                           •
                        arres,
                     And getting others for his owne to fight,
                     Inforc'd to vſe the vtmoſt of his might;
                     with that rich ſword in Pagan blood imbru'd,
                     Himſelfe to ſaue by his owne friends purſu'd.
                  
                  
                     
                     When wanting ſummes, the ſinewes of his force,
                     which his great courage quickly comes to finde,
                     Euen in the high ſpeede of his forward courſe,
                     So skilfully I mannaged his minde,
                     That I a way out readily did finde;
                     To his deſtruction, Henry to ſupply,
                     His future ſafetie happily to buy.
                  
                  
                     Him by all waies to amity to winne,
                     Not fully yet eſtabliſh'd as he would,
                     Hauing thus farre already gotten in,
                     Setting himſelfe ſubſtantially to hold,
                     By the francke offers of bewitching gold;
                     The yearely tribute from his Crowne to riſe,
                     Which might all former iniuries ſuffice.
                  
                  
                     Which entertaind by confident beleefe,
                     By which to paſſe his purpoſes were brought,
                     Not yet ſuſpitious of this ſecret theefe,
                     By which he ſoone and cunningly was caught;
                     Of which the leaſt when princely Robert thought,
                     Euen in a moment did annoy him more,
                     Then all their powre could euer do before.
                  
                  
                     Which to this great Lord vtterly vnknowne,
                     Not vnderſtanding, eaſily could not flie,
                     Into his way that ſubtilly was throwne,
                     which to auoide, Duke Robert look'd too hie,
                     Into good minds fraud doth the ſooneſt prie;
                     whoſe pliant nature I ſecurely choſe,
                     To worke vvhat forme it pleaſde me to diſpoſe.
                  
                  
                     
                     This fatall tribute cutting off the claime,
                     A lawfull Prince to Englands Empire laid,
                     His former right doth altogether maime,
                     As they agreed yeerely to be paid;
                     Thereon relying after being ſtaid,
                     As from a fountaine plenteouſly did ſpring,
                     The efficient cauſe of Roberts ruining.
                  
                  
                     Whenas his friends ſo well to him that meant,
                     And for this day did wholly them prepare,
                     Seeing him thus their purpoſe to preuent,
                     And how thereby t'was like with him to fare;
                     Now vpon Henry bended all their care,
                     Giuing their power their peace with him to make,
                     Gathered at firſt the Norman part to take.
                  
                  
                     And I by whom yet euery thing had beene,
                     Since Norman William conqueſt heere begunne,
                     To ſhew my ſelfe the worlds emperious Queene,
                     Direct my courſe againſt his eldeſt ſonne,
                     Things falling out diſaſtrouſly to runne,
                     On Englands part gainſt Normandie to ſtand,
                     Conquerd but lately by the Norman hand.
                  
                  
                     The conqueſt William made vpon this Ile,
                     When Norman blood the Engliſhmen did tame,
                     That natiue now enriched with her ſtile,
                     Turnde with reuenge to captiuate the ſame,
                     As backe deſcending whence it lately came,
                     As Norman power did Engliſh thrall prouoke,
                     That Norman neckes ſhould beare the Engliſh yoke.
                  
                  
                     
                     For which, being vp, and fallne to open Armes,
                     Such mortall hate betweene them daily growes,
                     And preſſing in where deadly perill ſwarmes,
                     The angry brothers dealing furious blowes,
                     Backe to regaine what they before did looſe,
                     Either to quit him of the others thrall,
                     Either to riſe, or euermore to fail.
                  
                  
                     Him on whome late in Paleſtine I ſmilde,
                     Returnde from Fraunce now dreadfully I frowne,
                     Being calld home that chiefly is exilde,
                     And in his kingdome onely leaues his crowne,
                     Him in the deluge of miſchance to drowne:
                     Laſtly, himſelfe contemptfully doth loſe,
                     Leauing his realme to his iniurious foes.
                  
                  
                     Which home to England priſner doe him bring,
                     Left as a ſpoile and prey vnto his owne,
                     Become her captiue ſhould haue bin her king,
                     Such was the lot vpon his life was throwne,
                     Where he remaining in continuall mone,
                     Preſcrib'd to one poore ſolitarie place,
                     Whoſe lawfull bounds the ocean did embrace,
                  
                  
                     Could humane knowledge comprehend my hate,
                     Or reaſon ſound the depth of things diuine,
                     The world amazed at Duke Roberts ſtate,
                     Might thinke no might to be comparde with mine,
                     And all the chaunces vnto me reſigne,
                     In Roberts fall apparantly to ſee,
                     Amongſt the ſtarres the ſtrength that reſts in mee.
                  
                  
                     
                     That ſword vpon him which reſumes ſuch powre,
                     Yet is too weake to conſumate his daies,
                     Time, whoſe ſwift courſe doth euery thing deuoure,
                     In his moſt neede, prolongs him with delaies,
                     Whilſt he his brothers tyrannie obeies,
                     That he in life a thouſand deaths might die,
                     In euery courſe ſo forcible am I.
                  
                  
                     And whilſt in ſuch extreamity he lies,
                     Depriude of all comfort but the bleſſed light,
                     Yet t'was not this that could my rage ſuffice,
                     But to abridge that, rob him of his ſight,
                     To ſute his daies directly with the night;
                     That, that to all men laſtly which ſhould be,
                     Due to the wretchedſt, him denide by me.
                  
                  
                     That Robert ſo infortunately blinde,
                     No outward obiect night diſpearſe his care,
                     The better to illuminate his minde,
                     To ſee his ſorrowes throughly what they are,
                     To do ſo much vnto this Prince I dare,
                     That being depriu'd of that which was the chiefe,
                     Did of the other amplifie the griefe.
                  
                  
                     And when bereaued of his nightly reſt,
                     With the remembrance of ſo great a wrong,
                     Faſtning ſo deepely on his penſiue breaſt,
                     His heart the while that violently ſtung,
                     Nature in him doth ſhew herſelfe ſo ſtrong;
                     That griefe, which many doth of life depriue,
                     Seemes to preſerue and keeps him ſtill aliue.
                  
                  
                     
                     Him I denide his enemy to kill,
                     Nor by his owne hand wretchedly to die,
                     That life vnto him ſhould be loathſome ſtill,
                     And that death from him euermore ſhould flie,
                     Making them both to him an enemie;
                     Willing to die by life, him double killing,
                     Vrged to liue, twice dying he vnwilling,
                  
                  
                     So many yeares as he hath worne a Crowne,
                     So many yeares as he hath hopde to riſe,
                     So many yeares vpon him did I frowne,
                     So many yeares he liues without his eyes,
                     So many yeares in dying e're he dies,
                     So many yeares ſhut vp in priſon ſtrong,
                     Sorrow doth make the ſhorteſt time ſeeme long.
                  
                  
                     Thus ſway I in the courſe of earthly things,
                     That time might worke him euerlaſting ſpight,
                     To ſhew how I can tyrannize on Kings,
                     And in the fall of great ones do delight,
                     In fined things my working infinite;
                     All worldly changes at my will diſpoſed,
                     For that in me all wonder is incloſed.
                  
                  
                     At Fortunes ſpeech amazed whilſt they ſtand,
                     And Fame herſelfe yet wondreth at his woe,
                     When from Duke Robert Fortune takes her hand,
                     Whoſe miſery ſhe thus had let them know;
                     When now to anſwer her diſpightfull foe,
                     Fame from deepe ſilence ſeeming to awake,
                     Thus for her Client modeſtly beſpake.
                  
                  
                     
                     Quoth ſhe, returning from renowned Rome,
                     
                     Seeking my ſelfe in Europe to aduance,
                     To winne her Princes to regaine the tombe,
                     Which had beene loſt by her miſgouernance,
                     Calling to England, Germany and France
                     (At length) perſwaded happily by me,
                     From Pagan hands faire Paleſtine to free.
                  
                  
                     That holy hermite long that did bemone
                     This their ſo great and euident a loſſe,
                     With famous Godfrey forwards that was gone,
                     Bearing the banner of the bloody Croſſe.
                     Now whilſt in ſo faire forwardnes it was,
                     And euery care attentiue now did ſtand,
                     To this great buiſnes onely then in hand.
                  
                  
                     Thither did all the nobleſt ſpirites reſort,
                     Which I that time ſucceſſefully did bring,
                     Allured by the confident report
                     That from ſo great an enterpriſe did ſpring.
                     T'aduenture in ſo popular a thing;
                     And no man deemed worthy to be mine,
                     That was not forward in this great deſigne.
                  
                  
                     Where now this duke the Conqu'rors eldeſt ſonne,
                     Which with his birthright Normandie did wreſt,
                     When of what elſe his noble father wonne,
                     His brother Rufus ſtrongly was poſſeſt;
                     Which whilſt he ſtriueth from his hands to reſt,
                     This great attempt now gloriouſly broke forth,
                     Which was by me divulged through the north.
                  
                  
                     
                     Which hauing got free entrance to his care,
                     Such entertainement happily did finde,
                     As no perſwaſion ſuffreth to be there,
                     From this high purpoſe to diuert his minde,
                     And being ſo religiouſly inclinde,
                     woo'd with this offer fitly doth prepare
                     Himſelfe to furniſh to this great affaire.
                  
                  
                     That kingdome he dooth careleſly neglect,
                     His brother Rufus wrongfully doth keepe,
                     And onely that doth conſtantly reſpect,
                     where he once in his ſepulchre did ſleepe,
                     At whoſe deere death the very rockes did weepe,
                     His crown of gold this chriſtian Prince doth ſcorn,
                     So much he lou'd him that was crownd with thorne.
                  
                  
                     The want that him did grieuouſly oppreſſe,
                     Of thoſe great ſummes in leuying power were ſpent,
                     Himſelfe againe of England to poſſeſſe,
                     Much hindreth his religious intent,
                     Yet could not this his purpoſe ſo preuent,
                     Although a while it ſeemd delay to make,
                     Of that which he did brauely vndertake.
                  
                  
                     Wherefore this noble and high ſpirited Lord.
                     whilſt novv his buiſnes ſtandeth at this ſtay,
                     And ſince his ſtate no better could afford,
                     In gage to Henry Normandie doth lay,
                     Prouiding firſt his ſouldiers how to pay,
                     Rather himſelfe choſe kingdomleſſe to leaue,
                     His countries hopes then baſely to deceaue.
                  
                  
                     
                     To his victorious enſigne comes from farre,
                     Th'inlled Red-ſhanks toucht with no remorſe,
                     The light-foote Iriſh that with darts do warre,
                     The Scot ſo much delighting in his horſe,
                     The Engliſh Archer of a Lions force,
                     The valiant Norman moſt his troupes among,
                     With the braue Britton wonderfully ſtrong.
                  
                  
                     Remote from comfort in this colder clime,
                     To other Countries kindely doth you bring,
                     (And wiſely teach you to redeeme the time,
                     Whence your eternall memory might ſpring)
                     Vnto the place whereas the heauenly King.
                     Your deare redemption happily beganne,
                     Liuing on earth, which was both God and man.
                  
                  
                     Poore Ilanders which in the Oceans chaine,
                     Too long impriſoned from the cheerefull day,
                     Your warlike leader brings you to the maine,
                     Which to my Court doth ſhew the open way,
                     And his victorious hand becomes the key;
                     Vnto ſo high aduentures that you beares,
                     Glory to you, and honour to your heires.
                  
                  
                     And doth thereto ſo zealouſly proceede,
                     As thoſe faire lockes his temples that adorne,
                     Vntill the great Ieruſalem were freed,
                     He made a vow ſhould neuer more be ſhorne,
                     Which ſince they ſo religiouſly were worne;
                     In euery eye did beautifie him more,
                     Then did the Crowne of Normandie before.
                  
                  
                     
                     Whilſt he ſtill on his vpright courſe doth hold,
                     As we the ſequell briefely ſhall relate,
                     Bearing himſelfe (as worthily he could)
                     And beſt became his dignitie and ſtate,
                     Teaching how his themſelues ſhould moderate,
                     Not following life, ſo with his chance content,
                     Nor flying death, ſo truly valient.
                  
                  
                     So did he all his faculties beſtow,
                     That euery thing exactly might be done,
                     That due fore-ſight before the act might goe,
                     Others groſſe errors happily to ſhunne,
                     Wiſely to finiſh well that was begunne;
                     Iuſtly directed in the courſe of things,
                     By the ſtraight rule from ſound experience ſprings.
                  
                  
                     Idle regards of greatnes that did ſcorne,
                     Careleſſe of pompe, magnificent to bee,
                     That man reputing to be nobleſt borne,
                     That was the moſt magnanimous and free,
                     In honor ſo impartiall was hee,
                     Eſteeming titles meritleſſe and nought,
                     Vnleſſe with danger abſolutely bought.
                  
                  
                     Giuing the ſouldier comfortable words,
                     And oft imbalmes his well-receiued wound,
                     To him that needed maintenance affords,
                     To braue attempts encouraging the ſound,
                     Neuer diſmaide in any perrill found,
                     His Tent a ſeate of iudgement to the greeu'd,
                     And as a Court to thoſe ſhould be releeu'd.
                  
                  
                     
                     So perfect vvas that rarifying fire,
                     That did compoſe and rectifie his minde,
                     Vnto that place that raiſed his deſire,
                     Aboue the vſuall compaſſe of his kinde,
                     And from the world ſo cleerely him refinde,
                     As him did wholy conſecrate to glorie,
                     A ſubiect fit whereon to build a ſtorie.
                  
                  
                     VVho in ambaſſage to the Emperour ſent,
                     Paſſing along through Macedon and Thrace,
                     
                     Neuer did ſleepe but onely in his tent,
                     Till he reviewd that famous Godfreis face,
                     Nor till hee came vnto that halowed place,
                     Ne're did repoſe his bodie in a bed,
                     Such were the cares poſſeſſ his troubled head.
                  
                  
                     O wherefore then great ſinger of thy daies,
                     Renovvned Taſſo in thy noble ſtorie,
                     Shouldſt thou be tax'd as partiall in his praiſe,
                     And yet ſo much ſhouldſt ſet forth others glorie?
                     Me thinkes for this thou ſhouldſt be inly ſorie,
                     That thou ſhouldſt leaue another to recite,
                     That which ſo much thou didſt neglect to write.
                  
                  
                     There was not found in all the chriſtian hoſte,
                     Any than he more forward to the field,
                     Nor their battallions could another boaſt,
                     To beare himſelfe more brauely with his ſhield,
                     So well his armes this noble Duke could wield,
                     As ſuch a one he properly ſhould be,
                     That
                           •
                         I did meane to conſecrate to me.
                  
                  
                     
                     Of ſo approoued and deliuer force,
                     Charging his launce or brandiſhing his blade,
                     Whether on foote, or managing his horſe,
                     That open paſſage through the ranckes he made,
                     At all aſſaies ſo happy to inuade,
                     That were he abſent in the charge or chaſe,
                     It was ſuppoſde the day did looſe the grace.
                  
                  
                     In doubtfull fights where danger ſoon'ſt did fall,
                     He would be preſent euer by his will,
                     And where the Chriſtians for ſupplies did call,
                     Thither through perill Robert preſſed ſtill,
                     To help by valour, or relieue by skill;
                     To euery place ſo prouidently ſeeing,
                     As power in him had abſolutely being.
                  
                  
                     When in the morne his Courſer he beſtrid,
                     He ſeemd compoſde eſſentially of fire,
                     But from the field he euer drowping rid,
                     As he were vanquiſht onely to retire,
                     Neereſt his reſt, the furth'ſt from his deſire,
                     And in the ſpoiles his ſouldiers ſhare the crownes,
                     They rich in golde, he only rich in wounds.
                  
                  
                     And when the faire Ieruſalem was wonne,
                     And king thereof they gladly him would make,
                     All worldly titles he ſo much doth ſhunne,
                     As he refuſde the charge on him to take,
                     One the vaine world that cleerely did forſake,
                     So farre it was from his religious minde,
                     To mixe things vile with thoſe of heauenly kinde.
                  
                  
                     
                     No triumph did his victories adorne,
                     But his high praiſe for ſinfull man that dide,
                     Nor other marke of victory is worne,
                     But that red Croſſe to tell him crucifide,
                     All other glories that himſelfe denide:
                     A holy life ſo willingly he leades,
                     In dealing almes, and bidding of his beades.
                  
                  
                     Thus a poore Pilgrime he returnes againe,
                     For glittring armes in Palmers homely gray,
                     Leauing his Lords to leade his warrelike traine,
                     Whilſt he alone comes ſadly on the way,
                     Dealing abroad his lately purchaſde pray;
                     An aged ſtaffe his carefull hand doth hold,
                     That with a launce his heathen foe controlde.
                  
                  
                     But now to end this long continued ſtrife,
                     Henceforth thy mallice takes no further place,
                     The hate thou bar'ſt him ended with his life,
                     By thee his ſpirite can ſuffer no diſgrace,
                     Now in mine armes his vertues I embrace,
                     His body thine, his croſſes witnes bee,
                     But mine his minde, that from thy powre is free.
                  
                  
                     Thou gau'ſt vp rule when he gaue vp his breath,
                     And where thou end'ſt, eu'n there did I beginne,
                     Thy ſtrength was buried in his timeleſſe death,
                     when as thy Conquerour laſtly came I in,
                     That all thou gotſt from thee againe did winne;
                     To whom thy right thou wholy didſt reſigne,
                     That all thou hadſt was abſolutely mine.
                  
                  
                     
                     To the baſe world then Fortune get thee backe,
                     The ſame with drery tragedies to fill,
                     There by thy power bring all things vnto wracke,
                     And on weake mortalles onely worke thy will,
                     And ſince ſo much thou dooſt delight in ill,
                     Heare his complaint, who wanting eies to ſee,
                     May giue thee ſight, which arte as blinde as hee.
                  
                  
                     At her great words amazed whilſt they ſtand,
                     The Prince which looked dreadfully and grimme,
                     Bearing his eies in his diſtreſſefull hand,
                     Whoſe places ſtoode with blood vnto the brimme,
                     In the great anguiſh ſhaking euery limme;
                     After deepe ſighes and lamentable throwes,
                     Thus gan at length to vtter forth his woes.
                  
                  
                     Saith he, farewell, the lights are now put out,
                     And where they were, is buried all my ioy,
                     That are with darkenes compaſſed about,
                     Which tiranny did wilfully deſtroy,
                     To breed my more perpetuall annoy,
                     That euen that ſenſe I onely might forgoe;
                     That could alone giue comfort to my woe.
                  
                  
                     You which beheld faire Palestine reſtorde,
                     And from prophane hands of the Pagans freed,
                     The Sepulchre of that moſt gratious Lord,
                     And ſeen the mount where his deere wounds did bleed
                     That with theſe ſights my zealous ſoule did feede;
                     Sith from your functions night doth you diſſeuer,
                     Seclude me now from worldly ioyes for euer.
                  
                  
                     
                     They ſawe no Sunne, nor did they view the day,
                     Except a candle, they beheld no light,
                     Strong walles before thoſe bleſſings kept away,
                     What could be feard'? they could not hurt the night,
                     For then teares wholy hindred them of ſight;
                     O then from whence ſhould Henries hate ariſe,
                     Though I ſawe nothing that I ſhould haue eies?
                  
                  
                     The wretchedſt thing the moſt deſpiſedſt beaſt,
                     Enioyes that ſence as generally as wee,
                     The very Gnat, or what than that is leaſt,
                     Of ſight by nature kindely is made free,
                     What thing hath mouth to feede, but eies to ſee,
                     O that a tyrant then ſhould me deprane,
                     Of that which elſe all liuing creatures haue:
                  
                  
                     Whilſt yet the light did mittigate my moane,
                     Teares found a meane to ſound my ſorrowes deepe,
                     But now ay me, that comfort being gone,
                     By wanting eies wherewith I erſt did weepe,
                     My cares alas concealed I muſt keepe;
                     O God, that blindeneſſe ſtealing my delight,
                     Should aboue all things giue my ſorrow ſight
                  
                  
                     Where ſometime ſtoode the beauties of this face,
                     Thoſe lampes once lighted with the veſtall flame,
                     Is now a dungeon, a diſtreſſed place,
                     A harbour fit for infamy and ſhame,
                     Which but with horrour none can ſcarcely name;
                     Out of whoſe darke grates miſery and griefe,
                     Starued for vengeance, daily beg reliefe.
                  
                  
                     
                     The day abhorres me, and me ſtill doth flie,
                     Night ſtill me followes, yet too long doth ſtay,
                     This neuer comes though it be euer nie,
                     And this in comming vaniſheth away,
                     What now me booteth either night or day;
                     All's one, ſtil day, or be it euer night,
                     Sith one to me the darkeneſſe and the light.
                  
                  
                     You wherewith once my comforts I did view,
                     Th'alcouering heauen and glory that it beares,
                     No more the ſame ſhall e're be ſeene of you,
                     That happy ſight that euery mortall cheares,
                     No more to me for euer nowe appeares;
                     Betake you ſelues vnto your darkeſome cell,
                     And bid the world eternally farewell.
                  
                  
                     His ſpeech thus ending, Fortune diſcontent,
                     Turning herſelfe as ſhe away would flie,
                     Playing with babes and fooles incontinent,
                     As neuer tutch'd with humane miſerie,
                     As what ſhe was herſelfe to verifie;
                     And ſtrait forgetting what ſhe had to tell,
                     To other ſpeech and girl
                           •
                        ſh laughter fell.
                  
                  
                     When gracefull Fame conueying thence her charge,
                     With all theſe troupes that did to her reſort,
                     Gaue me this booke, wherein was writ at large,
                     His life ſet out in admirable ſort,
                     T'amaze the world with this ſo true report,
                     But Fortune angry with her foe therefore,
                     Gaue me this gift, that I ſhould ſtill be pore.
                  
                  FINIS.
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  The Legend of Matilda
                  
                  
                     IF yet a Muſe there happily remaine,
                     That is by truth ſo diligently taught,
                     As vninſtructed wantonly to faine,
                     Declareth but what modeſtlie ſhe ought;
                     If this be ſuch which I ſo long haue ſought,
                     I craue by her my life may be reuealde,
                     By blacke obliuion enuiouſly concealde.
                  
                  
                     Oh if ſuch fauour I might hope to finde,
                     Heere in this world yet once to liue agen,
                     As I yet laſtly might expreſſe my minde,
                     By the endeuour of a powrefull pen,
                     In all my ſorrowes happy were I then;
                     Three hundreth yeares by all men ouer-paſt,
                     Finding one friend to pitty me at laſt.
                  
                  
                     O you of him ſo happily elect,
                     Whom I intreat to proſecute my ſtory,
                     Lady moſt deere, moſt worthy all reſpect,
                     The worlds beſt jewell, and your ſexes glory,
                     It ſhall ſuffice me, be Idea ſory,
                     Reading my Legend ſadly in his verſe,
                     Which now alone muſt ſerue me for a her
                           ••
                        .
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         you the patterne by whoſe perfect view,
                     Like your faire ſelfe he wiſely may me make,
                     For ſure aliue none fitter is then you,
                     Whoſe forme vnſpotted chaſtitie may take,
                     Be you propitious, for whoſe onely ſake
                     For me I know hee'le gladly do his beſt,
                     So you and I may equally be bleſt.
                  
                  
                     Bright Roſamond ſo highly that is graced,
                     Inroled in the regiſter of ſame,
                     That in our ſaincted kalender is placed,
                     By him who ſtriues to ſtellifie her name;
                     Yet will the modeſt ſay ſhe was too blame,
                     Though full of ſtate and pleaſing be his rime,
                     Yet can his skill not expiate her crime.
                  
                  
                     The wife of Shore winnes generall applauſe,
                     Finding a pen laborious in her praiſe,
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           lſtr
                              •
                           d reuiu'd to pleade her pittied cauſe,
                     After the enuie of ſo many daies,
                     Happie's the man their glories high'ſt can raiſe;
                     Thus the looſe wanton liked is of many,
                     Vice ſhall finde friends, but vertue ſeldome any.
                  
                  
                     To vaunt of my Nobilitie were vaine,
                     Which were I know, not bettered by the beſt,
                     Nor ſhould beſeeme an honourable ſtraine,
                     And me a maiden fits not of the reſt,
                     Nor worldly titles fondly will ſuggeſt;
                     A vertuous life I meane to boaſt alone,
                     Our birth our ſyres, our vertues be our owne:
                  
                  
                     
                     T'is ſhame to fetch our long deſcent from Kings,
                     If from the gods deriued thou ſhouldſt be,
                     The old atchieuements of thoſe wondrous things,
                     Which thou thy ſelfe then liuedſt not to ſee,
                     What be their acts materiall vnto thee?
                     Staining that blood and honour that was theirs,
                     Which could not leaue their vertues to their heires.
                  
                  
                     Heauen powr'd downe more abundance on my birth,
                     Then it before had vſually beſtow'd,
                     And was in me ſo bountifull to earth,
                     As though the fulneſſe meaning to haue ſhow'd,
                     On me it ſo immeaſurably flow'd,
                     That ſuch a ſhape with ſuch a ſpirit inſpir'd,
                     Did of the wiſeſt make me moſt deſir'd.
                  
                  
                     Vpon my brow ſate Beautie in her pride,
                     Vnto the world as miniſtring her law,
                     And vnto all ſuch riches did diuide,
                     As vnto her all generally did draw;
                     And yet mine eye did keepe them ſo in awe,
                     As that which onely could true vertues meaſure,
                     Ordainde by Nature to preſerue her treaſure.
                  
                  
                     My carrige ſuch as might content the wiſe,
                     My ſpeech ſuch comely decen
                           ••
                        e retaine,
                     As of the yonger was not deemde preciſe,
                     Nor of the aged was accounted vaine;
                     So well inſtructed to obſerue the meane,
                     So well compact, and natiue was cach good,
                     That did coher
                           •
                         with temper of my blood.
                  
                  
                     
                     Nature in me did ſuch perfections vary,
                     As that the leaſt allow'd not of compare,
                     And yet ſo well did teach me them to carry,
                     That then themſelues did make them ſeeme more rare,
                     As in my portion ſuffering none to ſhare,
                     In her faire grace by placing me ſo hie,
                     That there ſhould ſit the darling of the skie.
                  
                  
                     When Fame beganne my beauty firſt to blaze,
                     That ſoone became too lauiſh of the ſame,
                     Hauing her trumpet laden with my praiſe,
                     That euery place was filled with my name,
                     For which report thou too much wert too blame;
                     But vnto thee is beautie ſubiect ſtill,
                     Which I may ſay, is cauſer of our ill.
                  
                  
                     This jealous monſter hath a thouſand eyes,
                     Her ayrie body hath as many wings,
                     Now about earth, now vp to heauen ſhe flies,
                     And heere and there with euery breath ſhe flings,
                     Euen from the deepe her meſſages ſhe brings,
                     Nothing ſo ſecret but to her appeareth,
                     As apt to credite euery thing ſhe heareth.
                  
                  
                     And Princes eares as open to report,
                     As skill in blazing beauty to a King,
                     Subiect vnto the cenſure of the Court,
                     From whence Fame carries, thither ſhe doth bring,
                     And which ſoeuer ſhe doth lowdly ring,
                     Thither ah me vnhappily ſhe brought,
                     Where I my barre vnfortunately caught.
                  
                  
                     
                     There ſtood my beautie boldly for the prize,
                     Where the moſt cleere and perfectſt iudgements be,
                     And of the ſame the moſt iudiciall eyes,
                     Did giue the gole impartially to me;
                     So did I ſtand vnparaleld and free,
                     And like a comet in the euenings skie,
                     Strooke with amazement euery wondring eye.
                  
                  
                     This t'was poſſeſt the breaſt of princely Iohn,
                     
                     This on his hart-ſtrings endleſſe muſicke made,
                     This wholy wonne him vnto it alone,
                     And fully did his faculties inuade,
                     From which not reaſon euer could diſſwade;
                     This taught his eyes their due attendance ſtill,
                     Holding the reines which rulde his princely will.
                  
                  
                     When yet my father fortunate in Court,
                     And by his blood ranck'd equall with the beſt,
                     Hauing his quicke eare touch'd with this report,
                     Which yet the newes but hardly could digeſt,
                     And on my youth his onely care did reſt;
                     Straitly purſues it by thoſe ſecret ſpies,
                     As ſtill in Courts attend on Princes eyes.
                  
                  
                     And he thus while who ſeemed but to ſleepe,
                     Till he the Princes purpoſes could ſound,
                     And to himſelfe yet ſecretly did keepe,
                     What he but late had prouidently found;
                     So well that wiſe Lord could conceale his wound,
                     That well fore-ſaw how daugerous it would proue,
                     To croſſe the courſe of his impatient loue.
                  
                  
                     
                     When hauing found how violent a flame,
                     Vnbrideled will had kindled in the King,
                     If on the ſuddaine he ſhould ſtop the ſame,
                     A greater inconuenience might bring,
                     Which being knowne ſo dangerous a thing,
                     Me doth bethinke him fitteſt to perſwade,
                     E're for my ſafety further means he made.
                  
                  
                     Deare girle quoth he, thou ſeeſt who doth await,
                     T'intrap that beautie bred to be thy foe,
                     Being ſo faire and delicate a bait,
                     Tempting all eyes themſelues there to beſtow,
                     Whoſe power the King is taught too ſoone to know;
                     Of his deſire that what the end may bee,
                     Thy youth may feare my knowledge doth fore-ſee.
                  
                  
                     And for thou liueſt publiquely in Court,
                     Whoſe priuiledge doth euery meane protect,
                     Where the enſample of the greateſt ſort,
                     Doth more then opportunitie effect,
                     None thriuing there that dwell vpon reſpect,
                     Being a lottery where but few do winne,
                     Falſhood th'aduenture, and the prize but ſinne.
                  
                  
                     Subt'ly oppoſing to thy longing ſight,
                     What may to pleaſure poſſibly prouoke,
                     And fitly faſhioned vnto thy delight,
                     That with the graueſt ſtrikes too great a ſtroke,
                     Hauing withall emperious power thy cloke;
                     With ſuch ſtrong reaſons on her part propounded,
                     As may leaue vertue ſeemingly confounded.
                  
                  
                     
                     Many the waies inducing to thy fall,
                     And to thy ſafety none is left to guide thee,
                     And when thy danger greateſt is of all,
                     Euen then thy ſuccour ſooneſt is denide thee:
                     So ſundry meanes from vertue to diuide thee,
                     Hauing with all mortalitie about thee,
                     Frailty with in, temptation ſet without thee.
                  
                  
                     The leachers tongue is neuer voide of guile,
                     Nor wants he teares when he would winne his pray,
                     The ſubtilſt tempter hath the ſmootheſt ſtile,
                     Sirens ſing ſweetely when they would betray,
                     Luſt of it ſelfe had neuer any ſtay,
                     Nor to containe it bounds could haue deuiſde,
                     That when moſt fild, is leaſt of all ſuffiſde.
                  
                  
                     With euery meane and maieſtie is fraught,
                     That all things hath contained in his power,
                     And who wil conquer, leaues no meane vnſaught,
                     Soft golden drops did pierce the brazen Tower,
                     Watching th'aduantage of each paſſing hower,
                     Time offering ſtill each howre to doe amiſſe,
                     Thy banefull poiſon ſpiced with thy bliſſe.
                  
                  
                     And when this heady and vnſeaſned rage,
                     Which in his blood doth violently raigne,
                     Time, that the heate ſhall peceably aſſwage,
                     Shall ſhew the more apparently thy ſtaine,
                     Which vnto ages euer ſhall remaine;
                     Sinne in a chaine leades on her ſiſter ſhame,
                     And both in gyues faſt fettered to defame.
                  
                  
                     
                     Kings vſe their loues as garments they haue worne,
                     Or as the meate whereon they fully fed,
                     The Saint once gone, who doth the ſhrine adorne?
                     Or what is Nectar careleſly if ſhed,
                     vvhat Princes vvealth redeemes thy maidenhead,
                     vvhich ſhould be held as pretious as thy breath,
                     vvhoſe deſolution conſumates thy death.
                  
                  
                     The ſtately Eagle on his height dooth ſtand,
                     And from the maine the fearefull fowle doth ſmite,
                     Yet ſcornes to tuch it lying on the land,
                     When he hath felt the ſweete of his delight,
                     But leaues the ſame a prey to euery kite;
                     With much we ſurffet, plenty makes vs poore,
                     The vvretched Indian ſpurnes the golden ore.
                  
                  
                     When now he points the periode with a teare,
                     vvhich in my boſome made ſo great a breach,
                     As euery precept firmely fixed there,
                     And ſtill his councel vnto me did preach,
                     A father ſo effectually ſhould teach,
                     That then his words I after euer found,
                     Written on ſo immaculate a ground.
                  
                  
                     The youthfull king deluded but the while,
                     That in his breaſt did beare this quenchleſſe fire,
                     Whilſt flattring hope his ſences doth beguile,
                     That with freſh life ſtill quickned his deſire,
                     And gone ſo farre now meant not to retire;
                     Thinkes if that aptly winning him but place,
                     By loue or power to purchaſe him my grace.
                  
                  
                     
                     Which ſtill deferring, found he ſtill did faile,
                     Nor to his minde aught (kindely) tooke effect.
                     Couragiouſly reſoluing to aſſaile,
                     That other meanes doth vtterly neglect,
                     In ſpite what feare could any way obiect,
                     And finding time, not booting to be mute,
                     Thus to me laſtly did preferre his ſute.
                  
                  
                     Deare maide (quoth he) when Nature had ordained
                     Thee to the world her workemanſhip to bring,
                     All other creatures knowing ſhe had ſtained,
                     By ſo diuine and excellent a thing,
                     Onely therefore to gratifie a King,
                     Seal'd thee the Charter dated at thy birth,
                     Mirrour of heauen, the wonder of the earth.
                  
                  
                     Hoord not thy beautie, heauen doth giue thee ſtore,
                     Pittie ſuch treaſure ſhould lie idely dead,
                     Which being imparted ſhall increaſe the more,
                     And by the intereſt euermore be fed,
                     To be mans comfort that was onelie bred,
                     vvhich of it ſelfe is of ſuch povver and might,
                     As like the ſunne ioyes all things with the ſight.
                  
                  
                     From thoſe bright ſtars ſuch ſtreams of lightning glide
                     As through the eies doe wound the very hart,
                     Whoſe vertues may be ſundrie waies applide,
                     Hurting and healing like Achilles dart;
                     Such bountie Nature did to them impart,
                     Thoſe lampes two planets clearer then the ſeauen,
                     That with their ſplendor light the world to heauen.
                  
                  
                     
                     Had Art ſuch colours as could truly ſhow,
                     Each rare perfection rightly in his kinde,
                     And on each one ſufficiently beſtowe,
                     Vnto the glory properly aſſignde,
                     Painting the beauties aptly to the minde,
                     But O alone thy excellence is ſuch,
                     As words though many leſſen worth ſo much.
                  
                  
                     He is thy king, who is become thy ſubiect,
                     Sometimes thy Lord now ſeruant to thy loue,
                     Thy gracefull features be his onely obiect,
                     Who for thy ſake a thouſand deaths durſt proue,
                     A Princes prayer ſhould ſome compaſſion moue;
                     Let woolues and beares be cruell in their kindes,
                     But women meeke and haue relenting mindes.
                  
                  
                     Daine (deare) to looke vpon theſe brimfull eyes,
                     With tides of teares continually frequented,
                     Where hope without foode hunger-ſtaruen lies,
                     which to betray me trecherouſly conſented,
                     That for the fact being lawfully conuented,
                     Iudgde in theſe waters ſtill to haue their being,
                     For their preſumption thy perfections ſeeing.
                  
                  
                     Sit thou commanding vnder mine eſtate,
                     Hauing thy treſſes honored with my Crowne,
                     As not vnworthie of a meaner fate
                     And make the prowd'ſt to tremble with a frowne,
                     Raiſe whom thou wilt, caſt whō it pleaſe thee downe:
                     And be my loue renowned through this Ile,
                     With all the titles fame may thee inſtile.
                  
                  
                     
                     What if my Queene repining at our bliſſe,
                     Thee as did Iuno Ioues faire darling keepe,
                     Mine I'le preſerue as that great god did his,
                     Wiſe Mercury lulld Argus eies to ſleepe,
                     Loue euer laughs when iealouſie dooth weepe,
                     When moſt ſhe ſtirs, our power ſhal keep hir vnder,
                     She may raiſe ſtormes, but we doe rule the thunder.
                  
                  
                     Thus hauing made the entrance to his loue,
                     Which he ſuppoſde aſſuredly in time,
                     Of better tidings meſſenger might proue,
                     By which he after to his ioyes might clime,
                     And of my youth now being in the prime,
                     Leaues me, not knowing well which way to turne me,
                     warm'd with the fire which vnawares might burne me.
                  
                  
                     Vpon my weaknes that ſo ſtrongly wrought,
                     Whilſt in my breaſt a mutiny aroſe,
                     Feare and Deſire a doubtfull combate fought,
                     As like two eager and ambitious foes,
                     This ſtriues to winne, the other feares to looſe;
                     By this oft cleered, and by that accuſed,
                     Flattred by that moſt, moſt which me abuſed.
                  
                  
                     And in my ſelfe that well ſuſpected treaſon,
                     Knowing who watcht to haue me for his pray,
                     And in ſo apt and dangerous a ſeaſon,
                     vvhen youth and beauty bare ſo great a ſway,
                     And where he battery ſtill to me might lay,
                     vvho girt ſo ſtrongly euery way about,
                     vvell might ſuſpect I could not long holde out.
                  
                  
                     
                     All doubts end feares caſt vtterly aſide,
                     Reſolu'd at laſt away from Court to goe,
                     Whither it pleaſde my happy ſtarres to guide,
                     There I my ſelfe determinde to beſtowe,
                     Vntill time might this paſſion ouer-blow,
                     Or if at leaſt it wrought not the extruſion,
                     Might lend me power to help my reſolution.
                  
                  
                     When he whoſe care this while me not forſooke,
                     That many a ſweete ſleepe for my ſafetie brake,
                     Much that was pleaſed with the courſe I tooke,
                     As one that truely ſuffred for my ſake,
                     Did his abode at Baynards Caſtle make,
                     which ſince the Court ſo happly did leaue one,
                     To his protection kindely did receiue me.
                  
                  
                     Whence ſorrow ſeemed vtterly exilde,
                     vvherein my life I long before did waſte,
                     The preſent time that happily beguilde,
                     vvith thought of that which was alreadie paſt,
                     vvhere I was now ſo fortunately plac'd;
                     Euen as a bird eſcap'd the Fowlers ſnare,
                     vvhome former danger warneth to beware.
                  
                  
                     When now the King whoſe purpoſes were croſſd,
                     vvhich this euaſion ſubt'ly did preuent,
                     And that the meane to which he truſted moſt,
                     vvas that which moſt did fruſtrate his intent,
                     Seeing his ſute prepoſterouſly went,
                     Another courſe bethinkes himſelfe to runne,
                     Elſe now as farre off, as when firſt begunne.
                  
                  
                     
                     Thenceforth deuiſing to diſſolue the maſſe,
                     That lay ſo full betwixt him and the light,
                     That in his ſute ſo great a hindrance was
                     And leaſt exſpected wrought him moſt diſpite,
                     Finding the cauſe that all things went not right,
                     Caſteth forth with my father to remoue,
                     To make the way more cleerer to his loue.
                  
                  
                     When ſcarcely cured of that ſickely qual
                           〈…〉
                        
                     
                     And that my hart was happily at caſe,
                     But as a ſhip that in a gentle calme,
                     Floates vp and downe vpon the quiet ſeas,
                     By ſome rough guſt ſome aduerſe ſtarre doth raiſe,
                     Driuen againe into the troubled maine,
                     vvh
                           〈…〉
                         well had hopde ſecurely to haue laine.
                  
                  
                     The powrefull Prince whome I did thus reiect,
                     Heereon in Court doth firſt this Peere diſgrace,
                     Thereby to giue the people to ſuſpect,
                     T'offend in ſome thing ſitting neere his place,
                     Them it (by all meanes) vrging to imbrace;
                     Which if he cleerely modeld out, that path
                     Should giue a paſſage freely to his wrath.
                  
                  
                     And giuing colour to his ran'ckrous hate,
                     By ſuch falſe councell as to him he drew,
                     Cunning in all the ſtratagems of ſtate,
                     My guiltleſſe father ceaſeleſly purſue,
                     Whoſe kingly power too quickely ouerthrew
                     Him which I hop'd me ſuccour ſhould haue giuen,
                     Till from all refuge abſolutely driuen.
                  
                  
                     
                     And not their cleere and intellectuall ſight,
                     Into the quarrell that did throughly looke,
                     Nor our alies that to their vtmoſt might
                     Gainſt his proceeding that our partie tooke,
                     Vnto the end that neuer me forſooke;
                     Could the effect of his great power preuent,
                     To ſtay from Fraunce my baniſht father ſent.
                  
                  
                     Not all his ſeruice to his ſoueraigne done,
                     In warre as valiant as in councell ſound,
                     Which from this Prince compaſſion might haue won,
                     To him that faithfull euermore was found,
                     How deepely thou ingratitude dooſt wound:
                     Sure firſt deuiſed to no other end,
                     But to grieue thoſe whom nothing could offend.
                  
                  
                     Ay me forſaken, left vnto my foe,
                     Thus by my fortune fro wardly betraide,
                     Neuer poore maiden was beſieged ſo,
                     And all depreſſed that ſhould lend me aide,
                     Such weight the heauens vpon my birth had laide,
                     Yet her due merite vertue neuer loſeth,
                     Gainſt her faire courſe though heauen it ſelfe oppoſeth.
                  
                  
                     Embarkt for France his ſd deiected eies,
                     Filled with teares in plentifulleſt ſtore,
                     His parting threatned by the lowring skies,
                     Then vnder ſaile from ſight of any ſhore,
                     Feare him behinde, and ſorrow him before;
                     Waſting withall his ſad laments in vaine,
                     To the rude waters only to complaine.
                  
                  
                     
                     When like a deere before the hounds imboſte,
                     vvhen him his ſtrength beginneth to forſake,
                     Leaues the ſmoothe lawnes to which he truſted moſt,
                     And to the couert doth it ſelfe betake,
                     Doubling that creepes from brake againe to brake;
                     Thus ſtill I ſhift me from the Princes face,
                     vvhich hath me novv continually in chaſe.
                  
                  
                     The coaſt now cleere, ſuſpition laide to reſt,
                     And each thing fit to further his intent,
                     vvhich with much pleaſure quieted his breaſt,
                     That euery thing ſo proſperouſly went,
                     And if the reſt ſucceſſefully conſent,
                     Of former ayde that being quite forſaken,
                     He hopes the fort may eaſily be taken.
                  
                  
                     A Princes armes are ſtretcht from ſhore to ſhore,
                     Kings ſleeping ſee with eies of other men,
                     Craft findes a key to open euery doore,
                     Little it bootes in walles my ſelfe to pen,
                     The lambe incloſed in the lions den;
                     vvhoſe watchfull eies too eaſily deſcride me,
                     And found me ſoonſt, where 
                           •
                        ur'ſt I thought to hide me.
                  
                  
                     My paths by ſpies are diligently noted,
                     O're me he holdes ſo vigilant a watch,
                     And on my beautie he ſo fondly doted,
                     That at my lookes he enuiouſly did catch;
                     Readie that ſtoode attending at my 
                           •
                        atch,
                     vvhere jealous loue continually did warde,
                     Treaſon my handmaide, Falſhoode on my guarde.
                  
                  
                     
                     Wherefore ſince this ſo badly ſorted out,
                     He to my ſhifts ſo narrowly me draue,
                     Another courſe muſt needeſly caſt about,
                     Where ſafer harbor happily to haue,
                     Since inſufficient this was me to ſaue,
                     His power ſo ſpatious euery way did lie,
                     That ſtill I ſtood in his ambitious eye.
                  
                  
                     And feare which taught me euery way to proue,
                     When I of many long time did debate,
                     Me at the laſt it pleaſde the powers to moue,
                     To take vpon me a religious ſtate,
                     The holy Cloiſter none might violate;
                     Where after all theſe ſtormes I did endure,
                     There yet at laſt might hope to liue ſecure.
                  
                  
                     Wherefore to Dunmow ſecretly conuaide,
                     Vnto a houſe that ſometime was begunne,
                     By Iuga, of our anceſtry, a maide,
                     At whoſe great charge this Monaſtry was done,
                     In which ſhe after did become a Nunne;
                     And kept her order ſtrictly with the reſt,
                     Which in that place virginitie profeſt.
                  
                  
                     Where I my ſelfe did ſecretly beſtow,
                     From the vaine world which I too long had tride,
                     One whom affliction taught my ſelfe to know,
                     My youth and beautie gently that did chide,
                     And me inſtructing as a skilfull guide;
                     Printed with all ſuch coldneſſe in my blood,
                     That it might ſo perpetuate my good.
                  
                  
                     
                     The King who with an enuious eye did ſee,
                     His power deluded, ſtrongly diſcontent,
                     who thence his power not poſſibly could free,
                     Which his ſad breaſt doth grieuouſly torment;
                     which ſince that I ſo wilfully was bent,
                     And he paſt hope now euer to enioy me,
                     Reſolues by ſome meanes laſtly to deſtroy me.
                  
                  
                     And he that knew one fit for ſuch a fact,
                     To whom he durſt his ſecret thoughts impart,
                     One that for him would any thing enact,
                     And in performance wanted not his Art,
                     That had a ſtrong hand, a relentleſſe hart;
                     On him the King (in madneſſe ſo enrag'd)
                     Impoſde my death, himſelfe thereto that gag'd.
                  
                  
                     Who making haſte the fatall deede to do,
                     Thither repaires, but not as from the King,
                     One that did well know what belong'd thereto,
                     Nor therein needed any tutoring,
                     But as one ſent vpon ſome needefull thing;
                     with a ſmooth countenance and with ſetled browes,
                     Obtaines to get in where I paide my vowes.
                  
                  
                     Where I alone and to his tale expoſde,
                     As one to him a willing eare that lent,
                     Aye me, too ſoone himſelfe to me diſcloſde,
                     And who it was that him vnto me ſent,
                     From point to point, relating his intent;
                     Which whil'ſt I ſtoode ſtrooke dumbe with this invaſion,
                     He thus purſues me ſtrongly with perſwaſion.
                  
                  
                     
                     Saith he but heare how greatly thou dooſt erre,
                     Fondly to doat vpon thine owne perfection,
                     Whenas the King thee highly will preferre,
                     And that his power deſireth thy protection;
                     So indiſcreetly ſort not thy election,
                     To ſhut vp in a melancholy cell,
                     That in the Court ordained was to dwell.
                  
                  
                     How dangerous is ſo bountifull an offer,
                     If thy neglect do retchleſly abuſe it,
                     who was it euer that did ſee a coffer,
                     Filled with gold, and proffered did refuſe it;
                     Greater thy fault the more thou dooſt excuſe it,
                     Thy ſelfe condemning in thine owne good hap,
                     Refuſing treaſure caſt into thy lap.
                  
                  
                     Wrong not thy faire youth, nor the world depriue
                     Of that great riches Nature freely lent,
                     Pitty t'were they by niggardize ſhould thriue,
                     whoſe wealth by waxing craueth to be ſpent,
                     For which thou after iuſtly ſhalt be ſhent;
                     Like to ſome rich churle burying his pelfe,
                     Both to wrong others, and to ſtarue himſelfe.
                  
                  
                     What is this vaine, this idle reputation,
                     which to the ſhew you ſeemingly reſpect,
                     Onely the weakeneſſe of imagination.
                     which in concluſion worketh no effect?
                     Leſſe then that, can the worſhippers protect,
                     That onely ſtandeth vpon fading breath,
                     And hath at once the being, and the death.
                  
                  
                     
                     A feare that grew from doting ſuperſtition,
                     To which ſtill weake credulitie is prone,
                     And onely ſince maintained by tradition,
                     Into our eares impertinently blowne,
                     By follie gathered, as by error ſowne;
                     Which vs ſtill threatning, hindreth our deſires,
                     Yet all it ſhewes vs be but painted fires.
                  
                  
                     Thee let it like this Monaſtry to leaue,
                     Which youth and beautie iuſtly may forſake,
                     Do not the Prince of thoſe high ioyes bereaue,
                     Which happy him eternally may make,
                     Which ſends me elſe thy life away to take;
                     For dead to him if needſly thou wilt proue,
                     Die to thy ſelfe, and buried with his loue.
                  
                  
                     Rage that reſumde the colour of his face,
                     Whoſe eye ſeemde as the Baſalisks to kill,
                     The horror of the ſolitary place,
                     Being ſo fit wherein to worke his will,
                     Each good omitted, euery preſent ill;
                     Which all doe ſeeme my ouerthrow to further,
                     By feare diſſwaded, menaced by murther.
                  
                  
                     In this ſo great and peremptory triall,
                     With ſtrong temptations grieuouſly afflicted,
                     With many a yeelding, many a deniall,
                     Oft times acquitted, oftentimes conuicted,
                     Whilſt feare before me liuely ſtands depicted,
                     And at the inſtant by a little breath,
                     Giues me my life, or ſends me vnto death.
                  
                  
                     
                     When nowe my ſoule that gathred all her powres,
                     Which in this neede might friendly giue her aide,
                     The reſolution of ſo manie howres,
                     whereon herſelfe ſhe confidently ſtaide;
                     (In this diſtreſſe their helpe together laide,)
                     Making the ſtate which ſhe maintained good,
                     Expeld the feare, vſurping on by blood.
                  
                  
                     The which my tongue did modeſtly enlarge,
                     From thoſe ſtrict limits terror it confinde,
                     My greeued boſome ſadly to diſcharge,
                     And my loſt ſpirites did liberally vnbinds;
                     To my cleere eyes their reſidence reſignde,
                     And ſtrongly there mine honour to maintaine,
                     Check'd his preſumption with a chaſte diſdaine.
                  
                  
                     Finding me thus inuiolably bent,
                     He for my death that onely did abide,
                     Hauing a poiſon murdring by the ſeent,
                     Vnto the organ of that ſenſe applide;
                     which for the ſame when fitteſt time he ſpide,
                     Vnto my noſthrills forcibly did ſtraine,
                     Which at an inſtant wrought my deadly baine.
                  
                  
                     With his rude tuch (my vaile diſordered then)
                     My face diſcouering, whoſe delitious checke
                     Tinckted with crimſon, fading ſoone agen,
                     with ſuch a ſweetenes as made death euen meeke,
                     Seeming to him, beholding it euen like
                     Vnto a ſparke extinguiſh'd to the eye,
                     Breakes forth in fire e're ſuddainely it die.
                  
                  
                     
                     And whilſt thereat amazed he doth ſtand,
                     wherein he ſuch an excellencie ſaw,
                     Ruing the ſpoile done by his fatall hand,
                     whom nothing elſe my beauty now did awe,
                     And from his eyes would force him teares to draw;
                     Of which depriu'd and ſetled euen as dead,
                     Greeuing for me that it had none to ſhed.
                  
                  
                     When life retreating gently towards the hart,
                     (On whom cold death inuaſion now did make,
                     winning by little euery outward part)
                     As more and more her ſuccours her forſake,
                     To this laſt fort enforc'd her to betake,
                     To him whom ſadly yet did me behold,
                     Thus with milde ſpeech my greefe I did vnfold.
                  
                  
                     Is this the gift the King on me beſtowes,
                     which in this ſort he ſends thee to preſent me?
                     I am his friend, what giues he to his foes,
                     If this in token of his loue be ſent me?
                     His pleaſure thus, it muſt not diſcontent me;
                     Yet after ſure a proucrhe this ſhall proue,
                     The gift King Iohn beſtow'd vpon his loue.
                  
                  
                     When all that race to memory are ſet,
                     And by their ſtatues their atchieuements done
                     which wonne abroad, and which at home did get.
                     From ſonne to ſyre, from ſyre vnto the ſonne,
                     Grac'd with the ſpoiles that gloriouſly they wonne;
                     O that of him it onely ſhould be ſaid,
                     This was that King, the murtherer of a maid!
                  
                  
                     
                     O keepe it ſafely from the eares of Fame,
                     That none do heare of this vnhalowed deede,
                     To him be ſecret and conceale his ſhame,
                     Leſt after ages hap the ſame to reede,
                     And in their eyes the very letters bleede;
                     O let the graue my innocency hold,
                     Ere of a King ſo heynous ſinne be told.
                  
                  
                     Vttering my minde my ſorrow to aſſwage,
                     The heauy burthen of my penſiue breaſt,
                     The poiſon now that inwardly did rage,
                     The preſent vigor forcibly expreſt,
                     Me no way ſuffering to declare the reſt;
                     Longer for him t'was now no time to ſtay,
                     And death call'd on to haſten me away.
                  
                  
                     Thus in my cloſet being left alone.
                     Vpon the floore vncomfortably lying,
                     The deede committed and the murtherer gone,
                     Almoſt arriued at the point of dying,
                     Some of the ſiſters me by chance eſpying,
                     Calls all the reſt that in moſt wofull plight,
                     Came to behold this miſerable ſight.
                  
                  
                     Where like a roſe by an vnkindly blaſt,
                     Mongſt many buds that round about it grow,
                     The withered leaues improſp'rouſly doth caſt.
                     Yet all the reſt their ſoueraigne beauties ſhow,
                     Amidſt this goodly ſiſterhood euen ſo;
                     Nipt with cold death vntimely did I fade,
                     Whilſt they about me pitteous wailing made.
                  
                  
                     
                     When as my poore ſoule in hir ſuddaine flight,
                     Neglects the organ of each ſeverall ſenſe,
                     with all that horror could the ſame affright,
                     Being diſturbed in her parting hence,
                     Onely conſtrained for her beſt defence,
                     Vnto her ſpotleſſe innocence to take her,
                     Which her not leaues when all the reſt forſake her.
                  
                  
                     VVhen all our pleaſures are but childrens toyes,
                     And as meere ſhadowes preſently do paſſe,
                     As yeares encreaſing, waning are our ioyes,
                     As we forget our fauours in a glaſſe,
                     Euen as a tale of that which neuer was;
                     Death our delights continually doth ſeuer,
                     Vertue alone abandoneth vs neuer.
                  
                  
                     And now my ſpirit thus liberally enlargde,
                     By gently flitting from this earthly roome,
                     The debt to Nature faithfully diſchargde,
                     And at the howre conditiond on my toombe;
                     Such is the heauens ineuitable doombe,
                     Me Baynards Caſtle to the earth did bring,
                     
                        D
                              〈…〉
                           
                         againe my place of burying.
                  
                  
                     Now ſcarſly was my breathleſſe body cold,
                     But euery where my tragedy was ſpred,
                     For tatling Fame in euery place had told,
                     My reſolution being lately dead,
                     Ruing my blood ſo prodigally ſhed,
                     And to my father flies with this miſchance,
                     Which then remained in the Court of Frarce.
                  
                  
                     
                     His loſſe too great to be bewailde with teares,
                     Nor were there found wordes to expreſſe his woe,
                     Terror it ſelfe ſo ſettled in his eares,
                     No more might enter, nothing out might goe,
                     O while againe ſhould griefe diſtract me 
                           〈◊〉
                        ?
                     Enough of ſorrow is already ſhowne,
                     And telling his renewing of mine owne.
                  
                  
                     Me t'ſhall ſuffiſe my fortunes to relate,
                     And beare the burthen of my proper ill,
                     If I expreſſe my pittifull eſtate,
                     Tis all I aske, and I obtaine my will,
                     For whie, true ſorrow needes not others skill,
                     It is too much the bitterneſſe we taſte,
                     vvithout remembrance when the ſame is paſt.
                  
                  
                     Someſaie, the King repentant for this deede,
                     vvhenas remorce to thoughts thereof him draue,
                     Poorely diſguiſed in a Pilgrimes weede,
                     Offered his teares on my vntimely graue,
                     For which, no doubt but heauen his ſinne forgaue;
                     And did thereby my grieued ſpirite appeaſe,
                     H
                           ••••
                        ing contrite, I happly at eaſe.
                  
                  
                     Thus tolde my ſtorie, I my ſtate deuiſe,
                     To you ſweete Madam, fitt'ſt with you to r
                           •
                        ſt,
                     vvhich do my vertues daily exerciſe,
                     That be impreſſed in your patient breaſt,
                     By whome alone I rightlieſt am expreſt;
                     For whom my praiſe (it grieues me) is too ſcant,
                     Whoſe happie name an Epethite ſhall want.
                  
                  
                     
                     Then moſt deere Lady for a maidens ſake,
                     To ſhead one teare, if gently you but daine,
                     For all my wrongs it full amends may make,
                     And be my paſſe to the Elizian plaine,
                     In your chaſt
                           •
                         eies ſuch powre there doth remain
                           •
                        ,
                     As can th'afflicted proſprouſly deliuer,
                     Happy be they may looke vpon them euer.
                  
                  FINIS.
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  The Legend of Pierce Gaueſton.
                  
                  
                     FRom gloomy ſhadowes of eternall night,
                     Shut vp in darkenes where I long did dwell,
                     O heere beholde me miſerable wight,
                     Laſtly, inuokt my tragedie to tell;
                     Giue me then leaue my ſorrowes to impart,
                     Somewhat to eaſe my poore afflicted hart.
                  
                  
                     Goddeſſe of Artes and Armes, Pallas diuine,
                     Let thy bright fawchion lend me Cipreſſe bughes,
                     Be thou aſſiſting to this Poet of mine,
                     With funerall wreathes incompaſſing his browes,
                     Pittying my caſe when none would heare me weep,
                     To tell my ſorrowes, layes his owne to ſleepe.
                  
                  
                     And mournefulſt maiden of the ſacred Nine,
                     That balefull ſounds immoueably dooſt breathe,
                     With thy ſwolne viſage, and thy blubbred eine,
                     I vnto thee my ſad complaints bequeathe;
                     Matter that yeelds ſufficient for thy glorie,
                     If thou exactly proſecute my ſtorie.
                  
                  
                     
                     Tell how the ſtarres my wandring ſtate did guide,
                     Th'unconſtant turnes of euerie changing houre,
                     Of manie a lowe ebbe, manie as high a tide,
                     Manie a ſmoothe calme, manie a ſtormie ſhowre,
                     The height whereto I laſtly did aſcend,
                     My ſtrange beginning, and my fatall end.
                  
                  
                     When Edward ſate vpon the Engliſh throne,
                     
                        Long-ſhankes that ſo victoriouſly did raigne;
                     Firſt of that name, and ſecond vnto none,
                     In all to knighthoode euer did pertaine,
                     My life begunne, and then begunne my bliſſe,
                     Euen in thoſe daies, thoſe happie daies of his.
                  
                  
                     So much did vertue gratious harts inflame,
                     Promotion then not purchaſed with golde,
                     And in thoſe times he that deſired fame,
                     Bought it of them that it full deerely ſolde,
                     Hatefull exceſſe ſo much did not deuoure,
                     Lawes had leſſe force, and honeſty more powre.
                  
                  
                     And ſince that time ſo violently prayes
                     Vpon thoſe ages that euen holieſt bee,
                     Let me remember thoſe more happie daies,
                     In theſe ſad houres my grieued eies doe ſee,
                     With greater griefe that makes me theſe deplore,
                     When I doe thinke of thoſe that were before.
                  
                  
                     
                     And Muſe, to thee I ſadly then appeale,
                     Since thou my life wilt need
                           •
                        ly haue me ſhow,
                     That I by thee may faithfully reueale,
                     Euen what the moſt inquiſitiue would know,
                     Whilſt that my ſoule heere bodied did abide,
                     In the vaine world that pampred mein pride.
                  
                  
                     From Gaſcony our name and our deſcent,
                     Of which my father naturally was borne,
                     In all his warres that with king Edward went,
                     To him a 
                           〈…〉
                        ege man and a ſouldier ſworne:
                     And in his country ventred his eſtate.
                     To follow him that ſeemd to gouerne fate.
                  
                  
                     Whoſe truſt that great king highly did imploy,
                     And neare his perſon tooke him for the ſame,
                     Who with my ſelfe, but then a little boy,
                     Vnto the Court of famous England came;
                     Whereas the King for ſeruice he had done,
                     Made me a page vnto the Prince his ſonne.
                  
                  
                     In me what ſhape that man's did not excel,
                     Where euery part ſuch harmony did beate,
                     As in this modell Nature ſeemd to tell,
                     T'was not perfection if it were not there,
                     As euery age reſeru'd his rareſt feature,
                     Thereof to make ſo excellent a creature.
                  
                  
                     
                     My lookes the powrefull adamants to loue,
                     Which vnto them attracted euery ſight,
                     With which the ſame was fixed or did moue,
                     As ſvmpathizing naturally delight,
                     That where my thoughts intended to ſurpriſe,
                     I at my pleaſure conqu'red with mine eies.
                  
                  
                     If euen the beſt in Paintings curious art,
                     In ſome rare peece his workemanſhip ſhould ſhow,
                     Imag
                           〈…〉
                        on helping with her part,
                     vv
                           ••
                        n th'hand had done the vtmoſt it could doe
                     Vnto that bodie modelling a minde,
                     Such a one was I the mirrour of my kinde.
                  
                  
                     This was the baite was laide for Edwards loue,
                     That bred the league of amitie thereby,
                     That no misfortune after could remoue,
                     vvhen ſhe the vtmoſt of her force did trie,
                     Nor death it ſelfe retained power to ſunder,
                     Friendſhip ſeld ſeene, and in the world a wonder.
                  
                  
                     Heere on this earth th'onely meane thou art,
                     Whereby we hold intelligence with heauen,
                     And it is thou that onely dooſt impart,
                     All good can to mortalitie be giuen;
                     That 
                           〈…〉
                        red bo
                           •
                        d that neuer canſt be broken,
                     O word diuine to be with reu'r
                           •
                        nce ſpoken!
                  
                  
                     
                     With this ſweete Prince in height of worldly bliſſe;
                     vvhilſt Tutors care his wandering eares did guide,
                     I liu'd enioying whatſoe're was his,
                     vvho ne're my pleaſures any thing denide,
                     Whoſe deare affection ſtill me ſo attended,
                     As on my ioyes his happines depended.
                  
                  
                     Whether that it my rare perfections were,
                     That wonne my youth ſuch fauour in his eie,
                     Or that the heauens to whom I ſeemde ſo deare,
                     On me downe ſhowr'd this bleſſing from the skie;
                     I cannot tell, but well it did direct,
                     That could produce ſuch wonderfull effect.
                  
                  
                     Thou Arke of heauen where wonders are enrouled,
                     O depth of Nature, who can looke vnto thee?
                     What might he be that hath thy doome controuled?
                     Or hath the key of Reaſon to vndoe thee?
                     Thy workes diuine, which thine alone doe know,
                     Shallow mans wit, too ſhort for things below.
                  
                  
                     The ſoule her liking ſubt'ly doth eſpie,
                     In the high power that is to her aſſignde,
                     By the cleere ſight diſcouering through the eie,
                     The thing agreeing aptlieſt with her kinde;
                     And by each motion quickely apprehendeth,
                     That which it ſelfe paſt humane ſenſe extendeth.
                  
                  
                     
                     This Edward in the April of his age,
                     Whilſt yet the crowne ſate on his fathers head,
                     Like that great loue with his rap'd Phrigian page,
                     Me with Ambroſiall delicacies fed;
                     He might command that was the Soueraignes ſon,
                     And what I ſaid, that onelie muſt be done.
                  
                  
                     My will a lawe autentically paſt,
                     My yea by him was neuer croſſd with no,
                     Who in affection chained was ſo faſt,
                     He as my ſhadow ſtill with me did goe,
                     To me this Prince ſo pliant was in all,
                     Still as an eccho anſwering to my call.
                  
                  
                     My ſmiles his life, his heauen was in my ſight,
                     And his delight confinde by my deſire,
                     Who from my cleere eies borrowed all his light,
                     As pal
                           〈…〉
                        ide Cinthia from her brothers fire;
                     My cheeke the pillow where he laide his head,
                     My brow his booke, my boſome was his bed.
                  
                  
                     Like faire Idalia bent to amorous ſportes,
                     With yong Adonis in the wanton ſhade,
                     Figuring her paſſions in as ſundry ſortes,
                     As he to her indeerements to perſwade
                     Eithers affections happily to moue,
                     With all the tender daliances of loue.
                  
                  
                     
                     The table (thus) of our delight was laid,
                     Scru'd with what dainties pleaſure coulde deuiſe,
                     And many a Syren muſicke ſweetely plaid,
                     (O that youth had vs wherewith to ſuffice)
                     whilſt we on that vnſatiately doe feede,
                     Which our confuſion afterwards did breed.
                  
                  
                     For ſtill I ſpurd his violent deſire,
                     Holding the reines wherewith he rulde the ſunne,
                     My blandiſhment the fuell to the fire,
                     In which to frie already he begunne;
                     waxing his wings taught him Art to flie,
                     Who on his back might beare me through the skie.
                  
                  
                     Whilſt the vaine world vpon vs ſtill did winne,
                     Inticde his flatteries ſtedfaſtly to truſt,
                     Looſing the clew which led vs ſafely in,
                     Are loſt within this Labyrinth of luſt;
                     For when the fleſh is nuſſed once in vice,
                     The ſweete of ſinne makes hell a paradice
                  
                  
                     Who thy deceits vile world yet euer told,
                     In thee what is that's not extreamely ill?
                     A ſhop where poiſon's onely to be ſold,
                     whoſe very entrance inſtantly doth kill,
                     where all deformed wickedneſſe do dwell,
                     And all thy waies guide head long into hell.
                  
                  
                     
                     The King that ſaw his hopefull ſonne betraide,
                     That like young Phaeton ventred on the skies,
                     Perceiu'd his courſe with danger hardly ſtaide,
                     (For he was graue and prouidently wiſe;)
                     That wanting skill to maiſter youthes deſire,
                     Might by miſguidance ſet his throne on fire.
                  
                  
                     This was a corſiue to King Edwards daies,
                     That without ceaſing fed vpon his bones,
                     That in the day bereau'd him of his caſe,
                     Breaking his night-ſleepe with vnquiet grones;
                     That did depreſſe and burthened him downe,
                     More then the weight that ſate vpon his Crowne.
                  
                  
                     When now their iudgement that ſeuerely tride,
                     The matter whence this malladie firſt grew,
                     Likewiſe muſt now a remedie prouide,
                     To preuent the perill likely to enſue,
                     The cauſe muſt end e're the effect could ceaſe,
                     Elſe (well) of one, there many might encreaſe.
                  
                  
                     When ſuch in Court my oppoſites as were,
                     On all aduantage that could wiſely play,
                     Who did to me inuetterate malice beare,
                     That for their purpoſe found ſo faire a way;
                     On this their forces inſtantly did ground,
                     My name and fame perpetually to wound.
                  
                  
                     
                     And the time fit for venting their vntruth,
                     Me into hate more forcibly to bring,
                     Sticke not to charge the looſeneſſe of my youth,
                     T'offend euen in th'vnnaturaleſt thing,
                     And olde fore-paſſed outrages awake,
                     With all that me contemptible might make.
                  
                  
                     Wherefore the Prince to priuacie beſtow'd
                     In Realmes remote I baniſhed to rome,
                     Cenſured of all men fitſt to be abroad,
                     That had betraide my honeſt truſt at home,
                     A diudg'd to die, if after I were found,
                     The day preſcrib'd vpon the Engliſh ground.
                  
                  
                     So much aſtoniſh'd with the ſuddaine blow,
                     That I became inſenſible of paine,
                     Vntill awak'd with ſharpneſſe of my woe,
                     I ſaw the wound which open did remaine;
                     By which my ioyes ſtill fainted more and more,
                     No hope at all me euer to reſtore.
                  
                  
                     Euen as a Turtle for her faithfull make,
                     Whoſe youth her deare virginitie enioyde,
                     Sits ſhrowded in ſome ſolitary brake,
                     With melancholy penſiueneſſe annoide;
                     Thus without comfort ſit I all alone,
                     From the ſweete Prince infortunately gone.
                  
                  
                     
                     My beauty once which ſdainde the ſummers ſight,
                     Beaten with bleake and chilly winter ſtormes,
                     Thoſe tender limbes muſt trauell day and night,
                     So often hug'd in Edwards princely Armes;
                     Thoſe eyes oft viewing pleaſure in her pride,
                     With fearefull obiects euery way ſupplide.
                  
                  
                     And whilſt theſe ſtormes me ſtrangely thus did toſſe,
                     where I my ſelfe confined yet in France,
                     
                     Thwarted the while with many a greeuous croſſe,
                     Inſeperables to my ſad miſchance;
                     Others that ſtem'd the current of the time,
                     By which I fell, prou'd afterwards to clime.
                  
                  
                     Camelion-like the world doth alter hue,
                     And as falſe Proteus puts on ſundrie ſhapes,
                     One change ſcarce gone, another doth enſue,
                     This fild, that likewiſe for promotion gapes;
                     Thus did they ſwarme like Bees about the brim,
                     Some drownd, and ſome as dang'rouſly ſwim.
                  
                  
                     And ſome on whom the higher powres look'd faire,
                     Yet of the ſeaſon little ſeemde to vaunt,
                     For there were clowdes hung in the troubled ayre,
                     which ſhew'd ſomething to their deſire did want,
                     That forc'd them ſtoope which otherwiſe would flie,
                     Whilſt with much care they fading honor buy.
                  
                  
                     
                     When reſtleſſe Time that neuer turnes againe,
                     Whoſe winged feete are ſliding with the ſunne,
                     By the fleete howres attending on his traine,
                     His reſolution fatally begunne;
                     In a iuſt courſe eftſoone to bring about,
                     That which long ſince the wiſer ſort did doubt.
                  
                  
                     For whilſt the King doth ſeriouſly attend,
                     His long-hop'd voyage to the Holy-land,
                     For which his ſubiects mighty ſummes did leud,
                     Euen whilſt this buiſnes onely was in hand;
                     All on the ſuddaine happily doth fall,
                     The death of Edward quickely altred all.
                  
                  
                     Should I aſſay his vertues to report,
                     To do the honor due vnto his name,
                     My meane endeuours ſhould come farre too ſhort,
                     And I thereby ſhould greatly wrong the ſame;
                     But leaue it to ſome ſacred Muſe to tell,
                     Vpon whoſe life a Poets pen might dwell.
                  
                  
                     His princely body ſcarſly wrapt in lead,
                     Before his mournefull obſequies were done,
                     But that the Crowne was ſet on Edwards head,
                     With whom too ſoone my happy daies begunne;
                     After blacke night like brightneſſe of the day.
                     All former ſorrowes vaniſhed away.
                  
                  
                     
                     When now Carnaruan calls within a while,
                     Whom Edward Long-ſhanks hated to the death,
                     He whom the father lately did exile,
                     Is to the ſonne as precious as his breath,
                     What th'old inſcrib'd the yonger forth did blot,
                     Kings wils perform'd, and dead mens words forgot.
                  
                  
                     When the winde wafts me to that happy place.
                     And ſoone did ſet me ſafely on that ſhore,
                     From whence I ſeemde but baniſh'd for a ſpace,
                     That my returne might honored be the more;
                     Vnto this new King happily to leaue me,
                     Whoſe princely armes were ready to receiue me.
                  
                  
                     Who would haue ſeene how that kinde Roman dame.
                     O
                           •
                        e-come with ioy did yeelde her lateſt breath,
                     Herſonne returning laden with ſuch fame,
                     When thankfull Rome had mourned for his death,
                     Might heere behold her perſonated right,
                     When I approached to the Princes ſight.
                  
                  
                     My Ioue now Lord of the Aſcendant is,
                     In an aſpect that promiſde happy ſpeede,
                     Whilſt in that luckie influence of his,
                     Some praiſde the courſe wherein I did proceede;
                     Yet it to ſome prodigiouſly appeares,
                     Telling the troubles of enſuing yeares.
                  
                  
                     
                     When like to Midas all I touch'd was gold,
                     Powr'd as t'was once downe into Danaes lap,
                     For I obtained any thing I would,
                     Fortune had yet ſo lotted out my hap;
                     The cheſts of great men like to Oceans are,
                     To whom all floods by courſe do ſtill repare.
                  
                  
                     The Iſle of Man he firſt vnto me gaue,
                     To ſhew how high I in his grace did ſtand,
                     But fearing me ſufficient not to haue,
                     I next receiued from his bounteous hand,
                     Faire Wallingford that antiently had beene,
                     The wealthy dower of many an Engliſh Queene.
                  
                  
                     The ſummes his father had beene leuying long,
                     By impoſitions for the warre abroad,
                     Other his princely benefits among,
                     At once on me he bounteouſly beſtow'd;
                     When thoſe which ſaw how much on me he caſt,
                     Soone found his wealth ſufficed not his waſte.
                  
                  
                     He giues me then chiefe Secretaries place.
                     Thereby to traine me in affaires of ſtate,
                     And thoſe high roomes that I did hold to grace,
                     Me Earle of Cornwall franckly did create;
                     And that in Court he freely might pertake me,
                     Of England Lord high Chamberlaine did make me.
                  
                  
                     
                     And that he would more ſtrongly me alie,
                     To backe me gainſt their inſolent ambition,
                     Doth his faire Coſen vnto me affie,
                     A Lady of right vertuous condition,
                     which his deare ſiſter proſperouſly bare,
                     To the Earle of Gloſter blood-ennobled Clare.
                     
                  
                  
                     O ſacred bounty, mother of content,
                     Fautreſſe and happy nouriſher of Arts,
                     That giu'ſt ſucceſſe to euery high intent,
                     The Conquerour of the moſt nobleſt harts:
                     High grace into mortalitie infuſed,
                     Pitty it is that e're thou waſt abuſed.
                  
                  
                     When thoſe that did my baniſhment procure,
                     Still in my boſome hated did abide,
                     And they before that could me not endure,
                     Are now much more impatient of my pride;
                     For emulation euer did attend,
                     Vpon the great, and ſhall vnto th'end.
                  
                  
                     And into fauour cloſly working thoſe,
                     That from meane places lifted vp by me,
                     And factious ſpirits being fitteſt to oppoſe,
                     Them that perhaps too powerfull elſe might be;
                     That euen gainſt enuie raiſed by my hand,
                     Me muſt vphold to make themſelues to ſtand.
                  
                  
                     
                     And ſince the frame by fortune ſo contriu'd,
                     To giue protect to my ambitious waies,
                     Vrging thereby their hate to me deriu'd,
                     From thoſe hie honours 
                           〈◊〉
                         vpon me layes,
                     Drawing the King my courſes to pertake,
                     Still to maintaine what he himſelfe did make.
                  
                  
                     Thus doth my youth ſtill exerciſe extreames,
                     My heed fond raſhnes to forerunne my fall,
                     My wit meere folly, and my hopes but dreames,
                     My councell ſerues my ſelfe but to inthrall,
                     That me abuſed with a vaine illuſion,
                     When all I did intending my confuſion.
                  
                  
                     And now the King, to haſten his repaire,
                     Himſelfe by marriage highly to aduance,
                     With Iſabel a Princeſſe, yong and faire,
                     As was her father Philip king of France,
                     
                     When now the more to perfect my command,
                     Leaues vnto me protection of the land.
                  
                  
                     My power confirm'd ſo abſolute withall.
                     That I dranke pleaſure in a plenteous cup,
                     vvhen there was none me to account to call,
                     All to my hands ſo freely rendred vp,
                     That earth to me no greater bliſſe could bring,
                     Except to make me greater than a King.
                  
                  
                     
                     When being now got as high as I could clime,
                     That the vaine world thus bountifully bleſt,
                     Franckly imbrace the benefite of time,
                     Fully t'enioy that freely I poſſeſt;
                     Strongly maintaining he was worſe than mad,
                     Fondly to ſpare, a Princes wealth that had.
                  
                  
                     Their counſells when continually I croſſt,
                     As ſcorning their authoritie and blood;
                     And in thoſe things concernd their honor's moſt,
                     In thoſe againſt them euer moſt I ſtoode:
                     And things moſt publique priuately extend,
                     To feede my riot that had neuer end.
                  
                  
                     When laſtly Fortune like a treacherous foe,
                     That had ſo long attended on my fall,
                     In the plaine path wherein I was to goe,
                     Layes many a baite, to traine me on withall;
                     Till by her skill ſhe cunningly had brought me,
                     Vnto the place where at her will ſhe caught me.
                  
                  
                     The mighty buſines falling then in hand,
                     Triumphs ordain'd to welcome his returne
                     (Before the French in honour of the land)
                     vvith all my power I labourd to adiourne;
                     Till all their charge was laſtly ouer throwne,
                     vvho likde t'haue ſeene no glory but mine owne.
                  
                  
                     
                     Thus euery thing me forward ſtill doth ſet,
                     Euen as an engine forcing by the ſlight,
                     One miſchiefe thus a ſecond doth beget,
                     And that doth leade th'other but to right;
                     Yet euery one himſelfe employing wholy,
                     In their iuſt courſe to proſecute my folly.
                  
                  
                     Which when they found how ſtill I did retaine,
                     Th'ambitious courſe wherein I firſt beganne,
                     And laſtly felt, that vnder my diſdaine
                     Into contempt continually they ranne;
                     Take armes at once to remedy their wrong,
                     vvhich their cold ſpirits had ſuffred but too long.
                  
                  
                     Me boldely charging to abuſe the King
                     A waſtefull ſpender of his needefull treaſure,
                     A ſecret thiefe of many a ſacred thing,
                     And that I led him to vnlawfull pleaſure,
                     That neuer did in any thing delight,
                     But what might pleaſe my ſenſuall appetite.
                  
                  
                     That as a ſcourge vpon the land was ſent,
                     Whoſe hatefull life the cauſe had onely beene,
                     The State ſo vniuerſally was rent,
                     Whoſe ill increaſing euery day was ſeene;
                     I was reproached openly of many,
                     Who pitti'd none, not pitti'd now of any.
                  
                  
                     
                     And for oppoſde by men of greateſt might,
                     (The King my danger that had wiſely waide)
                     That did purſue me with ſuch deadly ſpight,
                     Me into Ireland ſecretly conuaide,
                     Vntill he might my peace againe procure,
                     And his owne ſafety better might aſſure.
                  
                  
                     As one whoſe houſe remedileſly burning,
                     Seeing his goods now heapt together loſt,
                     His griefe no whit disburthen'd by his mourning,
                     Taking ſome one thing that he loueth moſt,
                     To ſome remote place doth with that retire,
                     Leauing the reſt to'th mercie of the fire.
                  
                  
                     Yet he ſo much that ſtill did me eſteeme,
                     That euer ſtroue to couer my diſgrace,
                     To make my abſence otherwiſe to ſeeme,
                     And to the world to beare a fairer Face,
                     Leſt my exile ſuggeſted by their hate,
                     Might ouerthrow my liuelihoode and eſtate.
                  
                  
                     By their neere councell that were him about,
                     His Deputy of Ireland doth me make,
                     And cauſde it each-where to be giuen out,
                     My iourney thither inſtantly to take,
                     To ſtop their mouthes that gladly would embrace,
                     Any report might tend to my diſgrace.
                  
                  
                     
                     There liu'd I in that honourable ſort,
                     As to my high place purchaſed renowne;
                     vvith no leſſe bountie managing a court,
                     Then hourely crau'd th'reuenues of a Crowne;
                     To me his loue ſuch ſoueraigntie did bring.
                     That though he raignde, I abſolutely King.
                  
                  
                     Few weekes there went but ſome the channell croſſt,
                     With ſome ſuch preſent Princes holde in price,
                     Some jewell that him infinitely coſt,
                     Or ſumptuous roabe of excellent deuiſe;
                     When they that ſawe what he vpon me caſt,
                     Found that his treaſure long time could not laſt.
                  
                  
                     And ſince the floud me followed in this wiſe,
                     His fulnes I as amply entertaine,
                     It might ſhew folly to be found preciſe,
                     That to refuſe which fell as did the raine,
                     Such as no age before did euer winne,
                     And ſince his being, yet hath neuer bin.
                  
                  
                     When now th'abated Baronry that found,
                     The cunning vſde for couering of my flight,
                     That me but ſhifted to a ſurer ground,
                     On which ſo vainely they beſtow'd their might;
                     Perceiu'd farre off where greater perill roſe,
                     Then they could finde how rightly to diſpoſe.
                  
                  
                     
                     Like thoſe that ſtriue to ſtop ſome violent ſourſe,
                     vvhoſe plenty Nature planted not for boundes,
                     Climes aboue all the oppoſers of his courſe,
                     Or let at large the neighboring plaine ſurrounds,
                     That in it ſelfe ſ'enated is bleſs'd,
                     That will the more be, more it depreſs'd.
                  
                  
                     And fearing now the force I had abroade,
                     vvho knew the way the Iriſh harts to winne,
                     Fitter by farre at home to be beſtow'd,
                     (And to the State more ſafety found therein)
                     vvhere though my riots they could not preuent,
                     Yet might ſuruey the giddy courſe I went.
                  
                  
                     Whereof they ſcarſly entertain'd the thought,
                     And did thereto but ſeemingly deſcend,
                     But that his loue immediately it caught,
                     Nor cares he by it what they doe intend;
                     Plot what they could, ſo he therby might gaine him,
                     That with delight, which ſtill did entertaine him.
                  
                  
                     O how thy preſence maieſtie commands!
                     That ſo ſeuerely humbleth euery eie,
                     vvhoſe onely ſelfe actes more than many handes,
                     In thee ſuch vertue ſecretly doth lie,
                     Hauing about thee the high power of fate,
                     Art both emperious ouer loue and hate.
                  
                  
                     
                     He that occaſion neuer did neglect,
                     That aught vnto my happineſſe might winne,
                     My buiſnes did ſo carefully effect,
                     That euer was ſo fortunate therein,
                     As he to paſſe doth prouidently bring,
                     Before deemde ſo impoſſible a thing.
                  
                  
                     And Meſſengers immediately are ſent,
                     Me into England inſtantly to call,
                     Authorizde by the generall conſent,
                     Although not likde of inwardly of all;
                     Yet, twas ſufficient that it freedome gaue me,
                     But to be there where he deſirde to haue me.
                  
                  
                     My ſailes now ſwelling with a proſperous winde,
                     The boiſterous ſeas do homage to mine eies,
                     That much aboue their vſuall courſe are kinde,
                     All lowring clouds abandoning the skies,
                     Nothing diſcern'd that any whit might feare me,
                     Fortune herſelfe ſittes at the helme to ſteare me.
                  
                  
                     What time the King his progreſſe then did take,
                     That part of Wales pretending now to ſee,
                     For which he forward inſtantly did make,
                     vvhich was (indeede) there but to meete with me,
                     with all the fauour that he could deuiſe,
                     To giue me honour in the publique eies.
                  
                  
                     
                     Where for my landing long he did prouide,
                     That 
                           •
                        ought might want intending my delight,
                     And at each place as leaſurely we ride,
                     Did 
                           〈◊◊◊〉
                         with ſome pleaſing ſight,
                     And vnto L
                              •
                           ndon to the pompous Court,
                     Bring, me in the magnificenteſt ſort.
                  
                  
                     Which prou'd but ſpurres to my vntamde deſire,
                     Giuing the 
                           〈◊〉
                         to my 
                           〈…〉
                        ious will,
                     
                        
                           •
                        ho let me forth vnto my full ca
                           ••
                        re,
                     On places ſlippe
                           •
                        y, and my manage ill,
                     Small my forefight, and ouermuch my haſte,
                     That me alas infortunately caſt.
                  
                  
                     The Princes eare, that hauing at command,
                     That who would aught haue, me muſt entertaine,
                     And yet before it paſſde my gripple hand,
                     Got the greatſt ſhare vnto my priuate gaine;
                     Nor carde I what from any I did wring,
                     Many thereby too much impoueriſhing.
                  
                  
                     And daily begging of Monopolies,
                     Taking the lands belonging to the Crowne,
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         
                        
                           •
                        ence tranſporting thoſe commodities,
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         England vſefull comming of her owne,
                     And baſely ſelling offices (ere then)
                     The due reward of beſt deſeruing men.
                  
                  
                     
                     And being irrecouerably prowd,
                     Held all things vile that ſuted not my vaine,
                     Nothing might paſſe, my iudgement not allow'd,
                     A great opinion to my wit to gaine,
                     Giuing vile termes and nicke-names of diſgrace,
                     To men that ſate in honourable place.
                  
                  
                     By which brake out that execrable rage,
                     That long before had boiled in their blood,
                     And for reuenge they boldly them ingage,
                     When laſtly for their libertie they ſtood;
                     And in this quarrell open Armes they take,
                     Or to marre all, or better it to make.
                  
                  
                     They durſt affirme my mother was a witch,
                     And for the fact condemned burnt to be,
                     And I her ſonne and rightly of her pitch,
                     She had bequeath'd her damned Art to me;
                     Vrging it an inſeperable thing,
                     That I by Magicke wrought vpon the King.
                  
                  
                     And into France did charge me to conuay,
                     A goodly table that was maſſie gold,
                     A relique kept at Windſor many a day,
                     
                        
                           ••
                        at to King Arthur did belong of old;
                     Vpon whoſe margent as they did ſurmiſe,
                     
                        Merlin ingraued many prophecies.
                  
                  
                     
                     And by appealing to the ſea of Rome,
                     
                     A Legat thence procuring to the land,
                     With malediction by the Churches doome,
                     On any one that on my part ſhould ſtand:
                     The King ſuſpending ſhould he not conſent,
                     And ratifie the generall intent.
                  
                  
                     Which they did but to proſperouſly effect,
                     Being ſo ſtrong to counterprize his force,
                     The Clergy ſtill being ready to direct
                     Them the beſt way in all their reſtleſſe courſe,
                     That at the laſt they ſtrongly him procure,
                     By ſolemne oth me euer to abiure.
                  
                  
                     Th'vncertaine biding of each earthly thing,
                     (Set out moſt liuely in my ſtarre-croſt ſtate)
                     That doth remaine in Fortunes mannaging,
                     Appearing in my variable fate
                     On me that frown'd and flattered me ſo oft,
                     Caſting me downe and ſetting me aloft.
                  
                  
                     To Flanders then my preſent courſe I caſt,
                     Which being the near'ſt, lay fitteſt for my eaſe,
                     Safeſt the way the ſooner it was paſt,
                     All not my friends that were abroad at ſeas;
                     Such meanes in France they daily do procure,
                     That there my ſelfe I doubted to ſecure.
                  
                  
                     
                     And though I chang'd my habite and my name,
                     Becauſe I meant to liue vnknowne to any,
                     Yet ſwift report had ſo divulg'd my ſhame,
                     My hated life was publiſh'd to too many;
                     In euery ſtreete that as I pas'd along,
                     I was the talke of euery common tongue.
                  
                  
                     And finding that which onely I did craue,
                     A ſecret meanes to ſend vnto the King,
                     To me certaine intelligence that gaue,
                     Of the ſtate and courſe of euery thing;
                     Who labored now (more euer then before)
                     Me into England ſafely to reſtore.
                  
                  
                     For which relying on my Soueraignes loue,
                     (To whom my life had euer beene ſo deare)
                     Which I then now had ne're more cauſe to proue,
                     Striuing t'obtaine (if any meane there were;)
                     A diſpenſation for his former oth,
                     In their diſpight that thereto ſeem'd moſt loth.
                  
                  
                     Where caſting many a ſundry courſe at length,
                     (Being by marridge mightily alide,
                     And but too much preſuming of my ſtrength)
                     Reſolu'd for England, come what could be
                           •
                        ide;
                     And in a ſhip that for the iourney lay,
                     Thither my ſelfe did ſuddainely conuay.
                  
                  
                     
                     And ſafely landed on the wiſhed ſhore.
                     Vnto the Court me ſecretly betooke,
                     Of which the King had notice long before,
                     And for my comming euery day did looke,
                     Wiſely that plotted when I ſhould arriue,
                     All helpefull meanes my ſafetie to contriue.
                  
                  
                     Which ſoone being known whilſt yet their blood was hote,
                     That to their ſtrength now onely were to truſt,
                     For what before was done preuailed not,
                     And for my ſake the King did proue vniuſt;
                     Bringing thereby whilſt trifling they did ſtand,
                     Wrong to themſelues, and danger to the land.
                  
                  
                     Now when the time did generally diſtaſte,
                     Our lewd and inconſiderate neglect,
                     when thoſe in Court that our high fauours plac'de,
                     Giue vs iuſt cauſe their dealings to ſuſpect,
                     And they that view'd vs with the pleaſedſt eye,
                     Yet at our actions ſometimes looke awric.
                  
                  
                     Wherefore the King inforced to prouide,
                     A preſent Armie truſting to his friends,
                     Rep
                           •
                        irde to Yorke vntill he were ſupplide,
                     From whence for, aide he into Scotland ſends,
                     To warlike Balioll and to Wales, from whence
                     He might get power to fruſtrate their pretence.
                  
                  
                     
                     But they his purpoſe wholy intercept,
                     Not now to ſeeke in any ſecret thing,
                     The marches that ſo vigilantly kept,
                     And yet renounce all malice to the King;
                     Only to chaſtice my abhorred ſinne,
                     Who had the cauſe of all this trouble bin.
                  
                  
                     Thus Like a ſhip diſmembred of the ſailes,
                     Forc'd by the winde againſt the ſtreamefull tide,
                     From place to place with euery billow hales,
                     And as it haps from ſhore to ſhore doth ride;
                     As that poore veſſell reſts my brittle ſtay,
                     Nearer the land, ſtill neareſt caſt away.
                  
                  
                     Corſiue of kingdoms home-begotten hate,
                     which in no limits euer yet waſt bounded,
                     when didſt thou ſeize euen on the greateſt ſtate,
                     By thee that was not vtterly confounded?
                     How many kingdome be there that doe rue thee?
                     Happy the world was till too well it knew thee.
                  
                  
                     Thus of our ſuccour inſtantly bereft,
                     Hauing but now ſome little force at ſea,
                     Laſtly to truſt to, onely vs was left,
                     On which our hope infortunately lay;
                     Which he to haſten, ſpeedily doth make,
                     His former courſes forced to forſake.
                  
                  
                     
                     The preſent danger mannaging it ſo,
                     That did for aide importunately call,
                     Wherefore in Yorke as fartheſt from the foe,
                     Leaues me vnto the ſafegard of the wall;
                     Till his returne me further helpe might giue,
                     Whom more and more he ſtudied to relecue.
                  
                  
                     From Bedford now the Armie ſetting on,
                     Th'appointed randy whore they gathered head,
                     When they had notice that the King was gone,
                     Vpon their way more haſtily them ſped,
                     (Me t'afflict as purpoſed they were,)
                     Whoſe preſence elſe might force them to forbeare.
                  
                  
                     To Skarborough immediately I poſte,
                     With the ſmall force my fortune then did lend me,
                     A Fort beſt fitting ſtanding on the coaſt,
                     And of all other likeſt to defend me,
                     And came the worſt, reſiſtleſſe were their might.
                     The ſea ſhould ſafely priuiledge my flight.
                  
                  
                     But they the Cittie lying round about,
                     Keepe euery paſſage with a watchfull ſpie,
                     That gaue them notice of my paſſing out,
                     With their light horſe purſue me by and by;
                     Whereas vpon me ſuddainely they came,
                     E're I had time to fortifie the ſame.
                  
                  
                     
                     Along the lands towards Oxford they conuey me,
                     Wondring my ſight as birds do at the Owle,
                     And by the way continually they bray me,
                     As hungry woolues at paſſengers do howle;
                     Each one exulting that I now was caught,
                     That in the land ſuch miſchiefe euer wrought.
                  
                  
                     And being brought to Dedington at laſt,
                     Where the Ea
                           •
                        le of Pombrooke wild me to be ſtaid,
                     To vnderſtand 
                           〈◊〉
                         further that I paſt,
                     Things to my charge that ſecretly were laid;
                     And to the King he ſpeedily had ſent.
                     T'acquaint him with the generall intent.
                  
                  
                     But the Earle of Warwicke (lying but too neare)
                     (The dog of Arden that I vſde to call,)
                     That deadly hatred ſtill to me did beare,
                     And that I euer doubted moſt of all;
                     Thither repairing with a powerfull band,
                     Ceazed vpon me with a violent hand.
                  
                  
                     And vnto Warwicke carrying me along,
                     Where he had long deſired me to get,
                     With friends and tenants abſolutely ſtrong,
                     Whom all the puiſſant Barronry abet;
                     Since now occaſion offered them ſuch hold,
                     Haſten my death by all the meanes they could.
                  
                  
                     
                     North from the Towne, a mile or very neare,
                     An eaſie hill in publike view doth lie,
                     
                        Blacklow then call'd of thoſe that dwelled there,
                     Neare to the antient Hermitage of Guy;
                     
                     Thither with arm'd bands ſtrongly they me led,
                     Whereas I laſtly forfa
                           •
                        ed my head.
                  
                  
                     My ſundry paſſions hauing thus expreſt,
                     In the ſad tenor of my tragicke Tale,
                     Let me returne vnto the fields of reſt,
                     Thither tranſported by a proſp'rous gale;
                     I leaue the world my deſtiny to view,
                     Bidding it thus for euermore a diew.
                  
                  FINIS.
                  
               
            
         
      
   