
      
         
            
            
            Mortimeriados.
            THE LAMENtable ciuell warres of Edward the second and the Barrons.
            AT LONDON, Printed by I.R. for Humfry Lownes, and are to be solde at his shop at the West end of Paules Church.
         
         
            
            
            To the excellent and most accomplish'd Ladie, Lucie Countesse of Bedford.
            
               
                  RArest of Ladies, all, of all I haue,
               Anchor of my poore Tempest-beaten state,
               Which giuest life, to that life Nature gaue,
               And to thy selfe, doest onely consecrate:
               My hopes true Goddesse, guider of my fate,
               Vouchsafe to grace what here to light is brought,
               Begot by thy sweet hand, borne of my thought.
            
            
               And though I sing of this tumultuous rage,
               Still paynting passions in these Tragedies,
               Thy milder lookes, this furie can aswage,
               Such is the vertue of thy sacred eyes,
               Which doe contayne a thousand purities;
               And lyke them selues, can make their obiect such,
               As doth Th'elixar all things it doth tuch.
            
            
               Sweet fruite, sprong from that euer sacred tree,
               That happie wombe from whom thou lyfe do'st take,
               And with that lyfe, giues vertue vnto thee,
               Thus made of her, her lyke of thee to make,
               Shee lou'd for thee, thou honour'd for her sake;
               And eithers good, from other so deriued,
               Yet shee, nor thou, of any due depriued.
            
            
               
               The Harringtons, whose house thy byrth hath blest,
               Adding such honour to theyr familie,
               And famous Bedfords greatnes still increast,
               Raysing the height of theyr Nobilitie,
               That Earledomes tytle more to dignifie?
               That Vertue lyuely pictur'd forth in thee,
               May truly be discernd, what shee should be.
            
            
               And Lawrell-crowned Sidney, Natures pride,
               Whom heauen to earth, but onely shew'd this good,
               Betwixt the world, and thee did then deuide,
               His fame, and vertues, which both equall stood,
               The world his fame, to thee of her owne blood
               Hee gaue his vertues, that in his owne kind,
               His neuer-matched worth might be enshrin'd.
            
            
               That whilst they boast but of their sun-burnt brayns,
               Which Tramontani long haue termd vs so,
               With all their Po's, their Tyburs, and their Rheyn's,
               
               Greeuing to see how tidefull Thames shall flowe,
               Our Groues which for the gracefull Muses growe:
               Thy name shall be the glorie of the North,
               The fayrest fruit that euer shee brought forth.
            
            
               And in despight of tyranizing times,
               This hope great Lady yet to thee is left,
               Thy name shall lyue in steele-out-during rimes,
               Still scorning ages sacraligious theft,
               What fame doth keepe, can neuer be bereft:
               Nor can thy past-priz'd honour euer die,
               If lynes can gyue thee immortalitie.
            
            
               
               Leauing vnto succeeding times to see,
               How much thy sacred gyfts I did adore.
               What power thy vertues euer had in mee,
               And what thou wer
                     •
                   compar'd with those before,
               Which shall in age, thy youth againe restore:
               And still shall ad more vigor to thy fame,
               Then earthly honors, or a Countesse name.
            
            
               Proclayming vnto ages yet to come,
               Whilst Bedford lyu'd, what lyuing Bedford was,
               Enclosing thee in this immortall toombe,
               More durable then letter-grauen brasse,
               To shewe what thy great power could bring to passe,
               And other hopes I vtterly refuse,
               And thou my hope, my Lady, and my Muse.
            
            
               Your Honors euer deuoted seruaunt Michaell Drayton.
               
            
         
         
            
            To the right Honorable Lady, Lucie Countesse of Bedford.
            WHen God this wondrous Creature did create,
            This euer-mouing body, this huge weight,
            VVhose head, whose lofty head high situate,
            Is crown'd with starrs & constellations bright.
            Hee causd the same one certaine way to moue,
            VVhich moouing (some say) doth sweet tunes beget,
            Another way the Sunne and Planets proue,
            For they from thence moue where the sun doth set;
            Yet he the Pole-star, Cynosura cleere,
            Causd steddily to stand, though heauen did gyre,
            For an example to mens actions heere:
            Madam, you are the starre of his desire;
            VVhilst hee his thoughts heauen moues, ô gracious bee,
            And wonders in your Creature you shall see.
            
               Your honors and eternities Humble, E. B.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            Mortimeriados.
            
               THE lowring heauen had mask'd her in a clowde,
               Dropping sad teares vpon the sullen earth,
               Bemoning in her melancholly shrowde,
               The angry starres which raign'd at Edwards birth,
               VVith whose beginning ended all our mirth.
               
                  Edward the second, but the first of shame,
               Scourge of the crowne, eclipse of Englands fame.
            
            
               VVhilst in our blood, ambition hotely boyles,
               The Land bewailes her, like a wofull Mother,
               On euery side besieg'd with ciuill broyles,
               Her deerest chyldren murthering one another,
               Yet shee in silence forc'd her griefe to smother:
               Groning with paine, in trauaile with her woes,
               And in her torment, none to helpe her throwes.
            
            
               
               VVhat care would plot, discention striues to crosse,
               VVhich like an earthquake rents the tottering state;
               Abroade in warres we suffer publique losse,
               At home, betrayd with grudge and priuate hate,
               Faction attending blood-shed and debate;
               Confusion thus our Countries peace confounds,
               No helpe at hand, and mortall be her wounds.
            
            
               Thou Church then swelling in thy mightines,
               Thou which should'st be this poore sick bodyes soule,
               O nurse not factions which should'st sinne suppresse,
               And with thy members should'st all griefe condole,
               Perswade thy hart and not thy head controle;
               Humble thy selfe, dispence not with the word,
               Take Peters keyes, but cast aside his sword.
            
            
               The ragefull fire which burnt Carnaruans brest,
               Blowne with reuenge of Gauestons disgrace,
               Awakes the Barrons from their nightly rest,
               And maketh way to giue the Spensers place,
               VVhose friendship Edward onely doth embrace;
               By whose alurements he is fondly led,
               To leaue his Queene, and flie his lawful bed.
            
            
               
               This Planet stirr'd vp that tempestious blast
               By which our fortunes Anchorage was torne,
               The storme where-with our spring was first desac'd,
               VVhereby all hope vnto the ground was borne:
               Hence came the griefe, the teares, the cause to mourne.
               This bred the blemish which her beauty staind,
               VVhose vgly scarr's, to after-times remaind.
            
            
               In all this heat his greatnes first began,
               The serious subiect of my sadder vaine,
               Great Mortimer, the wonder of a man,
               VVhose fortunes heere my Muse must entertaine,
               And from the graue his griefes must yet complaine,
               To shew our vice nor vertues neuer die,
               Though vnder ground a thousand yeeres we lie.
            
            
               Thys gust first threw him on that blessed Coast
               VVhich neuer age discouered before:
               This luckie chaunce drew all King Edward lost,
               This shypwrack cast the prize vpon his shore,
               And thys all-drowning Deluge gaue him more;
               From hence the sunne of his good fortune shone,
               The fatall step, to Edwards fatall throne.
            
            
               
               
                  
                     
                        〈1 paragraph〉
                     
                  That vnckle now, whose name this Nephew bare,
               The onely comfort of the wofull Queene,
               And from his cradle held him as his care,
               And still the hope of all his house had beene,
               VVhilst yet this deep hart-goring wound is greene,
               On this well-seene aduantage wisely wrought,
               To place him highly in her princely thought.
            
            
               He saw his inclination from his birth,
               A mighty spirit, a minde which did aspire;
               Not of the drossy substance of the earth,
               But of the purest element of fire,
               VVhich sympathizing with his owne desire,
               Name, nature, feature, all did so agree,
               That still in him, himselfe he still might see.
            
            
               The temper of his nobler moouing part,
               Had that true tutch which purified his blood,
               Insusing thoughts of honor in his hart,
               VVhose flaggie feathers were not soyld in mud,
               The edge he bare declar'd the mettall good;
               The towring pitch wherein he flew for fame,
               Declar'd the ayrie whence the Eagle came.
            
            
               
               VVorthy the Grand-chyld of so great a sier,
               Braue Mortimer who liu'd whilst Long-shanks raign'd,
                     Roger Mortimer his Grand-father, who kept 
                           〈…〉
                         table 
                           ••
                         Kenelworth.
                  
               
               Our second Arthur, whom all times admire,
               At Kenelworth the Table round ordayn'd,
               And therein Armes, a hundreth Knights maintaind;
               A hundreth gallant Ladies in his Court,
               VVhose stately presence royaliz'd this sport.
            
            
               And whilst this poore vvife-widdowed Queene alone,
               In thys dispayring passion pines away,
               Beyond all hope, to all but heauen vnknowne,
               A little sparke which yet in secrete lay,
               Breakes forth in flame, and turnes her night to day,
               The wofull winter of her sorrowes cheering,
               Euen as the world at the faire Sunnes appearing.
            
            
               Yet still perplexed in these hard extreames,
               All meanes deprest which might her faith prefer,
               Blacke foggs oppos'd in those cleere-shining beames,
               VVhich else might lend their friendly light to her,
               This in her lookes direfull reuenge doth stir:
               VVhich strange eclipse plac'd in this irefull signe,
               Our Countries plague and ruine might diuine.
            
            
               
               Her snowy curled brow makes anger smile,
               Her laughing frowne giues beauty better grace,
               Blushing disdaine, disdaine doth quite exile,
               Sweet loue and silence wrestling in her face,
               Two capering Cupids in her eyes do chase;
               Her veynes like tydes oft swelling with delight,
               Making Vermilion faire, vvhite more then vvhite.
            
            
               Her beauty florish'd whilst her fauours fade,
               Her hopes growne old, but her desires be yong,
               Her power wants power her passion to perswade,
               Her sexe is weake, her will is ouer-strong,
               Patience pleades pitty, but reuenge her wrong;
               VVhat reason vrgeth, rage doth still denie,
               VVith arguments of vvrathfull iealousie.
            
            
               Pale Iealousie, child of insatiate loue,
               Of hart-sick thoughts with melancholie bred,
               A hell tormenting feare no faith can moue,
               By discontent with deadly poyson fed,
               VVith heedlesse youth and error vainely led,
               A mortall plague, a vertue-drowning flood,
               A hellish fire, not quenched but with blood.
            
            
               
               The hate-swolne Lords with furie set on fire,
               VVhom Edwards wrongs to vengeance doe prouoke,
               VVith Lancaster and Herford now conspire,
               No more to beare the Spensers seruile yoke,
               The bonds of their alegiance they haue broke:
               Resolu'd with blood theyr libertie to buy,
               To liue with honor, or with fame to dye.
            
            
               Amid thys faction Mortimer doth enter,
               The gastly Prologue to thys tragick act:
               His youth and courage boldly bids him venter,
               And tells him still how strongly he was backt:
               
                  Synon perswades howe Illion might be sackt;
               The people still applauding in his eares,
               The fame and credite of the Mortimers.
               
            
            
               Thys vapor-kindled Commet drew her eyes,
               VVhich now began his streamie flagge to reare;
               This beauty-blushing orient of his rise,
               Her clowdy frownes doth with his brightnes cleare,
               The ioyfull'st sight that euer did appeare;
               The messenger of light, her happy starre,
               VVhich told her now the dawning was not farre.
            
            
               
               As after pale-fac'd Night, the Morning fayre
               The burning Lampe of heauen doth once erect,
               VVith her sweet Crimson sanguining the ayre,
               On euery side with streakie dappl's fleckt,
               The circled roofe in white and Azure deckt,
               Such colour to her cheekes these newes do bring,
               VVhich in her face doth make a second spring.
            
            
               Yet trembling at the Spensers Lordly power,
               Their wrongs, oppression, and controling pride,
               Th'vnconstant Barrons, wauering euery houre,
               The fierce encounter of this raging tyde,
               No stratagem yet strongly policied;
               Shee from suspition seemingly retyers,
               Carelesse in shew of what she most desires.
            
            
               Grounded aduice, in danger seldom trips,
               The deadliest poyson, skill can safely drinke,
               Fore-sight stands fast, where giddy rashnes slips,
               VVisdome seemes blinde, when eyed as a Linxe
               Preuention speaketh all but what he thinks;
               The deadliest hate, with smyles securely stands,
               Reuenge in teares doth euer wash his hands.
            
            
               
               Loe for her safetie this shee must desemble,
               A benefite which women haue by kind,
               The neerest colour finely to resemble,
               Suppressing thus the greatnes of her mind,
               Now is shee shrowded closely vnder wind,
               And at her prayers (poore soule) shee plainly ment,
               A silly Queene, a harmelesse innocent.
            
            
               The least suspition cunningly to heale,
               Still in her lookes humilitie shee beares,
               VVith patience she with mightines must deale,
               So policie religions habite weares,
               He's mad which takes a Lyon by the eares.
               This knew the Queene, and this well know the wise,
               This must they learne, which toyle in Monarchies.
            
            
               
                  Torlton the learnedst Prelate in the Land,
                     Adam Torlton Bishop of Herford, a mighty polititian.
                  
               
               Vpon a text of politicks to preach,
               Car'd not on Paules preciser poynts to stand,
               Poore Moralls to beleeuing men to teach,
               For he at Kingdomes had a further reach:
               This learned Tutor, Isabell had taught,
               In nicer poynts then euer Edward sought.
            
            
               
               Now in meane time, the smothered flame brake forth,
               The Mortimers march from the vvesterne playne,
               The Lords in armes at Pomfret in the North,
               The King from London, comes with might and mayne,
               Their factious followers in the streetes are slayne.
               No other thing is to be hop'd vpon,
               But horrour, death, and desolation.
            
            
               Like as Sabrina from the Ocean flancks,
               Comes sweeping in along the tawny sands,
               And with her billowes tilting on the bancks,
               Rowles in her flood vpon the westerne strands,
               Stretching her watrie armes along the lands,
               VVith such great furie doe these legions ryse,
               Filling the shores with lamentable cryes.
            
            
               Thus of three hands, they all set vp theyr rest,
               And at the stake their liues they franckly lay,
               Hee's like to winne who cuts his dealing best,
               And for a Kingdome at the least they play,
               The fayr'st in show must carrie all away;
               And though the King himselfe in sequence came,
               He sawe the Queene lay right to make his game.
            
            
               
               But Fortune masking in this straunge disguise,
               VVhose prodigie, whose monster he was borne,
               Now in his lyfe her power, t'anotomize,
               Ordayning him her darling and her scorne,
               His Tragedie her triumph to adorne.
               Shee straight begins to bandy him about,
               At thousand ods before the set goes out.
            
            
               As when we see the spring-begetting Sunne,
               In heauens black night-gowne couered from our sight,
               And when he yet, but fewe degrees hath runne,
               Some fennie fogge damps vp his gladsome light,
               That at his noon-sted he may shine more bright.
               His cheerefull morning Fortune cloudeth thus,
               To make his day more fayre, more glorious.
            
            
               
                  Edward whom daunger warnd to dread the worst,
               Vnto the hart with poysned ranckor stung,
               Now for his crowne must scuffle if he durst,
               Or else his scepter in the dust were flung,
               To stop the head from which these mischiefes sprung.
               First with the Marchers thinks it fit to cope,
               On whom he knew lay all the Barrons hope.
            
            
               
               Like to a vvhirle-wind comes this irefull King,
               VVhose presence soone the VVelchmens power had staid,
               The Cornish yet theyr forces fayld to bring,
               And Lancaster too slacke forslow'd theyr ayd,
               Faynt-harted friends, their succours long delayd.
               Depriu'd of meanes, forlorne of farther good,
               And wanting strength to stem so great a flood.
            
            
               They vvho perceiu'd, their trust was thus betrayd,
               Their long expected purpose thus to quayle,
               How mischiefe still vpon their fortune playd,
               That they perforce their high-borne top must vayle,
               This storme still blew so stifly on their sayle.
               Of Edwards mercy now the depth must sound,
               VVhere yet their Ankor might take hold on ground.
            
            
               This tooke the King in presage of his good,
               VVho this euent to his successe apply'd,
               VVhich coold the furie of his boyling blood,
               Before their force in armes he yet had try'd,
               His sterne approch this easely molified
               That on submission he dismist theyr power,
               And sends them both as prisoners to the Tower.
            
            
               
               Not cowardize but wisedome warnes to yield,
               VVhen Fortune aydes the proud insulting foe,
               Before dishonour euer blot the field;
               VVhere by aduantage hopes agayne may growe,
               VVhen as too weake to beare so great a blowe:
               That whilst his pittie pardons them to liue,
               To his owne wrongs he full reuenge might giue.
            
            
               LOe now my Muse must sing of dreadfull Arme
                     •
                  ,
               And taske her selfe to tell of ciuill vvarres,
               Of Ambuscados, stratagems, alarmes,
               Of murther, slaughter, monstrous Massacarres,
               Of blood, of wounds, of neuer-healed scarres,
               Of battailes fought by brother against brother,
               The Sonne and Father one against the other.
            
            
               O thou great Lady, Mistris of my Muse,
               Renowned Lucie, vertues truest frend,
               VVhich doest a spyrit into my spyrit infuse,
               And from thy beames the light I haue dost lend,
               Into my verse thy lyuing power extend.
               O breathe new lyfe to write this Tragicke storie,
               Assist me now braue Bedford for thy glorie.
            
            
               
               VVhilst in the Tower the Mortimers are mew'd,
               The Barrons drew their forces to a head,
               VVhom Edward (spurd with vengeance) still pursu'd
               By Lancaster and famous Herford led,
               Toward eithers force, forth-with both Armies sped.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        urton vpon 
                           •
                        rent.
                  At Burton both in camping for the day,
               VVhere they must trye who beares the spurres away.
            
            
               
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        eedwood.
                  Vpon the East from bushie Needwoods side,
               There riseth vp an easie clyming hill,
               At whose fayre foote the siluer Trent doth slide,
               And all the shores with ratling murmure 
                     •
                  ill,
               VVhose tumbling waues the flowrie Meadowes swill,
               Vpon whose streame a Bridge of wondrous strength,
               Doth stretch her selfe, neere fortie Arches length.
            
            
               Vpon this mount the King his Tents hath fixt,
               And in the Towne the Barrons lye in sight,
               This famous Ryuer risen so betwixt,
               VVhose furie yet prolong'd this deadly fight,
               The passage stopp'd, not to be wonne by might.
               Things which presage both good and ill there bee,
               VVhich hea
                     •
                  en fore-shewes, yet will not let vs see.
            
            
               
               The raging flood hath drownd vp all her foards,
               Sok'd in excesse of cloud-congealed teares,
               And steepes the bancks within her watrie hoards,
               Supping the whir-pooles from the quaggie mears,
               Now doth shee washe her tressed rushie hayrs.
               Swolne with the dropsie in her grieued woombe,
               That this her channell must become a Toombe.
            
            
               O warlike Nation hold thy conquering hand,
               Euen sencelesse things doe warne thee yet to pawse,
               Thy Mother soyle on whom thy feete doe stand,
               O then infrindge not Natures sacred lawes,
               Still runne not headlong into mischiefes iawes:
               Yet stay thy foote in murthers vgly gate,
               Ill comes too soone, repentance ost too late.
            
            
               And can the cloudes weepe ouer thy decay,
               Yet not one drop fall from thy droughtie eyes?
               Seest thou the snare yet wilt not shunne the way,
               Nor yet be warn'd, by passed miseries?
               Or ere too late, yet learne once to be wise.
               A mischiefe seene, may easely be preuented,
               But beeing hap'd, not help'd, yet still lamented.
            
            
               
               Behold the Eagles, Lyons, Talbots, Bears,
               The Badges of your famous ancestries,
               And shall they now by their inglorious heyrs:
               Be thus displayd against their families?
               Reliques vnworthie of theyr progenies.
               Those Beastes you beare doe in their kinds agree
               And then those Beasts more sauage will you bee?
            
            
               Cannot the Scot of your late slaughter boast?
               And are you yet scarce healed of the sore?
               Is't not inough you haue already lost,
               But your owne madnes now must make it more?
               Your VViues and Children pittied you before.
               But when your own blood, your own swords imbrue,
               VVho pitties them, which once haue pittied you?
            
            
               VVhat, shall the Sister weepe her Brothers death,
               VVho sent her Husband to his timelesse graue?
               The Nephewe moane his Vnckles losse of breath,
               VVhich did his Father of his lyfe depraue?
               VVho shall haue mind your memories to saue?
               
                  
                     •
                  r shall he buriall to his friend afford,
               VVho lately put his Sonne vnto the sword?
            
            
               
               But whilst the King, and Lords in counsell sit,
               Yet in conclusion variably doe houer,
               See how misfortune still her time can fit:
               Such as were sent the Country to discouer,
               Haue found a way to land their forces ouer.
               Ill newes hath wings, and with the winde doth goe,
               Comfort's a Cripple, and comes euer slow.
            
            
               And Edward fearing Lancasters supplyes,
               Great Surry, Richmond, and his Pembrooke sent,
               On whose successe his chiefest hope relyes,
               Vnder whose conduct halfe his Armie went,
               And he himselfe, and Edmond Earle of Kent,
               Vpon the hill in sight of Burton lay.
               VVatching to take aduantage of the day.
            
            
               Stay Surry stay, thou maist too soone begon;
               Stay till this rage be some-what ouer-past,
               VVhy runn'st thou thus to thy destruction?
               
                  Pembrooke and Richmond, whether doe you hast?
               Neuer seeke sorrow, for it comes too fast.
               VVhy striue you thus to passe this fatall flood,
               To fetch new wounds, and shed your neerest blood?
            
            
               
               Great Lancaster, sheath vp thy conquering sword,
               On Edwards Armes, whose edge thou should'st not whet,
               Thy naturall Nephew, and thy soueraigne Lord,
               Both one, one blood, and both Plantaginet.
               
               Canst thou thy oth to Longshanks thus forget?
               Yet call to minde, before all other things,
               Our vowes must be perform'd to Gods and Kings.
            
            
               Knowe, noble Lord, it better is to end,
               Then to proceed in things rashly begun:
               VVhich o
                     •
                  t ill counseld worser doe offend,
               Speech hath obtaind, where weapons haue not won;
               By good perswasion what cannot be done?
               And when all other hopes and helps be past,
               Then fall to Armes, but let that be the last.
            
            
               The winds are husht, no little breth doth blow,
               The calmed ayre as all amazed stood,
               The earth with roring trembleth below,
               The Sunne besmear'd his glorious face in blood,
               The fearfull Heards bellowing as they were wood:
               The Drums and Trumpets giue a signall sound,
               VVith such a noyse as they had torne the ground.
            
            
               
               The Earles now charging with three hundred horse,
               The Kings vantgard assay the Bridge to win,
               Forcing the Barrons to deuide their force,
               T'auoyde the present danger they were in:
               Neuer till now the horror doth begin;
               That if th'elements our succour had not sought,
               All had that day beene to confusion brought.
            
            
               Now frō the hill the Kings maine power comes downe,
               VVhich had Aquarius to their valiant guide,
                     Aquary a notable souldier.
                  
               
               Braue Lancaster and Herford from the towne,
               Doe issue forth vpon the other side:
               The one assailes, the other munified.
               Englands Red crosse vpon both sides doth flye,
               Saint George the King, Saint George the Barrons cry.
            
            
               Euen as a bustling tempests rouzing blasts,
               Vpon a Forrest of old-branched Oakes,
               Downe vpon heapes their climing bodies casts,
               And with his furie teyrs their mossy loaks,
               The neighbour groues resounding with the stroaks,
               VVith such a clamor and confused woe,
               To get the Bridge these desperate Armies goe.
            
            
               
               Now must our famous and victorious bowes,
               VVith which our Nation Kingdoms did subdue,
               First send their darting arrowes against those
               VVhose sinewed armes against their foes them drew;
               These winged weapons, mourning as they flew,
               Cleaue to the strings, with very terror slack,
               As to the Archers they would faine turne back.
            
            
               The battered Caskes, with Battel-Axes strokes,
               Besnow the soyle with drifts of scattered plumes,
               The trampling presse stirre vp such duskie smokes
               VVhich choke the ayre with reekie smothering fumes,
               VVhich rising vp, into a clowde consumes;
               As though the heauen had muffled her in black,
               Lothing to see this lamentable sack.
            
            
               Behold the remnant of Troyes famous stocke,
               Laying on blowes as Smithes on Anuiles strike,
               Grappling together in this fearfull shock,
               The like presse forth, t'incounter with the like,
               And then reculing to the push of pyke:
               Yet not a foote doth eyther giue to eyther,
               Now one the ods, then both alike, then neither.
            
            
               
               Euen as you see a field of standing Corne,
               VVhen in faire Iune some easie gale doth blow,
               How vp and downe the spyring eares are borne,
               And with the blasts like Billowes come and goe,
               As golden streamers wauing to and fro,
               Thus on the suddaine runne they on amaine,
               Then straight by force are driuen backe againe.
            
            
               Heer lyes a heap, halfe slaine, halfe chok'd, halfe drownd,
               Gasping for breth amongst the slymie seggs,
               And there a sort falne in a deadly swound,
               Scrawling in blood vpon the muddy dreggs:
               Heere in the streame, swim bowels, armes and leggs▪
               
               One kills his foe, his braine another cuts,
               Ones feet intangled in anothers guts.
            
            
               One his owne hands in his owne blood defiles,
               Another from the Bridges height doth fall,
               Some dash'd to death vpon the stony pyles,
               Some in theyr gore vpon the pauement sprall,
               The carkasses lye heaped like a wall:
               Such hideous shreeks the bedlam Souldiers breath,
               As though the Spirits had howled from beneath.
            
            
               
               The mangled bodies diuing in the streame,
               Now vp, now downe, like tumbling Porpose swim,
               The water couer'd with a bloody creame,
               To the beholder horrible and grim:
               Heere lies a head, and there doth lye a lym;
               VVhich in the sands the swelling waters souse,
               That all the shores seeme like a slaughter-house.
            
            
               It seem'd the very wounds for griefe did weepe,
               To feele the temper of the slicing blade,
               The sencelesse steele in blood it selfe did steepe,
               To see the wounds his sharpe-ground edge had made,
               VVhilst kinsman, kinsman, friend, doth friend inuade,
               Such is the horror of these ciuill broyles,
               VVhen with our blood, we fat our natiue soyles.
            
            
               This faction still defying Edwards might,
               
                  Edmond of VVoodstock, famous Earle of Kent,
               Charging the foe againe renewes the fight,
               Vpon the Barrons forces almost spent,
               VVho now againe supplying succours sent.
               And now a second conflict doth begin,
               The English Lords like Tygars flying in.
            
            
               
               Like as an exhalation hote and dry,
               Amongst the ayre-bred moyftie vapors throwne,
               Spetteth his lightning forth outragiously,
               Renting the thick clowdes with a thunder-stone,
               As though the huge all-couering heauen did grone,
               Such is the garboyle of this conflict then,
               Braue Englishmen, encountring Englishmen.
            
            
               Euen as proude Pyrrhùs entring Iltion,
               
               Couragious Talbot with his shield him bare,
               
                  Clifford and Moubray, seconding anon,
               
                  Audley and Gifford thrunging for their share,
               
                  Elmbridge and Balsmer
                  ▪ in the thickest are:
               Pell-mell together flyes this furious power,
               Like to the falling of some mighty Tower.
            
            
               
                  Mountfort and Teis, your worths faine would I speake,
               But that your valure can but ill deserue,
               Braue Denuile, heere I from thy prayse must breake,
               And from thy prayses VVillington must swarue,
               Great Damory, heere must thy glory starue;
               Concealing many, most deseruing blame,
               Because their acts doe quench my sacred flame.
            
            
               
               O that those Armes in conquests had been borne,
               And that, that battered fame-engrauen shield,
               Should in those ciuill massacres be torne
               VVhich bare the marks of many a bloody field:
               O that our armes had power their Armes to weeld.
               That since that time, the stones for very dreed,
               Against foule stormes could teary moisture sheed.
            
            
               O had you shap'd your valures first by them
               VVho summon'd Akon with an English drum,
               Or marched on to faire Ierusalem,
               
               T'inlarge the bounds of famous Christendome,
               Or with Christs warriors slept about his toombe,
               Then ages had immortaliz'd your fame,
               VVhere now my song can be but of your shame.
            
            
               Death following on, feare euer in their eyes,
               Grieued with wounds, the conquered Barrons fled,
               And now the King enrich'd with victories,
               Hath in the field his glorious Ensignes spred,
               This in his thoughts againe fresh courage bred,
               And somwhat drawes th'vnconstant peoples harts,
               VVho equall peyz'd, yet way'd to neither parts.
            
            
               
               And wanting ground, they vnresolued are,
               King Edwards friends, agaynst the rebels cry,
               The Barrons plead their Countries onely care,
               Exclayming on the Princes tyrannie,
               Hee vrg'd obedience, they their libertie.
               Both vnder colour, carefull of the state,
               Hee right, and they their wrongs expostulate.
            
            
               Some fewe them selues in Sanctuaries hide,
               In mercie of the priuiledged place,
               Yet are their bodyes so vnsanctifide,
               As scarce their soules can euer hope for grace,
               A poore dead lyfe, this draweth out a space.
               Hate stands without, and horror sits within,
               Prolonging shame, yet pard'ning not their sinne.
            
            
               At fatall Pomfret gathering head at length,
               VVhen they of all extreamities had tasted,
               VVhere yet before they could recouer strength,
               King Edward followeth whilst his fortune lasted,
               Vnto whose ayde the Earle of Carlell hasted.
               VVith troupes of bow-men and ranck-riding bands,
               Of VVestmer, Cumber, and Northumberlands.
               
            
            
               
               Mad and amaz'd, nor knowing what to doe,
               Surpriz'd by this late mischieuous euent,
               Seeing at hand their vtter ouerthrowe,
               And in despight how crossely all things went,
               Fortune her selfe to their destruction bent;
               In all disorder head-long on they runne,
               To end with blood, what was with blood begunne.
            
            
               Lyke as a heard of silly hartlesse Deare,
               VVhom hote-spurd Huntsmen fiercely doe pursue,
               In brakes and bushes falling heere and there,
               Yet when no way the hounds they can eschew,
               Now flying back from whence of late they flew,
               Hem'd on each side with hornes rechating blast,
               Head-long them selues into the toyles doe cast.
            
            
               To Borough bridge by fate appoynted thus,
               VVhere lyke false Raynard, falser Herckley lay,
               Bridges to Barrons euer ominous,
               There to renewe this latest deadly fray,
               O heere begins the blackest dismall day,
               The birth of horror, hower of wrath that yet,
               The very soyle seemes to remember it.
            
            
               
               Heere is not Death contented with the dead,
               Nor vengeance is with vengeance satisfied,
               Blood-shed by blood-shed still is nourished,
               And mischiefe meanes no more her store to hide,
               Strange sorts of torments heauen doth now prouide,
               That dead men should in miserie remayne,
               And in lyuing death should dye with payne.
            
            
               Thus rules the world, a world why sawe I so,
               VVorst is the world, yet worser must I name it,
               Nights vgli'st night, hells bitter'st hell of woe,
               So ill as slaunder neuer can defame it,
               That shame her selfe is sham'd, seeking to shame it,
               Could enuie speake, what enuie can expresse,
               In saying most, that most should make it lesse.
            
            
               Heere noble Herford, Bohun breathes his last,
               Crowne of true Knight-hood,
                     Bohun stain at Borogh.
                   flower of Chiualrie,
               But Lancaster their torment liues to tast,
               VVho perrish now with endlesse obloquie,
               O vanquisht conquest, loosing victorie,
               That where the sword for pittie leaues to spill,
               There extreame iustice should begin to kill.
            
            
               
               O subiect for some tragick Muse to sing,
               Of fiue great Earledomes at one time possest,
               Sonne, Vnckle, Brother, Grandchild to a King,
               
                  
                     Thomas the great Earle of Lancaster.
                  VVith fauours, friends, and earthly honours blest,
               But see on earth, heere is no place of rest.
               These Fortunes gyfts, and she to shew her power,
               Takes lyfe, and these, and all within an hower.
            
            
               The wretched Mother tearing of her hayre,
               Bewayles the time this fatall warre begunne,
               Lyke graue-borne gosts, amaz'd and mad with feare,
               To view the quartered carkasse of her Sonne,
               VVith hideous shreeks through streetes & wayes doth runne.
               And seeing none to help, none heare her crye,
               Some drownd, some stabd, some starud, some strangled die.
            
            
               Lyke gastly death the aged Father stands,
               VVeeping his Sonne, bemoning of his vvife,
               Shee murthered by her owne blood-guiltie hands,
               Hee flaughtered by the executioners knife,
               Sadly sits downe to ende his hatefull life;
               Banning the earth, and cursing at the ayre▪
               
               Vpon his poyniard falleth in dispayre.
            
            
               
               The wofull widdowe for her Lord distrest,
               VVhose breathlesse body cold death doth benum,
               Her little Infant leaning on her breast,
               Rings in her eares, when will my Father come?
               Doth wish that she were deafe, or it were dombe.
               Clipping each other, weeping both togeather,
               Shee for her Lord, the poore babe for his Father.
            
            
               The ayre is poysned with the dampie stinck,
               VVhich most contagious pestilence doth breed,
               The glutted earth her fill of gore doth drinck,
               VVhich from vnburied bodies doth proceede,
               Rauens and dogs on dead men onely feede;
               In euery Coast thus doe our eyes behold,
               Our sinnes by iudgement of the heauens controld.
            
            
               Lyke as a VVolfe returning from the foyle,
               Hauing full stuft his flesh-engorged panch,
               Tumbles him downe to wallowe in the soyle,
               VVith cooling breath his boyling mawe to stanch,
               Scarce able now to mooue his lustlesse hanch.
               Thus after slaughter Edward breathlesse stood,
               As though his sword had surfeted with blood.
            
            
               
               Heere endeth life, yet heere death cannot end,
               And heere begins, what Edwards woes begun,
               Nor his pretence, falls as he doth pretend,
               Nor hath he wone, what he by battell wone,
               All is not done, though almost all vndone,
               VVhilst power hath raign'd still policie did lurke,
               Seldome doth mallice want a meane to worke.
            
            
               The King now by the conquering Lords consent,
               VVho by this happie victorie grew strong,
               Summons at Yorke a present Parliament,
               To plant his right, and helpe the Spensers wrong,
               From whence agayne his minions greatnes sprung,
               VVhose counsell still, in all their actions crost,
               Th'inraged Queene whom all misfortunes tost.
            
            
               But miseries which seldome come alone,
               Thicke in the necks one of another fell,
               Meane while the Scots heere make inuasion,
               And Charles of France doth thence our powers expell,
               The grieued Commons more and more rebell.
               Mischiefe on mischiefe, curse doth followe curse,
               Plague after plague, and worse ensueth worse.
            
            
               
               For Mortimer this wind yet rightly blewe,
               Darckning their eyes which else perhaps might see,
               VVhilst Isabell who all aduantage knewe,
               Is closely plotting his deliuerie,
               Now fitly drawne by Torltons policie:
               Thus by a Queene, a Bishop, and a Knight,
               To check a King, in spight of all dispight.
            
            
               A drowsie potion shee by skill hath made,
               VVhose secret working had such wonderous power,
               As could the sence with heauie sleepe inuade,
               And mortifie the patient in one hower,
               As though pale death the body did deuower;
               Nor for two dayes might opened be his eyes,
               By all meanes Arte or Phisicke could deuise.
            
            
               Thus sits this great Enchauntresse in her Cell,
               Inuironed with spyrit-commaunding charmes,
               Her body censed with most sacred smell,
               VVith holy fiers her liquors now shee warmes,
               Then her with sorcering instruments she armes.
               And from her hearbs the powerfull iuyce she wrong,
               To make the poyson forcible and strong.
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
            
            
               
               Reason might iudge, doubts better might aduise,
               And as a woman, feare her hand haue stayd,
               VVaying the strangenesse of the interprize,
               The daunger well might haue her sex dismayd,
               Fortune, distrust, suspect, to be betrayd;
               But when they leaue of vertue to esteeme,
               They greatly erre which thinke them as they seeme.
            
            
               Their plighted fayth, when as they list they leaue,
               Their loue is cold, their lust, hote, hote their hate,
               VVith smiles and teares these Serpents doe deceaue,
               In their desires they be insatiate,
               Their will no bound, and their reuenge no date.
               All feare exempt, where they at ruine ayme,
               Couering their sinne with their discouered shame.
            
            
               
                  Medea pittifull in tender yeares,
               Vntill with Iason she would take her flight,
               Then mercilesse her Brothers lymmes she teares,
               Betrayes her Father, flyes away by night,
               Nor Nations, Seas, nor daungers could affright;
               VVho dyed with heate, nor could abide the wind,
               Now like a Tigar falls vnto her kind.
            
            
               
               Now waits the Queene fitt'st time, as might behoue,
               Their ghostly Father for their speed must pray,
               Their seruants seale these secrets vp with loue,
               Their friends must be the meane, the guide, the way,
               And he resolue on whom the burthen lay;
               This is the summe, the all, if this neglected,
               Neuer againe were meane to be expected.
            
            
               Thus, while hee liu'd a prysoner in the Towre,
               The Keepers oft with feasts he entertaind,
               VVhich as a stale, serues fitly at this howre,
               The tempting bayte wher-with his hookes were traind,
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   banquet now he had ordaind,
               And after cates when they their thirst should quench,
               He sawc'd their wine with thys approoued drench.
            
            
               And thus become the keeper of the kayes,
               In steele-bound locks he safely lodg'd the Guard:
               Then lurking forth by the most secret wayes,
               Not now to learne his compasse by the Card,
               VVith corded ladders which hee had prepard,
               Now vp these proude aspyring walls doth goe,
               VVhich seeme to scorne they should be mastred so.
            
            
               
               They soundly sleepe, now must his wits awake,
               A second Theseus through a hells extreames,
               The sonne of Ioue, new toyles must vndertake,
               Of walls, of gates, of watches, woods, and streame.
               And let them tell King Edward of their dreames:
               For ere they wak'd out of this brainsick traunce,
               He hopes to tell thys noble iest in Fraunce.
               
            
            
               The sullen night in mistie rugge is wrapp'd,
               Powting the day had tarryed vp so long,
               The Euening in her darksome dungion clapp'd,
               And in that place the swarty clowdes were hong,
               Downe from the VVest the half-fac'd Cynthia flong
               As shee had posted forth to tell the Sonne,
               VVhat in his absence in her Court was done.
            
            
               The glymmering starr's like Sentinels in warre,
               Behind the Clowdes as thieues doe stand to pry,
               And through false loope-holes looking out a farre,
               To see him skirmish with his destenie,
               As they had held a counsell in the Sky,
               And had before consulted with the night,
               Shee should be darke, and they would hide their light.
            
            
               
               In deadly silence all the shores are hush'd,
               Onely the Shreechowle sounds to the assault,
               And Isis with a troubled murmure rush'd,
               As shee had done her best to hide the fault,
               A little whispering moou'd within the vault,
               Made with his tuching softly as he went,
               VVhich seem'd to say it furthered his intent.
            
            
               This wondrous Queene, whom care from rest had kept,
               Now for his speed to heauen holds vp her hands,
               A thousand thoughts within her bosome heap'd,
               Now in her Closset listning still she stands,
               And though deuided as in sundry strands,
               Yet absent, present in desires they bee,
               For minds discerne, where eyes could neuer see.
            
            
               Loe now he thinks he vaulteth in her sight,
               Still taking courage, strengthned by her words,
               Imagining shee sported with delight,
               To see his strong armes stretch the tackling coards,
               And oft a smyle vnto his toyle affords:
               And when shee doubted danger, might her heare,
               Call him her soule, her life, her Mortimer.
               
            
            
               
               Nowe doth shee wooe the walls, intreat and kisse,
               And then protests to memorize the place,
               And to adorne it with a Piramis,
               VVhose glory wrack of time should not deface.
               Then to the cord shee turnes her selfe a space,
               And promiseth, if that should set him free,
               A sacred relique it should euer bee.
            
            
               Shee saith, the small clowds issuing from his breath,
               Seasond with sweet from whence they lately came,
               Should cleere the ayre from pestilence and death,
               And like Promethian life-begetting flame,
               Pure bodies in the element should frame;
               And to what part of heauen they hapt to stray,
               There should they make another milkie way.
            
            
               Attaind the top his tyred lymm's to breath,
               Mounted in tryumph on his miseries,
               The gentle earth salutes him from beneath:
               And couer'd with the comfortable skyes,
               Lightned with beames of Isabella's eyes,
               Downe from the Turret desperatly doth slide;
               Now for a kingdome, Fortune be his guide.
            
            
               
               As hee descends, so doe her eyes ascend,
               As feare had fixt them to behold his fall;
               Then from the sight, away her sight doth bend,
               VVhen chilly coldnes doth her hart appall,
               Then out for helpe shee suddainly doth call;
               Silent againe, watching if ought should hap,
               Her selfe might be the ground, his graue her lap.
            
            
               Now doth she court the gentle calmie ayre,
               And then againe shee doth coniure the winde;
               Now doth she try to stop the night by prayer,
               And then with spells the heauy sence to binde;
               Then by the burning Tapers shee diuinde;
               Now shee intreats faire Thames that hee might passe
               The Hellespont where her Leander was.
            
            
               The brushing murmure stills her like a song,
               Yet fearing least the streame should fall in loue,
               Enuies the drops which on his tresses hong,
               Imagining the waues to stay him stroue;
               And when the billowes with his brest he droue,
               Grieued there-with, shee turnes away her face,
               Iealous least hee the billowes should embrace.
            
            
               
               Shee likneth him to the transformed Bull,
               VVhich curll'd the fayre flood with his Iuory flanck,
               VVhen on his backe he bare the louely trull,
               Floting along vnto the Cretan banck,
               Comparing this to that lasciuious pranck,
               And swears then hee, no other Ioue there were,
               If shee Europa had been present there.
            
            
               Thus seekes he life, encourag'd by his loue,
               Yet for his loue his life he doth eschue,
               Danger in him a deadly feare doth moue,
               And feare enuits him danger to pursue,
               Rage stirr's reuenge, reuenge doth rage renue:
               Danger and feare, rage and reuenge at strife,
               Life warr's with loue, and loue contends with life.
            
            
               Thys angry Lyon hauing slypp'd his chayne,
               Now like a Quartain, makes King Edward quake,
               VVho knew too well, ere he was caught againe,
               Some of his flock his bloody thirst must slake;
               And vnawares intangled in this brake,
               Sawe further vengeance hanging in the wind,
               Knowing too well, the greatnes of his mind.
            
            
               
               Thys once againe the world begins to worke,
               Theyr hopes (at length) vnto thys issue brought,
               VVhilst yet the Serpent in his Den doth lurke,
               Of whom God knowes, the King full little thought,
               The instrument which these deuises wrought.
               For ther's no treason woundeth halfe so deepe,
               As that which doth in Princes bosoms sleepe.
            
            
               Now must the Cleargie serue them for a cloke,
               The Queene her state vnto the time must fit,
               But tis the Church-man which must strike the stroke,
               Now must thys Prelate shew a statesmans wit,
               They cast the plot, and March must manage it;
               They both at home together lay on load,
               And he the Agent to effect abroad.
            
            
               VVho sweetly tunes his well-perswading tong,
               In pleasing musick to the French-kings ears,
               The sad discourse of Isabellas wrong,
               VVith tragick action forcing silent tears,
               Moouing to pitty euery one that hears,
               That by discouery of thys foule reproch,
               Old mischiefes so, might new be set abroch.
            
            
               
               VVhilst they are tempring in these home-bred iarres,
               How for the Scot fit passage might be made,
               To lay the ground of these succesfull warrs,
               That hope might giue him courage to inuade,
               And from the King the Commons to perswade;
               That whilst at home his peace he would assure,
               His further plague in Fraunce he might procure.
            
            
               By these reports, all circumstances knowne,
               Sounds Charles of Fraunce into the lists againe,
               To ceaze on Guyen by Armes to clayme his owne,
               VVhich Edward doth vnlawfully detaine,
               Homage for Pontieu, and for Aquitaine,
               
               Reuoking this dishonorable truce,
               Vrg'd by his wrongs, and Isabels abuse.
            
            
               The spirits thus rayz'd which haunt him day and night,
               And on his fortune heauen doth euer lower,
               Danger at hand, and mischiefe still in sight,
               Ciuill sedition weakning still his power,
               No ease of paine one minute in the hower:
               T' intreat of peace with Charles, he now must send,
               Else all his hopes in Fraunce were at an end.
            
            
               
               Heere is the poynt wherein all poynts must end,
               VVhich must be handled with no meane regard,
               The prop whereon this building must depend,
               VVhich must by leuell curiouslie be squard,
               The cunningst descant that had yet beene hard.
               Heere close conueyance must a meane prouide,
               Else might the ambush easely be discride.
            
            
               Or this must helpe, or nothing serues the turne,
               This way, or no way, all must come about,
               To blowe the fier which now began to burne,
               Or tind the strawe before the brand went out,
               This is the lot which must resolue the doubt,
               To walke the path where Edward bears the light,
               And take their ayme by leuell of his sight.
            
            
               This must a counsell seriously debate,
               In grauest iudgements fit to be discust,
               Beeing a thing so much consernes the state,
               
                  Edward in this, must to their wisedomes trust,
               No whit suspecting but that all were iust.
               Especially the Church whose mouth shoud be,
               The Oracle of truth and equitie.
            
            
               
               
                  Torlton whose tongue, mens eares in chaines could tye,
               VVhose words, euen like a thunderbolt could pearce,
               And were alowd of more aucthoritie,
               Then was the Sibills olde diuining verse,
               VVhich were of force a iudgement to reuerse:
               Now for the Queene, with all his power doth stand,
               To lay this charge on her well-guiding hand.
            
            
               VVhat helpes her presence to the cause might bring,
               First as a wife, a sister, and a mother,
               A Queene to deale, betwixt a King, and King,
               To right her sonne, her husband, and her brother,
               And each to her indifferent as the other:
               VVhich colour serues to worke in these extreames,
               That which (God knowes) King Edward neuer dreames.
            
            
               
                  Torlton is this thy spirituall pretence?
               VVould God thy thoughts were more spirituall,
               Or lesse perswasiue were thy eloquence,
               But ô thy actions are too temporall,
               Thy reasons subtill and sophisticall:
               VVould all were true thy suposition sayth,
               Thy arguments lesse force, or thou more fayth.
            
            
               
               Thus is the matter managed with skill,
               To his desires, their meanes thus to deuise,
               To thrust him on, to drawe them vp the hill,
               That by his strength, they might get power to rise,
               This great Archmaster of all policies:
               In the beginning wisely had forcast,
               How ere things went, which way they must at last.
            
            
               VVith sweetest hony, thus he baytes the snare,
               And clawes the beast till he be in the yoke,
               In golden cups he poyson doth prepare,
               And tickles where he meanes to strike the stroke,
               Giuing the bone whereas he meant to choke:
               And by all helpes of Arte doth smooth the way,
               To send his foe, downe head-long to decay.
            
            
               Shee which thus fitly had both winde and tide,
               And sawe her passage serue the hower so right,
               VVhilst things thus fadge are quicke dispatch applide,
               To take her time whilst yet the day is light,
               VVho hath beene tyerd in trauell feares the night:
               And finding all too much to change inclind,
               And euery toy soone altering Edwards mind.
            
            
               
               Her followers such as frendlesse else had stood,
               Supprest and troden with the Spensers pride,
               VVhose howses Edward branded had with blood,
               And but with blood could not be satisfi'd,
               VVho for reuenge did but the hower abide;
               And knew all helpes, that mischiefe could inuent,
               To shake the state, and further her intent.
            
            
               Thus on the wronged, she her wrongs doth rest,
               And vnto poyson, poyson doth applie,
               Her selfe oprest, to harden the oprest,
               And with a spye, to intercept a spye,
               An Enemie, against an Enemie.
               Hee that will gaine what policie doth heede,
               By Mercurie must deale, or neuer speede.
            
            
               Now Mortimer, whose mayne was fully set,
               Seeing by fortune all his hopes were crost,
               His strugling still how he againe might get,
               That which before his disaduantage lost,
               Not once dismayd though in these tempests tost:
               Nor in affliction is he ouerthrowne,
               To Mortimer all Countries are his owne.
            
            
               
               Englands an Ile where all his youth he spent,
               Enuiron'd valure in it selfe is drownd,
               But now he liues within the continent,
               VVhich being boundlesse, honour hath no bound,
               Here through the world, doth endlesse glory sound:
               To fames rich treasure Time vnlocks the dore,
               VVhich angry Fortune had shut vp before.
            
            
               VVhat wayes he of his wealth, our VVigmore left,
                     Wigmore the ancient house of the Mortimers.
                  
               
               Let builded heapes, let Rocks and Mountaines stand,
               Goods oft be held by wrong, first got by theft,
               Birds haue the ayre, Fish water, Men the land,
               
                  Alcides pitch'd his pillers in the sand.
               Men looke vp to the starres thereby to knowe,
               As they doe progresse heauen, he earth should doe.
            
            
               And to this end, did Nature part the ground,
               Else had not man beene King vpon the Sea,
               Nor in depths her secrets had beene found,
               If to all parts on firme had layne his way,
               But she to shewe him where her wonders lay:
               To passe the floods, this meane for him inuents,
               To trample on these baser elements.
            
            
               
               Neuer sawe France, no neuer till this day,
               A mind more great, more free, more resolute,
               Let all our Edwards say, what Edwards may,
               Our Henries, Talbot, or our Mountacute,
               
               To whom our royall conquests we impute:
               That Charles him selfe, oft to the Peers hath sworne,
               This man alone, the Destinies did scorne.
            
            
               Vertue can beare, what can on Vertue fall,
               VVho cheapeneth honour, must not stand on price,
               VVho beareth heauen (they say) can well beare all,
               A yeelding mind doth argue cowardize,
               Our haps doe turne as chaunces on the dice.
               Nor neuer let him from his hope remoue,
               That vnder him hath mould, the starres aboue.
            
            
               Let dull-braynd slaues contend for mud and earth,
               Let blocks and stones, sweat but for blocks and stones,
               Let peasants speake of plenty and of dearth,
               Fame neuer lookes so lowe as on these drones,
               Let courage manage Empiers, sit on thrones.
               And he that Fortune at commaund will keepe,
               He must be suer, he neuer let her sleepe.
            
            
               
               VVho wins her grace, must with atchiuements wooe her,
               As shee is blind, so neuer had shee eares,
               Nor must with puling eloquence goe to her,
               Shee vnderstands not sighes, she heares not prayers,
               Flatterd shee flyes, controld shee euer feares;
               And though a while shee nicely doe forsake it,
               Shee is a woman, and at length will take it.
            
            
               Nor neuer let him dreame once of a Crowne,
               For one bad cast, that will giue vp his game,
               And though by ill hap he be ouerthrowne,
               Yet let him manage her, till shee be tame,
               The path is set with danger leads to fame:
               VVhen Minos did the Graecians flight denie,
               He made him wings, and mounted through the skie.
            
            
               THE cheerefull morning cleeres her cloudie browes,
               The vaporie mists are all disperst and spred,
               Now sleepie Time his lazie lims doth rouze,
               And once beginneth to hold vp his head,
               Hope bloometh faire, whose roote was wel nere dead,
               The clue of sorrowe to the end is ronne,
               The bowe appeares to tell the flood is donne.
            
            
               
               Nature lookes backe to see her owne decay,
               Commaunding age to slacke her speedy pace,
               Occasion forth her golden loake doth lay,
               VVhilst sorrowe paynts her wrinckle-withered face,
               Day lengthneth day, and ioyes doe ioyes imbrace.
               Now is she comming yet till she be heere,
               My pen runnes slowe, each comma seemes a yeere.
            
            
               She's now imbarck'd, slide billowes for her sake,
               VVhose eyes can make your aged Neptune yong,
               Sweet Syrens from the chaulkie cleeus awake,
               Rauish her eares with some inchaunting song,
               Daunce the Lauoltos all the sands along:
               It is not Venus on your floods doth passe,
               But one more fayre then euer Venus was.
            
            
               You scalie Dolphins gaze vpon her eyes,
               And neuer after with your kind make warre,
               O steale the Musicke from her lips that flyes,
               VVhose accents like the tunes of Angels are,
               Compard with whom Arions did but iarre.
               Hugge them sweet ayre, and when the Seas doe rage,
               Vse them as charmes thy tempests to aswage.
            
            
               
               Sweet Sea-nymphs flock in sholes vpon the shores,
               
                  Fraunce kisse those feete whose steps thou first didst guide,
               Present thy Queene with all thy gorgious store,
               Now mayst thou reuell in thy greatest pride:
               Shyp mount to heauen, and be thou stellified,
               And next that starr-fix'd Argosie alone,
               There take thou vp thy constellation.
            
            
               Th' exceeding ioy conceued by the Queene,
               Or his content, to them I leaue to gesse
               VVho but the subiect of their thoughts haue seene,
               VVho I am sure, if they the truth confesse,
               VVill say that silence onely can expresse:
               And when with honor shee fit time could take,
               VVith sweet embraces thus shee him bespake.
            
            
               O Mortimer, great Mortimer quoth shee,
               VVhat angry power such mischiefe could deuise,
               To separate thy deerest Queene and thee,
               VVhom loues eternall vnion strongly tyes?
               But seeing thee, vnto my longing eyes
               (Though guiltlesse they,) this penance is assignd,
               To gaze vpon thee vntill they be blind.
            
            
               
               Sweet face, quoth shee, how art thou changed thus,
               Since beauty on this louely front thou bor'st,
               Like the yong Hunter fresh Hipolitus,
               
               VVhen in these curles my fauors first thou wor'st?
               Now like great Ioue thy Iuno thou ador'st;
               The Muses leaue theyr double-topped throne,
               And on thy temples make theyr Helicon.
               
            
            
               Come tell mee now what griefe and danger is,
               Of paine and pleasure in imprisonment,
               At euery breath the poynt shal be a kisse,
               VVhich can restore consuming languishment,
               A cordiall to comfort banishment;
               And thou shalt find, that pleasures long restraind,
               Be farre more pleasant when they once be gaind.
            
            
               Now sweeten all thy sorrowes with delight,
               Teach man-hood courtshyp, turne these broyles to loue,
               The day's nere ill that hast a pleasing night,
               Ther's other warrs in hand, which thou must proue,
               VVarrs which no blood shall shed, nor sorrow moue:
               And that sweet foe of whom thou winn'st the day,
               Shall crowne thy tresses with tryumphant Bay.
            
            
               
               And sith that tyme our better ease assures,
               Let solace sit and rock thee on her brest,
               And let thy sences say like Epicures,
               Lets eate and drinke, and lay vs downe to rest,
               Like belly-Gods, to surfet at the feast;
               Our day is cleere, then neuer doubt a shower,
               Prince Edward is my sonne, England my dower.
            
            
               Possessing this inestimable Iem,
               VVhat is there wanting to maintaine thy port?
               Thy royall Mistresse wears a Diadem,
               Thy high-pitchd pyneons sore beyond report,
               I am thy VVigmore, Fraunce shall be thy Court;
               How canst thou want millions of Pearle and gold,
               VVhen thou the Indies in thyne armes dost hold?
            
            
               Thou art King Edward, or opinion fayles,
               
                  Longshanks begot thee when in youth he rang'd,
               Thou art Carnaruan, thou the Prince of VVales,
               
               And in thy Cradle falsely thou wert chang'd,
               Hee Mortimer, and thou hast beene estrang'd:
               Pardon me deere, what Mortimer sayd I,
               Then should I loue him, but my tongue doth lie,
            
            
               
               As Fortune hath created him a King,
               Had Nature made him valiant as thou art,
               My soule had not beene tuch'd with torments sting,
               Nor hadst thou now been plac'd so neere my hart;
               But since by lot this falleth to thy part,
               If such haue wealth as lewdly will abuse it,
               Let those enjoy it who can better vse it.
            
            
               Except to heauen, my hopes can clime no hier;
               Now in mine armes had I my little boy,
               Then had I all on earth I could desier,
               The King's as he would be, God send him ioy,
               Now with his mynions let him sport and toy:
               His lemman Spenser, and himselfe alone,
               May sit and talke of Mistresse Gaueston.
               
            
            
               VVhen first I of that wanton King was woo'd,
               VVhy camst thou not vnto the Court of Fraunce?
               Thou then alone should'st in my grace haue stood,
               O Mortimer, how good had been thy chaunce?
               Then had I beene thine owne inheritance;
               Now entrest thou by force, and holds by might,
               And so intrud'st vpon anothers right.
            
            
               
               Honor that Idoll weomen so adore,
               How many plagues hast thou in store to grieue vs,
               VVhen in our selues we finde there yet is more
               Then that bare word of maiestie can giue vs?
               VVhen of that comfort so thou canst depriue vs,
               VVhich with our selues oft sett'st vs at debate,
               And mak'st vs beggers in our greatest state.
            
            
               Euen as a Trumpets liuely-sounding voyce,
               Tryps on the winds with many a dainty trick,
               VVhen as the speaking Ecchoes doe reioyce,
               So much delighted with the rethorick,
               Seeming to make the heauie dull ayre quick;
               VVith such rare musick in a thousand kayes,
               Vpon his hart-strings shee in consort playes.
            
            
               On thys foundation whilst they firmely stand,
               And as they wish, so fitly all things vvent,
               No worse their warrant, then King Edwards hand,
               VVho his owne Bow to his destruction bent;
               The course of things to fall in true consent,
               Giues full assurance of the happy end,
               On which their thoughts now carefully attend.
            
            
               
               And sith in payment all for currant passe,
               And theyr proceedings were allow'd for such,
               Although this peace against her stomack was,
               And yet imports the Princes strength so much,
               To carry all things cleerly without tuch,
               VVith seeming care doth seemingly effect,
               VVhat loue commaunds, and greatnes should respect.
            
            
               
                  Charles waying well his lawfull Nephews right,
               So mighty an Embassador as shee,
               This meane to winne her grace in Edwards sight,
               And so reclaime his vaine inconstancie,
               VVith kindnes thus to conquer all these three,
               VVhat loue the subiects to his Sister bore,
               Heapes on desert, to make this much the more.
            
            
               Her expedition, and thys great successe
               Of after-good, still seeming to deuine,
               
                  Carnaruan should by couenant release,
               And to the Prince the Prouinces resigne,
               VVho dooing homage, should reenter Guyne,
               
               Safe-conduct sent the King, to come with speed,
               To seale in person what the Queene decreed.
            
            
               
               But whilst he stood yet doubtfull what to doe,
               The Spensers who his counsels chiefely guide,
               Nor with theyr Soueraigne into Fraunce durst goe,
               Nor in his absence durst at home abide:
               His listning eares with such perswasions plyde,
               As hee by them, to stay at home is wonne,
               And with Commission to dispatch his Sonne.
            
            
               Now till thys howre all ioyes inwombed lay,
               And in this howre now came they first to light,
               Ad dayes to Months, and howres vnto the day,
               And as Ioue dyd, so make a treble night,
               And whilst delight is rauish'd with delight,
               Swound in these sweets, in pleasures pleasing paine,
               And as they die, so brought to life againe.
            
            
               Now Clowd-borne care, hence vanish for a time,
               The Sunne ascending, hath the yeere renew'd,
               And as the Halkes in hotest Sotherne clime,
               Their halfe-sick hopes their crazed flags haue mew'd,
               A world of ioyes their brests doe now include,
               The thoughts whereof, thoughts quicknes doth benum,
               In whose expression, pens and tongues be dumbe.
            
            
               
               In fayre Lauinium, Troy is built againe,
               And on thys shore her ruins are repard,
               Nor Iunos hate such vigor doth retaine,
               The Fates appeas'd who with theyr fortune squard,
               The remnant of the shypwrackt nauie spard,
               Though torne with tempests, yet ariu'd at last,
               May sit and sing, and tell of sorrowes past.
            
            
               If shee doe sit, he leanes on Cynthias throne,
               If shee doe walke, he in the circle went,
               If shee doe sport, he must be grac'd alone,
               If shee discourse, he is the argument,
               If shee deuise, it is to his content:
               From her proceeds the light he beares about him,
               And yet she sets if once shee be without him.
            
            
               Still with his eares his soueraigne Goddesse hears,
               And with his eyes shee graciously doth see,
               Still in her breast his secret thoughts she bears,
               Nor can her tongue pronounce an I, but vvee,
               Thus two in one, and one in two they bee:
               And as his soule possesseth head and hart,
               Shee's all in all, and all in euery part.
            
            
               
               Like as a well-tund Lute thats tucht with skill,
               In Musicks language sweetly speaking playne,
               VVhen euery string it selfe with sound doth fill,
               Taking their tones, and giuing them againe,
               A diapazon heard in euery strayne:
               So their affections set in kayes so like,
               Still fall in consort, as their humors strike.
            
            
               Shee must returne, King Edwards will is so,
               But soft a while, shee meaneth no such thing,
               He's not so swift, but shee is twice as slowe,
               No hast, but good, this message backe to bring,
               Another tune he must be taught to sing:
               VVhich to his hart more deadly is by far,
               Then cryes of ghosts, or Mandrakes shreekings are.
            
            
               
                  Stapleton who had beene of their counsell long,
               Or woonne with gifts, or else of childish feare,
               Or mou'd in conscience with King Edwards wrong,
               Or pittying him, or hate to them did beare,
               Or of th'euent that now he did dispaire:
               This Bishop backe from Fraunce to Edward flewe,
               And knowing all discouered all he knewe.
            
            
               
               The platforme of this enterprize disclosd,
               And Torltons drift by circumstances found,
               VVith what conueyance all things are disposd,
               The cunning vsd in laying of the ground,
               And vvith what Art, this curious trayle is woond:
               Awakes the King, to see his owne estate,
               VVhen to preuent, he comes a day too late.
            
            
               
                  Isabell the time doth still and still reiorne,
               
                  Charles as a Brother with perswasions deales,
               
                  Edward with threats, doth hasten her retorne,
               Pope Iohn, with Bulls and curses hard assailes,
               Perswasions, curses, threats, no whit preuailes:
               
                  Chales, Edward, Iohn, Pope, Princes, doe your worst,
               The Queene fares best, when she the most is curst.
            
            
               The Spensers, who the French-mens humors felt,
               And with their Soueraigne, had deuisd the draught,
               VVith Prince, and Peers, now vnder hand had delt,
               In golden nets, who were alreadie caught,
               And nowe King Charles, they haue so throughlie wrought:
               That he with sums, too slightly ouerwaid,
               Poore Isabells hopes, now in the dust are layd.
            
            
               
               Thou base desier, thou graue of all good harts,
               Corsiue to kindnes, bawd to beastly will,
               Monster of time, defrauder of desarts,
               Thou plague, which doest both loue and vertue kill,
               Honours abuser, friendships greatest ill:
               If curse in hell, there worse then other bee,
               I pray that curse, may trebled light on thee.
            
            
               Nor can all these amaze this mighty Queene,
               VVho vvith affliction, neuer was controld,
               Neuer such courage in her sex was seene,
               Nor was she cast in other womens mould,
               But can endure vvarres, trauell, want, and cold:
               Strugling with Fortune, nere with greefe opprest,
               Most cheerefull still, when she was most distrest,
            
            
               Thus she resolu'd, to leaue vngratefull France,
               
               And in the world her fortune yet to trye,
               Chaunging the ayre, hopes time will alter chance,
               As one whose thoughts with honors wings doe flye,
               Her mighty mind, still scorning miserie:
               Yet ere she went, her greeued hart to heale,
               Shee rings King Charles, this dolefull parting peale.
            
            
               
               Is this the trust I haue repos'd (quoth shee)
               And to this end to thee my griefes haue told?
               Is this the kindnes that thou offerest mee?
               And in thy Country am I bought and sold?
               In all this heate art thou become so cold?
               Came I to Fraunce in hope to find a frend?
               And now in thee haue all my hopes their end?
            
            
               
                  Phillip (quoth shee) thy Father neuer was,
               But some base peasant, or some slauish hind,
               Neuer did Kingly Lyon get an Asse,
               Nor cam'st thou of that Princely Eagles kind:
               But sith thy hatefull cowardise I find,
               Sinke thou, thy power, thy Country, ayde and all,
               Thou barbarous Moore, thou most vnnaturall.
            
            
               Thou wert not Sonne vnto the Queene my mother,
               Nor wert conceiued in her sacred woombe,
               Some misbegotten changeling, not my Brother,
               O that thy Nurses armes had beene thy Toombe,
               Or thy birth-day had beene the day of the doombe:
               Neuer was Fortune with such error led,
               As when shee plac'd a Crowne vpon thy head.
            
            
               
               And for my farewell this I prophecie,
               That from my loynes, that glorious fruite shall spring,
               VVhich shall tread downe that base posteritie,
               And lead in tryumph thy succeeding King,
               To fatall Fraunce, I as Sibilla sing:
               Her Citties sackd, the ruine of her men,
               VVhen of the English, one shall conquer ten.
            
            
               
                  Beumount who had in Fraunce this shufling seene,
               VVhose soule with kindnes Isabell had wonne,
               To flye to Henault, now perswades the Queene,
                     Iohn of Henault.
                  
               
               Assuring her what good might there be done,
               Offering his Neece, vnto the Prince her Sonne:
               The onely meane, to bend his brothers might,
               Against King Edward, and to back her right.
            
            
               This worthy Lord, experienc'd long in armes,
               VVhom Isabell with many fauours grac'd,
               VVhose Princely blood, the brute of conquest warmes,
               In whose great thoughts, the Queene was highly plac'd,
               Greeuing to see her succours thus defac'd.
               Hath cast this plot, which managed with heed,
               Sith all doe fayle, should onely helpe at need.
            
            
               
               Shee who but lately had her Ankors wayd,
               And sawe the cloudes on euery side to rise,
               Nor now can stay, vntill the streame be stayd,
               Nor harbour till the cleering of the skies,
               VVho though she rou'd, the marke stil in her eyes,
               Accepts his offer thankfully as one,
               Succouring the poore in such affliction.
            
            
               This courteous Earle, mou'd with her sad report,
               VVhose eares were drawne to her inchanting tong,
               Traind vp with her in Phillips royall Court,
               And fully now confirmed in her wrong,
               Her foes growe weake, her friends grow daily strong.
               The Barrons oath, gag'd in her cause to stand,
               The Commons word, the Cleargies helping hand.
            
            
               All Couenants signd with wedlocks sacred seale,
               In friendships bonds eternally to bind,
               And all proceeding from so perfect zeale,
               And suting right, with Henalts mighty mind,
               VVhat ease hereby, the Queene doth hope to find;
               The sweet contentment of the louely bride,
               Young Edward pleasd, and ioy on euery side.
            
            
               
               NOw full seauen times, the Sunne his welked waine,
               Had on the top of all the Tropick set,
               And seauen times descending downe againe,
               His fiery wheeles, had with the fishes wet,
               Since malice first this mischiefe did beget:
               In which so many courses hath beene runne,
               As he that time celestiall signes hath done.
            
            
               From Henalt now this great Bellona comes,
               Glyding along fayre Belgias glassie maine,
               Mazing the shores with noyse of thundring drums,
               VVith her young Edward, Duke of Aquitayne,
               
               The fatall scourges of King Edwards raigne:
               Her Souldiour Beumount, and the Earle of Kent,
               
               And Mortimer that mightie Malcontent.
            
            
               Three thousand Souldiers mustred men in pay,
               Of Almaynes, Swisers, trustie Henawers,
               Of natiue English fled beyond the Sea,
               Of fat-braind Fleamings, fishie Zelanders,
               
                  Edwards decreasing power, augmenting hers:
               Her friends at home expect her comming in,
               And new commotions euery day begin.
            
            
               
               The Coasts be daylie kept with watch and ward,
               The Beacons burning, at thy foes discrie,
               O had the loue of Subiects beene thy guard,
               T'ad beene t'effect, what thou didst fortifie,
               But t'is thy houshold home-bred Enemie:
               Nor Fort, nor Castell, can thy Countrey keepe,
               VVhen foes doe wake, and dreamed friends doe sleepe.
            
            
               In vaine be armes, when heauen becomes a foe,
               Kneele, weepe, intreat, and speake thy Deaths-man fayre,
               The earth is armd vnto thy ouerthrowe,
               Goe pacifie the angrie powers by prayer,
               Or if not pray, goe Edward and dispayre:
               Thy fatall end, why doest thou this begin,
               Locking Death out, thou keep'st destruction in.
            
            
               A Southwest gale, for Harwich fitly blowes,
               Blow not so fast, to kindle such a fier:
               VVhilst vnder saile, shee yet securely rowes,
               Turne gentle wind, and force her to retyer,
               But ô the winds, doe Edwards wrack conspyre,
               For when the heauens are vnto iustice bent,
               All things be turnd to our iust punishment.
            
            
               
               Shee is arriu'd in Orwells pleasant Roade,
               
                  Orwell thy name, or ill, or neuer was:
               VVhy art thou not ore-burthend with thy loade?
               VVhy sinck'st thou not vnder thys monstrous masse?
               But what heauen will, that needs must come to passe.
               That grieuous plague thou carriest on thy deepe,
               Shall giue iust cause for many, streames to weepe.
            
            
               Englands Earle-marshall, Lord of all that Coast,
               VVith bells and bonfires welcoms her to shore,
               Great Leicester next ioyneth hoast to hoast,
               The Cleargies power, in readines before,
               VVhich euery day increaseth more and more:
               Vpon the Church a great taxation layd,
               For Armes, munition, mony, men, and ayd.
            
            
               Such as too long had looked for this hower,
               And in their brests imprisoned discontent,
               Their wills thus made too powerful by their power
               VVhose spirits were factious, great, and turbulent,
               Their hopes succesfull by this ill euent,
               Like to a thiefe that for his purpose lyes,
               Take knowledge now of Edwards iniuries.
            
            
               
               Young Prince of VVales, loe heere thy vertue lyes,
               Soften thy Mothers flintie hart with teares,
               Then wooe thy Father with those blessed eyes,
               VVherein the image of himselfe appeares,
               VVith thy soft hand softly vniting theirs:
               VVith thy sweet kisses so them both beguile,
               Vntill they smyling weepe, and weeping smile.
            
            
               Bid her behold that curled silken Downe,
               Thy fayre smooth brow, in beauties fayrer pryme,
               Not to be prest with a care-bringing Crowne,
               Nor that with sorrowes wrinckled ere the time,
               Thy feete too feeble to his seate to clime;
               VVho gaue thee life, a crowne for thee did make,
               Taking that Crowne, thou life from him doost take.
            
            
               Looke on these Babes, the seales of plighted troth,
               VVhose little armes about your bodies cling,
               These pretty imps, so deere vnto you both,
               Beg on their knees, their little hands do wring,
               Queenes to a Queene, Kings kneele vnto a King,
               To see theyr comfort, and the crowne defac'd,
               You fall to Armes, which haue in armes embrac'd.
            
            
               
               Subiects see these, and then looke backe on these,
               VVhere hatefull rage with kindly nature striues,
               And iudge by Edward of your owne disease,
               Chyldren by chyldren, by his wife your wiues,
               Your state by his, in his life your owne liues,
               And yeeld your swords, to take your deaths as due,
               Then draw your swords, to spoyle both him and you.
            
            
               From Edmondsbury now comes thys Lyonesse,
               Vnder the Banner of young Aquitaine,
               
               And downe towards Oxford doth herselfe adresse,
               A world of vengeance vvayting on her traine,
               Heere is the period of Carnaruans raigne;
               
                  Edward thou hast, but King thou canst not beare,
               Ther's now no King, but great King Mortimer.
               
            
            
               Now friendles Edward followed by his foes,
               Needes must he runne, the deuill hath in chase,
               Poore in his hopes, but wealthy in his woes,
               Plenty of plagues, but scarcitie of grace,
               VVho wearied all, now wearieth euery place;
               No home at home, no comfort seene abroad,
               His minde small rest, his body small aboad.
            
            
               
               One scarce to him his sad discourse hath done
               Of Henalts power, and what the Queene intends,
               But whilst he speakes, another hath begun,
               Another straight beginning where he ends,
               Some of new foes, some of reuolting frends;
               These ended once, againe new rumors spred
               Of many which rebell, of many fled.
            
            
               Thus of the remnant of his hopes bereft,
               Shee hath the sum, and hee the silly rest,
               Towards VVales he flyes, of England being left,
               To rayse an Armie there himselfe adrest,
               But of his power shee fully is possest;
               Shee hath the East, her rising there-withall,
               And he the VVest, I there goes downe his fall.
            
            
               VVhat plagues doth Edward for himselfe prepare?
               Alas poore Edward, whether doost thou flie?
               Men change the ayre, but seldome change their care,
               Men flie from foes, but not from miserie,
               Griefes be long-liu'd, and sorrowes seldome die;
               And whē thou feel'st thy conscience tuch'd with griefe,
               Thy selfe pursues thy selfe, both rob'd and thiefe.
            
            
               
               Towards Lundy, which in Sabryns mouth doth stand,
               Carried with hope, still hoping to finde ease,
               Imagining thys were his natiue Land,
               Thys England: and Seuerne the narrow seas,
               VVith this conceit (poore soule) himselfe doth please.
               And sith his rule is ouer-rul'd by men,
               On byrds and beasts he'll king it once agen.
            
            
               Tis treble death a freezing death to feele,
               For him, on whom the sunne hath euer shone,
               VVho hath been kneel'd vnto, can hardly kneele,
               Nor hardly beg which once hath been his owne,
               A fearefull thing to tumble from a throne;
               Fayne would he be king of a little Ile,
               All were his Empyre bounded in a myle.
            
            
               Aboard a Barke, now towards the Ile he sayles,
               Thinking to find some mercy in the flood:
               But see, the weather with such power preuailes,
               Not suffring him to rule thys peece of vvood;
               VVho can attaine, by heauen and earth with-stood?
               
                  Edward, thy hopes but vainly doe delude,
               By Gods and men vncessantly pursu'd.
            
            
               
               At length to land his carefull Barke he hales,
               Beaten with stormes, ballast with misery,
               Thys home-bred exile, on the Coast of VVales,
               
               Vnlike himselfe, with such as like him bee,
               
                  Spenser, Reading, Baldock, these haplesse three,
               They to him subiect, he subiect to care,
               And he and they, to murther subiect are.
            
            
               To ancient Neyth, a Castell strongly built,
               Thether repayre thys forlorne banish'd crew,
               VVhich holdeth them, but not contaynes theyr guilt,
               There hid from eyes, but not from enuies view,
               Nor from theyr starrs themselues they yet with-drew,
               VValls may awhile keepe out an enemie,
               But neuer Castle kept out destenie.
            
            
               Heere Fortune hath immur'd them in this hold,
               VVilling theyr poore imprisoned liberty,
               Liuing a death, in hunger, want, and cold,
               VVhilst murtherous treason entreth secretly,
               All lay on hands to punish cruelty;
               And when euen might is vp vnto the chin,
               VVeake frends become strong foes to thrust him in.
            
            
               
               
                  MElpomine, thou dolefull Muse be gone,
               Thy sad complaints be matters farre too light,
               Heere (now) come plagues beyond comparison.
               You dreadfull Furies, visions of the night,
               VVith gastly howling all approch my sight,
               And let pale ghosts with sable Tapers stand,
               To lend sad light to my more sadder hand.
            
            
               Each line shall be a history of woe,
               And euery accent as a dead mans cry;
               Now must my teares in such aboundance flow,
               As doe the drops of fruitfull Castaly,
               
               Each letter must containe a tragedy:
               Loe, now I come to tell this wofull rest,
               The drerest tale that euer pen exprest.
            
            
               You sencelesse stones, as all prodigious,
               Or things which of like solid substance be,
               Sith thus in nature all grow monsterous,
               And vnto kinde contrary disagree,
               Consume, or burne, or weepe, or sigh with mee,
               Vnlesse the earth hard-harted, nor can moane,
               Makes steele and stones, more hard then steele and stone.
            
            
               
               All-guiding heauen, which so doost still maintaine
               VVhat ere thou moou'st in perfect vnitie,
               And bynd'st all things in friendshyps sacred chayne,
               In spotles and perpetuall amitie,
               VVhich is the bounds of thy great Emperie;
               VVhy sufferest thou the sacriligious rage,
               Of thys rebellious, hatefull, yron age.
            
            
               Now ruine raignes, God helpe the Land the while,
               All prysons freed to make all mischiefes free,
               Traytors and Rebels called from exile,
               All things be lawfull, but what lawfull bee,
               Nothing our owne, but our owne infamie:
               Death, which ends care, yet carelesse of our death,
               VVho steales our ioyes, but stealeth not our breath.
            
            
               
                  London which didst thys mischiefe first begin,
               Loe, now I come thy tragedy to tell,
               
                  
                     The Londeners set all the prisoners at liberty.
                  Thou art the first thats plagued for this sin,
               VVhich first didst make the entrance to this hell,
               Now death and horror in thy walls must dwell,
               VVhich should'st haue care thy selfe in health to keepe,
               Thus turn'st the vvolues amongst the carelesse sheepe.
            
            
               
               O had I eyes, another Thames to weepe,
               Or words expressing more, then words expresse,
               O could my teares, thy great foundation steepe,
               To moane thy pride, thy wastfull vaine excesse,
               Thy gluttonie, thy youthfull wantonnesse:
               But t'is thy sinnes, that to the heauens are fled,
               Dissoluing clowdes of vengeance on thy head.
            
            
               The place prophan'd, where God should be adord,
               The stone remou'd, whereon our faith is grounded,
               Aucthoritie is scornd, counsell abhord,
               Religion so by foolish sects confounded,
               VVeake consciences by vaine questions wounded:
               The honour due, to Magistrates neglected,
               VVhat else but vengeance can there be expected?
            
            
               VVhen fayth but faynd, a faith doth onely fayne,
               And Church-mens liues, giue Lay-men leaue to fall,
               The Ephod made a cloake to couer gayne,
               Cunning auoyding what's canonicall,
               Yet holines the Badge to beare out all:
               VVhen sacred things be made a merchandize,
               None talke of texts, then ceaseth prophicies.
            
            
               
               VVhen as the lawes, doe once peruert the lawes,
               And weake opinion guides the common weale,
               VVhere doubts should cease, doubts rise in euery clawse,
               The sword which wounds, should be a salue to heale,
               Oppression vvorks oppression to conceale:
               Yet being vs'd, when needfull is the vse,
               Right clokes all wrongs, and couers all abuse,
            
            
               Tempestious thunders, teare the fruitlesse earth,
               The roring Ocean past her bounds to rise,
               Death-telling apparisions, monstrous birth,
               Th'affrighted heauen with comet-glaring eyes,
               The ground, the ayre, all fild with prodigies:
               Fearefull eclipses, fierie vision,
               And angrie Planets in coniunction.
            
            
               Thy channels serue for inke, for paper stones,
               And on the ground, write murthers, incests, rapes,
               And for thy pens, a heape of dead-mens bones,
               Thy letters, vgly formes, and monstrous shapes;
               And when the earths great hollow concaue gapes,
               Then sinke them downe, least shee we liue vpon,
               Doe leaue our vse, and flye subiection.
            
            
               
               Virgine, but Virgine onely in thy name,
               Now for thy sinne what murtherer shall be spent:
               Blacke is my inke, but blacker is thy shame,
               VVho shall reuenge? my Muse can but lament,
               VVith hayre disheueld, words and tears halfe spent:
               Poore rauish'd Lucrece stands to end her lyfe,
               VVhlist cruell Tarquin whets the angrie knyfe.
            
            
               Thou wantst redresse, and tyrannie remorce,
               And sad suspition dyes thy fault in graine,
               Compeld by force, must be repeld by force,
               Complaints no pardon, penance helpes not payne,
               But blood must vvash out a more bloody stayne:
               To winne thine honour with thy losse of breath,
               Thy guiltlesse lyfe with thy more guiltie death,
            
            
               Thou art benumd, thou canst not feele at all,
               Plagues be thy pleasures, feare hath made past feare,
               The deadly sound of sinnes nile-thundering fall,
               Hath tuned horror setled in thine eare,
               Shreeks be the sweetest Musicke thou canst heare:
               Armes thy attyer, and weapons all thy good,
               And all the wealth thou hast, consist in blood.
            
            
               
               See wofull Cittie, on thy ruin'd wall,
               The verie Image of thy selfe heere see,
               Read on thy gates in charrecters thy fall,
               In famish'd bodies, thine Anatomie,
               How like to them thou art, they like to thee:
               And if thy teares haue dim'd thy hatefull sight,
               Thy buildings are one fier to giue thee light.
            
            
               For world that was, a wofull is, complayne,
               VVhen men might haue been buried when they dyed,
               VVhen Children might haue in their cradels layne,
               VVhen as a man might haue enioy'd his bride,
               The Sonne kneeld by his Fathers death-bed side:
               The lyuing wrongd, the dead no right (now) haue,
               The Father sees his Sonne to vvant a graue.
            
            
               The poore Samarian almost staru'd for food,
               Yet sawced her sweet Infants flesh with tears,
               But thou in child vvith murther, long'st for blood,
               VVhich thy wombe wanting, casts the fruite it bears,
               Thy viperous brood, their lothsome prison teyrs.
               Thou drinkst thy gore out of a dead-mans scull,
               Thy stomack hungry, though thy gorge be full.
            
            
               
               Is all the world in sencelesse slaughter dround?
               No pittying hart? no hand? no eye? no eare?
               None holds his sword from ripping of the wound,
               No sparke of pittie, nature, loue, nor feare;
               Be all so mad, that no man can forbeare?
               VVill you incur the cruell Neros blame,
               Thus to discouer your owne Mothers shame?
            
            
               The man who of the plague yet rauing lyes,
               Heares yeelding gosts to giue their latest grone,
               And from his carefull window nought espyes,
               But dead-mens bodies, others making moane,
               No talke but Death, and execution.
               Poore silly women from their houses fled,
               Crying (ô helpe) my husbands murthered;
            
            
               
                  Thames turne thee backe to Belgias frothie mayne,
               Fayre Tame and Isis, hold backe both your springs,
               Nor on thy London spread thy siluer trayne,
               Nor let thy Ships lay forth their silken wings,
               Thy shores with Swans late dying Dirgies rings,
               Nor in thy armes let her imbraced bee,
               Nor smile on her which sadly weepes on thee.
            
            
               
               Time end thy selfe here, let it not be sayd,
               That euer Death did first begin in thee,
               Nor let this slaunder to thy fault be layd,
               That ages charge thee with impietie,
               Least feare what hath beene, argue what may be:
               And fashioning so a habite of the mind.
               Make men no men, and alter humaine kind.
            
            
               But yet this outrage hath but taken breath,
               For pittie past, she meanes to make amends,
               And more enrag'd, she doth returne to death,
               And next goes downe King Edward and his frends,
               VVhat she hath hoarded, now she franckly spends:
               In such strange action as was neuer seene,
               Clothing reuenge in habite of a Queene.
            
            
               Now Stapleton's thy turne, from France that fled,
               The next the lot vnto the Spensers fell,
               
                  Reding the Marshall, marshal'd with the dead,
               Next is thy turne great Earle of Arundell,
               
               Then Mochelden and wofull Daniell:
               
               VVho followed him in his lasciuious wayes,
               Must goe before him to his blackest dayes,
            
            
               
               
                  Carnaruan by his Countrie-men betrayd,
               And sent a Prisoner from his natiue Land,
               To Knelworth poore King he is conuayd,
               To th'Earle of Leister with a mighty band;
               And now a present Parliament in hand,
               Fully concluding what they had begunne,
               T'vncrowne King Edward, and inuest his Sonne?
            
            
               A scepter's lyke a pillar of great height,
               VVhereon a mighty building doth depend,
               VVhich when the same is ouer-prest with weight,
               And past his compasse, forc'd therby to bend,
               His massie roofe down to the ground doth send:
               Crushing the lesser props, and murthering all,
               VVhich stand within the compasse of his fall.
            
            
               VVhere vice is countenanc'd with nobilitie,
               Arte cleane excluded, ignorance held in,
               Blinding the world, with mere hipocrisie,
               Yet must be sooth'd in all their slauish sinne,
               Great malcontents to growe they then begin:
               Nursing vile wits, to make them factious tooles,
               Thus mighty men oft prooue the mightiest fooles.
            
            
               
               The Senate wronged by the Senator,
               And iustice made iniustice by delayes,
               Next innouation playes the Orator,
               Counsels vncounseld, Death defers no dayes,
               And plagues, but plagues, alow no other playes:
               And when one lyfe, makes hatefull many liues,
               
                  Caesar though Caesar, dyes with swords and kniues,
            
            
               Now for the Cleargie, Peers, and Laietie,
               Against the King must resignation make,
               Th'elected Senate of the Emperie,
               To Kenelworth are come, the Crowne to take,
               Sorrowe hath yet but slept, and now awake:
               In solemne sort each one doth take his place,
               The partiall Iudges of poore Edwards case.
            
            
               From his imprisoning chamber, cloth'd in black,
               Before the great assemblie he is brought,
               A dolefull hearse vpon a dead-mans back,
               VVhose heauie lookes, might tell his heauie thought,
               Greefe neede no fayned action to be taught:
               His Funerall solemniz'd in his cheere,
               His eyes the Mourners, and his legs the Beere.
            
            
               
               His fayre red cheeks clad in pale sheets of shame,
               And for a dumbe shew in a swound began,
               VVhere passion doth strange sort of passion frame,
               And euery sence a right Tragedian,
               Exceeding farre the compasse of a man,
               By vse of sorrow learning nature arte,
               Teaching Dispayre to act a liuely part.
            
            
               Ah Pitty, doost thou liue, or art thou not?
               Some say such sights, men vnto flints haue turned,
               Or Nature, else thy selfe hast thou forgot?
               Or is it but a tale, that men haue mourned?
               That water euer drown'd, or fire burned?
               Or haue teares left to dwell in humaine eyes,
               Or euer man to pitty miseries?
            
            
               Hee takes the Crowne, and closely hugs it to him,
               And smiling in his greese he leanes vpon it;
               Then doth hee frowne because it would forgoe him,
               Then softly stealing, layes his vesture on it;
               Then snatching at it, loth to haue forgone it,
               Hee put it from him, yet hee will not so,
               And yet retaines what fayne he would forgoe.
            
            
               
               Like as a Mother ouer-charg'd with woe,
               Her onely chylde now laboring in death,
               Doing to helpe it, nothing yet can doe,
               Though with her breath, she faine would giue it breath,
               Still saying, yet forgetting what shee sayth:
               Euen so with poore King Edward doth it fare,
               Leauing his Crowne, the first-borne of his care.
            
            
               In thys confused conflict of the minde,
               Tears drowning sighes, and sighes confounding tears,
               Yet when as neyther any ease could finde,
               And extreame griefe doth somwhat harden feares,
               Sorrow growes sencelesse when too much she bears,
               VVhilst speech & silence, striues which place should take,
               VVith words halfe spoke, he silently bespake.
            
            
               I clayme no Crowne, quoth he, by vise oppression,
               Nor by the law of Nations haue you chose mee,
               My Fathers title groundeth my succession,
               Nor in your power is cullor to depose mee,
               By heauens decree I stand, they must dispose mee;
               A lawles act, in an vnlawfull thing,
               VVith-drawes allegiance, but vncrownes no King.
            
            
               
               VVhat God hath sayd to one, is onely due,
               Can I vsurpe by tyrannizing might?
               Or take what by your birth-right falls to you?
               Roote out your houses? blot your honors light?
               By publique rule, to rob your publique right?
               Then can you take, what he could not that gaue it,
               Because the heauens commaunded I should haue it.
            
            
               My Lords, quoth hee, commend me to the King,
               Heere doth he pause, fearing his tongue offended,
               Euen as in child-birth forth the word doth bring,
               Sighing a full poynt, as he there had ended,
               Yet striuing, as his speech he would haue mended;
               Things of small moment we can scarcely hold,
               But griefes that tuch the hart, are hardly told.
            
            
               Heere doth he weepe, as he had spoke in tears,
               Calming this tempest with a shower of raine,
               VVhispering, as he would keepe it from his ears,
               Doe my alegiance to my Soueraigne;
               Yet at this word, heere doth he pause againe:
               Yes say euen so, quoth he, to him you beare it,
               If it be Edward that you meane shall weare it.
            
            
               
               Keepe hee the Crowne, with mee remaine the curse,
               A haplesse Father, haue a happy Sonne,
               Take he the better, I endure the worse,
               The plague to end in mee, in mee begun,
               And better may he thriue then I haue done;
               Let him be second Edward, and poore I,
               For euer blotted out of memorie.
            
            
               Let him account his bondage from the day
               That he is with the Diadem inuested,
               A glittering Crowne doth make the haire soone gray,
               VVithin whose circle he is but arested,
               In all his feasts, hee's but with sorrowe feasted;
               And when his feete disdaine to tuch the mold,
               His head a prysoner, in a Iayle of gold.
            
            
               In numbring of his subiects, numbring care,
               And when the people doe with shouts begin,
               Then let him thinke theyr onely prayers are,
               That he may scape the danger he is in,
               The multitude, be multitudes of sin;
               And hee which first doth say, God saue the King,
               Hee is the first doth newes of sorrow bring.
            
            
               
               His Commons ills shall be his priuate ill,
               His priuate good is onely publique care,
               His will must onely be as others will:
               Himselfe not as he is, as others are,
               By Fortune dar'd to more then Fortune dare:
               And he which may commaund an Empery,
               Yet can he not intreat his liberty.
            
            
               Appeasing tumults, hate cannot appease,
               Sooth'd with deceits, and fed with flatteries,
               Displeasing to himselfe, others to please,
               Obey'd asmuch as he shall tyrannize,
               Feare forcing friends, enforcing Enemies:
               And when hee sitteth vnder his estate,
               His foote-stoole danger, and his chayre is hate.
            
            
               He King alone, no King that once was one,
               A King that was, vnto a King that is;
               I am vnthron'd, and hee enioyes my throne,
               Nor should I suffer that, nor he doe this,
               He takes from mee what yet is none of his;
               Young Edward clymes, old Edward falleth downe;
               King'd and vnking'd, he crown'd, farwell my crowne.
            
            
               
               Princes be Fortunes chyldren, and with them,
               Shee deales, as Mothers vse theyr babes to still,
               Vnto her darling giues a Diadem,
               A pretty toy, his humor to fulfill;
               And when a little they haue had theyr will,
               Looke what shee gaue, shee taketh at her pleasure,
               Vsing the rod when they are out of measure.
            
            
               But policie, who still in hate did lurke,
               And yet suspecteth Edward is not sure,
               VVaying what blood with Leicester might worke,
               Or else what friends his name might yet procure,
               A guilty conscience neuer is secure;
               From Leisters keeping cause him to be taken;
               Alas poore Edward, now of all forsaken.
            
            
               To Gurney and Matrauers he is giuen;
               O let theyr act be odious to all ears,
               And beeing spoke, stirre clowdes to couer heauen,
               And be the badge the wretched murtherer bears,
               The wicked oth whereby the damned swears:
               But Edward, in thy hell thou must content thee,
               These be the deuils which must still torment thee.
            
            
               
               Hee on a leane ilfauored beast is set,
               Death vpon Famine moralizing right;
               His cheeks with tears, his head with raigne bewet,
               Nights very picture, wandring still by night;
               VVhen he would sleep, like dreams they him affright;
               His foode torment, his drinke a poysoned bayne,
               No other comfort but in deadly paine.
            
            
               And yet because they feare to haue him knowne,
               They shaue away his princely tressed hayre,
               And now become not worth a hayre ofs owne,
               Body and fortune now be equall bare;
               Thus voyde of wealth, ô were he voyde of care.
               But ô, our ioyes are shadowes, and deceaue vs,
               But cares, euen to our deaths doe neuer leaue vs.
            
            
               A silly Mole-hill is his kingly chayre,
               VVith puddle water must he now be drest,
               And his perfume, the lothsome fenny ayre,
               An yron skull, a Bason sitting best,
               A bloody workman, suting with the rest;
               His lothed eyes, within thys filthy glas,
               Truly behold how much deform'd hee was.
            
            
               
               The drops which from his eyes abundance fall,
               A poole of tears still rising by this rayne,
               Euen fighting with the water, and withall,
               A circled compasse makes it to retaine,
               Billow'd with sighes, like to a little maine;
               VVater with tears, contending whether should
               Make water warme, or make the warme tears cold.
            
            
               Vise Traytors, hold of your▪ vnhalowed hands,
               The cruelst beast the Lyons presence fears:
               And can you keepe your Soueraigne then in bands?
               How can your eyes behold th'anoynteds tears?
               Are not your harts euen pearced through the ears?
               The minde is free, what ere afflict the man,
               A King's a King, doe Fortune what shee can.
            
            
               VVho's he can take what God himselfe hath giuen?
               Or spill that life his holy spirit infused?
               All powers be subiect to the powers of heauen,
               Nor wrongs passe vnreueng'd, although excused,
               VVeepe Maiestie to see thy selfe abused;
               O whether shall authoritie be take,
               VVhen shee herselfe, herselfe doth so forsake?
            
            
               
               A wreath of hay they on his temples bind,
               VVhich when he felt, (tears would not let him see,)
               Nature (quoth he) now art thou onely kind,
               Thou giu'st, but Fortune taketh all from mee,
               I now perceaue, that were it not for thee:
               I should want vvater, clothing for my brayne,
               But earth giues hay, and mine eyes giue me rayne.
            
            
               My selfe deform'd, lyke my deformed state,
               My person made like to mine infamie,
               Altring my fauour, could you alter fate,
               And blotting beautie, blot my memorie,
               You might flye slaunder, I indignitie:
               My golden Crowne, tooke golden rule away,
               A Crowne of hay, well sutes a King of hay.
            
            
               Yet greeu'd agayne, on nature doth complayne,
               Nature (sayth he) ô thou art iust in all,
               VVhy should'st thou then, thus strengthen me agayne,
               To suffer things so much vnnaturall?
               Except thou be pertaker in my fall:
               And when at once so many mischiefes meete,
               Mak'st poyson nuterment, and bitter sweete.
            
            
               
               And now he thinks he wrongeth Fortune much,
               VVho giueth him this great preheminence,
               For since by fate his myseries be such,
               Her worser name hath taught him pacience,
               For no offence, he taketh as offence:
               Crost on his back, and crosses in the brest,
               Thus is he crost, who neuer yet was blest.
            
            
               To Berckley thus they lead this wretched King,
               The place of horror which they had fore-thought,
               O heauens why suffer you so vile a thing,
               And can behold, this murther to be wrought,
               But that your wayes are all with iudgement frought:
               Now entrest thou, poore Edward to thy hell,
               Thus take thy leaue, and bid the world farewell.
            
            
               O Berckley, thou which hast beene famous long,
               Still let thy walls shreeke out a deadly sound,
               And still complayne thee of thy greeuous wrong,
               Preserue the figure of King Edwards wound,
               And keepe their wretched footsteps on the ground:
               That yet some power againe may giue them breath,
               And thou againe mayst curse them both to death.
            
            
               
               The croking Rauens hideous voyce he hears,
               VVhich through the Castell sounds with deadly yells,
               Imprinting strange imaginarie fears,
               The heauie Ecchoes lyke to passing bells,
               Chyming far off his dolefull burying knells:
               The iargging Casements which the fierce wind dryues,
               Puts him in mind of fetters, chaynes, and gyues.
            
            
               By silent night, the vgly shreeking Owles,
               Lyke dreadfull Spirits with terror doe torment him,
               The enuious dogge, angry with darcknes howles,
               Lyke messengers from damned ghosts were sent him,
               Or with hells noysome terror to present him:
               Vnder his roofe the buzzing night-Crow sings,
               Clapping his windowe with her fatall wings.
            
            
               Death still prefigur'd in his fearefull dreames,
               Of raging Feinds, and Goblins that he meets,
               Of falling downe from steepe-rocks into streames
               Of Toombs, of Graues, of Pits, of winding sheets,
               Of strange temptations and seducing sprits:
               And with his cry awak'd, calling for ayde,
               His hollowe voyce doth make him selfe afrayd.
            
            
               
               Oft in his sleepe he sees the Queene to flye him,
               Sterne Mortimer pursue him with his sword,
               His Sonne in sight, yet dares he not come nigh him,
               To whom he calls, who aunswereth not a word,
               And lyke a monster wondred and abhord:
               VVidowes and Orphans following him with cryes,
               Stabbing his hart, and scratching out his eyes.
            
            
               Next comes the vision of his bloody raigne,
               Masking along with Lancasters sterne ghost,
               Of eight and twentie Barrons hang'd and slayne,
               Attended with the rufull mangled host,
               At Burton and at Borough battell lost:
               Threatning with frownes, and trembling euery lim,
               VVith thousand thousand curses cursing him.
            
            
               And if it chaunce that from the troubled skyes,
               Some little brightnes through the chinks giue light,
               Straight waies on heaps the thrunging clouds doe rise,
               As though the heauen were angry with the night.
               Deformed shadowes glimpsing in his sight:
               As though darcknes, for she more darcke would bee,
               Through these poore Crannells forc'd her selfe to see,
            
            
               
               VVithin a deepe vault vnder where he lay,
               Vnder buried filthie carcasses they keepe,
               Because the thicke walls hearing kept away,
               His feeling feeble, seeing ceas'd in sleepe;
               This lothsome stinck comes from this dungeon deepe,
               As though before they fully did decree,
               No one sence should from punishment be free.
            
            
               Hee haps our English Chronicle to find,
               On which to passe the howers he falls to reed,
               For minuts yet to recreate his mind,
               If any thought one vncar'd thought might feed,
               But in his breast new conflicts this doth breed:
               For when sorrowe, is seated in the eyes,
               VVhat ere we see, increaseth miseries.
            
            
               Opening the Booke, he chaunced first of all
               On conquering VVilliams glorious comming in,
               The Normans rising, and the Bryttains fall,
               Noting the plague ordyan'd for Harolds sinne,
               How much, in how short time this Duke did winne;
               Great Lord (quoth hee) thy conquests plac'd thy throne,
               I to mine owne, haue basely lost mine owne.
            
            
               
               Then comes to Rufus a lasciuious King,
               VVhose lawlesse rule on that which he enioy'd,
               A sodaine end vnto his dayes doth bring,
               Himselfe destroy'd in that which he destroy'd,
               None moane his death, whose lyfe had all anoy'd:
               
                  Rufus (quoth he) thy fault far lesse then mine,
               Needs must my plague be far exceeding thine.
            
            
               To famous Bewclarke studiouslie he turnes.
               VVho from Duke Robert doth the scepter wrest,
                     Robert Short-thigh Duke of Normandy
                  
               
               VVhose eyes put out, in flintie Cardiffe mornes,
               In Palestine who bare his conquering crest,
               VVho though of Realmes, of same not dispossest:
               In all afflictions this may comfort thee,
               Onely my shame in death remaines (quoth hee.)
            
            
               Then comes he next to Stephens troublous state,
               Plagu'd with the Empresse, in continuall warre,
               Yet with what patience he could beare his hate,
               And lyke a wise-man rule his angry starre,
               Stopping the wheele of Fortunes giddie carre:
               O thus (quoth he) had gracelesse Edward done,
               He had not now beene Subiect to his Sonne.
            
            
               
               Then to Henry Plantagine he goes,
               Two Kings at once, two Crown'd at once doth find,
               The roote from whence so many mischiefes rose,
               The Fathers kindnes makes the Sonne vnkind,
               Th'ambitious Brothers to debate inclind:
               Thou crown'st thy Sonne, yet liuing still do'st raigne,
               Mine vncrownes me (quoth he) yet am I slaine.
            
            
               Then of couragious Lyon-hart he reeds,
               The Souldans terror, and the Pagans wrack,
               The Easterne world fild with his glorious deeds,
               Of Ioppas siege, of Cipres wofull sack,
               
                  Richard (quoth hee) turning his dull eyes back:
               Thou did'st in height of thy felicitie,
               I in the depth of all my miserie.
            
            
               Then by degrees to sacriligious Iohn,
               
               Murthering young Arthur, hath vsurp'd his right,
               The Cleargies curse, the poors oppression,
               The greeuous crosses that on him did light,
               To Rooms proud yoke yeelding his awfull might:
               Euen by thy end (he sayth) now Iohn I see,
               Gods iudgements thus doe iustly fall on mee.
            
            
               
               Then, to long-raigning VVinchester his Sonne,
               VVith whom his people bloody vvarre did wage,
               And of the troubles in his time begunne,
               The head-strong Barrons wrath, the Commons rage.
               And yet how he these tumults could aswage:
               Thou liuest long, (quoth he) longer thy name,
               And I dye soone, yet ouer-liue my fame,
            
            
               Then to great Longshanks mighty victories,
               VVho in the Orcads fix'd his Countries mears,
               And dar'd in fight our fayths proud Enemies,
               VVhich to his name eternall Trophies rears,
               VVhose gracefull fauors yet faire England wears:
               Bee't deadly sinne (quoth he) once to defile,
               This Fathers name with me a Sonne so vile.
            
            
               Following the leafe, he findeth vnawars,
               VVhat day young Edward Prince of VVales was borne,
               VVhich Letters seeme lyke Magick Charrecters,
               Or to dispight him they were made in scorne,
               O let that name (quoth he) from Books be torne:
               Least that in time, the very greeued earth,
               Doe curse my Mothers woombe, and ban my birth.
            
            
               
               Say that King Edward neuer had such child,
               Or was deuour'd as hee in cradle lay,
               Be all men from my place of birth exil'd,
               Let it be sunck, or swallowed with some sea,
               Let course of yeeres deuoure that dismall day,
               Let all be doone that power can bring to passe,
               Onely be it forgot that ere I was.
            
            
               The globy tears impearled in his eyes,
               Through which as glasses hee is forc'd to looke,
               Make letters seeme as circles which arise,
               Forc'd by a stone within a standing Brooke,
               And at one time, so diuers formes they tooke,
               VVhich like to vglie Monsters doe affright,
               And with their shapes doe terrifie his sight.
            
            
               Thus on his carefull Cabin falling downe,
               Enter the Actors of his tragedy,
               Opening the doores, which made a hallow soune,
               As they had howl'd against theyr crueltie,
               Or of his paine as they would prophecie;
               To whom as one which died before his death,
               He yet complaynes, whilst paine might lend him breath.
            
            
               
               O be not Authors of so vile an act,
               To bring my blood on your posteritie,
               That Babes euen yet vnborne doe curse the fact,
               I am a King, though King of miserie,
               I am your King, though wanting Maiestie:
               But he who is the cause of all this teene,
               Is cruell March the Champion of the Queene.
            
            
               He hath my Crowne, he hath my Sonne, my wyfe,
               And in my throne tryumpheth in my fall,
               Is't not inough but he will haue my lyfe?
               But more, I feare that yet this is not all,
               I thinke my soule to iudgement he will call:
               And in my death his rage yet shall not dye,
               But persecute me so, immortallie.
            
            
               And for you deadly hate me, let me liue,
               For that aduantage angrie heauen hath left,
               Fortune hath taken all that she did giue;
               Yet that reuenge should not be quite bereft,
               Shee leaues behind this remnant of her theft:
               That miserie should find that onely I,
               Am far more wretched then is miserie.
            
            
               
               Betwixt two beds these deuils straight enclos'd him,
               Thus done, vncouering of his secrete part,
               VVhen for his death they fitly had disposd him,
               VVith burning yron thrust him to the hart.
               O payne beyond all paine, how much thou art!
               VVhich words, as words, may verbally confesse,
               But neuer pen precisely could expresse.
            
            
               O let his tears euen freezing as they light,
               By the impression of his monstrous payne,
               Still keepe this odious spectacle in sight,
               And shew the manner how the King was slaine,
               That it with ages may be new againe;
               That all may thether come that haue beene told it,
               And in that mirror of his griefes behold it.
            
            
               Still let the building sigh his bitter grones,
               And with a hollow cry his woes repeate,
               That sencelesse things euen mouing sencelesse stones,
               VVith agonizing horror still may sweat;
               And as consuming in their furious heate,
               Like boyling Cauldrons be the drops that fall,
               Euen as that blood for vengeance still did call,
            
            
               
               O let the wofull Genius of the place,
               Still haunt the pryson where his life was lost:
               And with torne hayre, and swolne ilfauored face,
               Become the guide to his reuengefull ghost,
               And night and day still let them walke the Coast:
               And with incessant howling terrifie,
               Or mooue with pitty all that trauell by.
            
            
               TRue vertuous Lady, now of mirth I sing,
               To sharpen thy sweet spirit with some delight,
               And somwhat slack this mellancholie string,
               VVhilst I of loue and tryumphs must indite,
               Too soone againe of passion must I write.
               Of Englands wonder, now I come to tell,
               How Mortimer first rose, when Edward fell.
            
            
               Downe lesser lights, the glorious Sunne doth clime▪
               
               His ioyfull rising is the worlds proude morne;
               Now is he got betwixt the wings of Tyme,
               And with the tyde of Fortune forwards borne,
               Good starrs assist his greatnes to subborne;
               VVho haue, decreed his raigning for a while,
               All laugh on him, on whom the heauens doe smile.
            
            
               
               The pompous sinode of these earthly Gods,
               At Salsbury, appointed by their King,
               To set all euen which had been at ods,
               And into fashion, their dissignes to bring,
               That peace might now frō their proceedings spring,
               And to establish what they had begun,
               Vnder whose cullour mighty things were done.
            
            
               Heere Mortimer is Earle of March created,
               Thys honor added to his Barronie,
               And vnto fame heere is he consecrated,
               That titles might his greatnes dignifie,
               As for the rest, he easely could supply▪
               
               VVho knew a kingdom to her lap was throwne,
               VVhich hauing all, would neuer starue her owne.
            
            
               A pleasing calme hath smooth'd the troubled sea,
               The prime brought on with gentle falling showers,
               The misty breake yet proues a goodly day;
               And on their heads since heauen her 
                     •
                  argesse powers,
               That onely ours, which we doe vse as ours:
               Pleasures be poore, and our delights be dead,
               VVhen as a man doth not enioy the head.
            
            
               
               Tyme wanting bounds, still wanteth certainty,
               Of dangers past, in peace wee loue to heare,
               Short is the date of all extreamity,
               Long wished things a sweet delight doth beare,
               Better forgoe our ioyes then still to feare:
               Fortune her gifts in vaine to such doth gyue,
               As when they liue, seeme as they did not liue.
            
            
               Now stand they like the two starre-fixed Poles,
               Betwixt the which the circling Spheres doe moue,
               About whose Axeltree thys fayre Globe roules,
               VVhich that great Moouer by his strength doth shoue,
               Yet euery poynt still ending in theyr loue;
               For might is euer absolute alone,
               VVhen of two powers there's true coniunction.
            
            
               The King must take, what by theyr power they giue,
               And they protect what serues for theyr protection,
               They teach to rule, whilst he doth learne to liue,
               T' whom all be subiect, liues in theyr subiection,
               Though borne to rule, yet crown'd by their election,
               Th'alegiance which to Edward doth belong,
               Doth make theyr faction absolutely strong.
            
            
               
               Twelue guide the King, his power theyr powers consist,
               Peers guide the King, they guide both King and Peers,
               Ill can the Brooke his owne selfe-streame resist,
               Theyr aged counsell, to his younger yeeres,
               Young Edward vowes, and all the while he steers;
               VVel might we think the man were more then blind,
               VVhich wanted Sea roomth, and could rule the wind.
            
            
               In lending strength, theyr strength they still retaine,
               Building his force, theyr owne they so repare,
               Vnder his raigne, in safety they doe raigne,
               They giue a kingdome, and doe keepe the care,
               They who aduenture, must the booty share,
               A Princes wealth in spending still doth spred,
               Like to a Poole with many fountaines fed.
            
            
               They sit at ease, though he sit in the throne,
               He shaddowes them who his supporters be,
               And in diuision they be two for one,
               An Empyre now must thus berul'd by three,
               VVhat they make free, they challenge to be free;
               The King enioyeth, but what they lately gaue,
               They priuiledg'd to spend, leaue him to saue.
            
            
               
               
                  
                     sort inter 
                           •
                        se-score nights in reti
                           ••
                        e.
                  Nine-score braue Knights belonging to his Court
               At Notingham, which all the Coast commaunds,
               All parts pay trybute, honor to his port,
               Much may he doe which hath so many hands,
               This rocke-built Castell, ouer-looks the Lands:
               Thus lyke a Gyant, still towards heauen doth ryse,
               And fayne would cast the Rocks against the skyes.
            
            
               VVhere ere he goes there pompe in tryumph goes,
               Ouer his head Fame soring still doth flye,
               Th'earth in his presence decks her selfe in showes,
               And glory sits in greatest Maiestie,
               Aboundance there doth still in Child-bed lye:
               For where Fortune her bountie will bestowe,
               There heauen and earth must pay what she doth owe.
            
            
               In Notingham, the Norths great glorious eye,
               Crowne of the beautious branch-embellish'd soyle,
               The throne emperiall of his Emperie,
               His resting place, releeuer of his 
                     •
                  oyle,
               Here he enioyes his neuer-prized spoyle:
               There lyuing in a world of all delight,
               Beheld of all, and hauing all in sight.
            
            
               
               Here all along the flower-enameld vales,
               Cleere Trent vpon the pearly sand doth slide,
               And to the Meadowes telling wanton tales,
               Her christall lims lasciuiously in pride,
               VVith thousand turnes shee casts from side to side:
               As loth shee were the sweet soyle to forsake,
               And throw her selfe into the German lake.
            
            
               VVhence great hart-harboring Sherwood wildly roues,
               VVhose leauie Forrests garlanding her Towers,
               Shadowing the small Brooks with her Ecchoing groues,
               vvhose thick-plashd sides repulse the Northerne showers,
               VVhere Nature sporting in her secret Bowers:
               This strong built Castell hurketh in her shade,
               As to this end she onely had beene made.
            
            
               There must the glorious Parliament be held,
               Earth must come in, when awfull heauen doth send,
               For whether Ioue his powerfull selfe doth weld,
               Thether all powers them selues must wholly bend,
               VVhose hand holds thunder, who dare him offend?
               And where proud conquest keepeth all in awe,
               Kings oft are forc'd in seruile yokes to drawe.
            
            
               
               Heere sit they both vnder the rich estate,
               Yet neither striue the vpper hand to get,
               In pompe and power both equall at a rate,
               And as they came, so are they friendly set,
               He entreth first, which first in entring met;
               A King at least the Earle of March must be,
               Or else the maker of a King is hee.
            
            
               Perhaps, he with a smyle the King will grace,
               His knees growe stiffe, they haue forgot to bow,
               And if he once haue taken vp his place,
               
                  Edward must come, if he his will would know,
               A foote out of his seate he cannot goe;
               Thys small word subiect, pricks him like a sting,
               My Empyres Colleage, or my fellow King.
            
            
               O had felicity feeling of woe,
               Or could on meane but moderatly seede,
               Or would looke downe the way that he must goe,
               Or could abstaine from what diseases breede,
               To stop the wound before to death he bleede,
               VVarre should not fill Kings Pallaces with moane,
               Nor perrill come when tis least thought vpon.
            
            
               
               Ambition with the Eagle loues to build,
               Nor on the Mountayne dreads the winters blast,
               But with selfe-soothing doth the humor guild,
               VVith arguments correcting what is past,
               Fore-casting Kingdomes, daungers vnforecast:
               Leauing this poore word of content to such,
               VVhose earthly spirits haue not his fierie 
                     •
                  uch.
            
            
               But pleasures neuer dine but on excesse,
               VVhose dyet made to drawe on all delight,
               And ouercome in that sweet drunkennes,
               His appetite maintayned by his sight,
               Strengthneth desier, but euer weakneth might:
               Vntill this vlcer ripening to a head,
               Vomits the poyson which it nourished.
            
            
               Euen as a flood swelling beyond his bounds,
               Doth ouer-presse the channell where he flowd,
               And breaking forth, the neighbour Meadows drowns,
               That of him selfe, him selfe doth quite vnload,
               Dispearcing his owne greatnes all abroad:
               Spending the store he was maintayned by,
               Empties his Brooke, and leaues his Channell dry.
            
            
               
               Vpon this Subiect, enuie might deuise,
               Here might she prooue her mischeese-working wings,
               An obiect for her euer-waking eyes,
               VVherein to stick a thousand deadly stings,
               A ground whereon to build as many things:
               For where our actions measure no regard,
               Our lawlesse will is made his owne reward.
            
            
               Here vengeance calls destruction vp from hell,
               Coniuring mischeese to deuise a curse,
               Increasing that, which more and more did swell,
               Adding to ill, to make this euill worse,
               VVhilst hatefull pride becomes ambitions nurse:
               T'is incedent to those whom many feare,
               Many to them more greeuous hate doe beare.
            
            
               And now those fewe which many tears had spent,
               And long had wept on olde King Edwards graue,
               Find some begin to pittie their lament,
               VVishing the poore yet some redresse might haue,
               Reuenge cannot denie what death doth craue:
               Opening their cares what so abhord their eyes,
               Ill will too soone regardeth enuies cryes.
            
            
               
               Time calls account of what before is past,
               All thrust on mallice pressing to be hard,
               Vnto misfortune all men goe too fast,
               Seldome, aduantage is in wrongs debard,
               Nor in reuenge a meane is neuer spard:
               For when once pryde but poynteth towards his fall,
               He bears a sword to wound him selfe with all.
            
            
               
                  Edward whose shoulders now were taught to peyze,
               
                  Briarius burthen, which opprest him so,
               His current stop'd with these outragious Seas,
               VVhose gulfe receau'd the tyde should make him flowe,
               This Rocke cast in the way where he must goe:
               That honor brooks, no fellowship hath tryde,
               Nor neuer Crowne Corriuall could abyde.
            
            
               Some vrge that March, meaning by blood to rise,
               First cut off Kent, fearing he might succeed,
               Trayning the King to what he did deuise,
               Lymming in cullors this vnlawfull deed,
               And to his owne, the royall blood to weed:
               Thus euery strawe prooues fewell to the fier,
               VVhen counsell doth concurre with our desier.
            
            
               
               All fence the tree which serueth for a shade,
               VVhose great growne body doth repulse the wind,
               Vntill his wastfull branches doe inuade,
               The straighter plants, and them in pryson bind,
               Then lyke a foule deuower of his kind:
               Vnto his roote all put their hands to hewe,
               VVhose roomth but hinder other which would grow.
            
            
               Greatnes, lyke to the Sunnes reflecting powers,
               The fen-bred vapours naturally exhales,
               And is the cause that oft the euening lowers,
               VVhen foggie mists enlarge their duskie failes,
               That his owne beams, he in the clouds impales:
               And eyther must extinguish his owne light,
               Or by his vertue cause his propper night.
            
            
               Of winter thus whilst they prognosticate,
               He hath the Sommer, and a fruitfull yeare,
               And still is soothed by his flattering fate,
               For still the starre which guides him doth appeare;
               Hee looks far off, yet sees not daunger neare:
               For oft we see before a sodaine shower,
               The sunne shines hott'st, and hath the greatest power.
            
            
               
               Now sphears with Musick make a new worlds birth,
               Bring on againe olde Saturns golden raigne,
               Renewe this wearie barren-wombed earth,
               And rayse aloft the sunnes declyning wayne,
               And by your power make all things young agayne:
               
                  Orpheus, once more to Thebes olde Forrests bring,
               Drinke Nectar, whilst the Gods are banquetting.
            
            
               VVithin this Castell had the Queene deuisd,
               A stately Chamber with the pensill wrought,
               VVithin whose compasse was imparadizd,
               VVhat euer Arte or rare inuention taught,
               As well might seeme far to exceed all thought:
               That were the thing on earth to moue delight,
               He should not want it to content his sight.
            
            
               Heere Phoebus clipping Hiacynthus stood,
               VVhose lyues last drops, his snowie breast imbrewe,
               Mixing his christall tears with purple blood,
               As were it blood or tears, none scarcely knewe,
               Yet blood and tears, one from the other drewe:
               The little wood-nimphs chasing him with balme,
               To rayse this sweet Boy from this deadly qualme.
            
            
               
               Here lyes his Lute, his Quiuer, and his bowe,
               His golden mantle on the greene-spred ground,
               That from the things themselues none could them know,
               The sledge so shadowed, still seem'd to rebound,
               Th'wound beeing made, yet still to make a wound:
               The purple flower with letters on the leaues,
               Springing that Nature, oft her selfe deceaues.
            
            
               The milke-white Heifor, Io, Ioues faire rape,
               Viewing her new-ta'en figure in a Brooke,
               The water seeming to retayne the shape,
               VVhich lookes on her, as shee on it doth looke,
               That gazing eyes oft-times them selues mistooke:
               By prospectiue deuis'd that looking nowe,
               Shee seem'd a Mayden, then againe a Cowe.
            
            
               Then Mercurie amidst his sweetest ioyes,
               Sporting with Hebe by a Fountayne brim,
               Clipping each other with lasciuious toyes,
               And each to other lapped lim to lim,
               On tufts of flowers which loosely seeme to swim:
               VVhich flowers in sprinckled drops doe still appeare,
               As all their bodies so embraudered were.
            
            
               
               Heere clyffy Cynthus, with a thousand byrds,
               VVhose checkerd plumes adorne his tufted crowne,
               Vnder whose shadow graze the stragling heards,
               Out of whose top, the fresh springs trembling downe,
               Duly keepe time with theyr harmonious sowne.
               The Rock so liuely done in euery part,
               As arte had so taught nature, nature arte.
            
            
               The naked Nymphes, some vp, some downe discending.
               Small scattering flowers one at another flung,
               VVith pretty turns their lymber bodies bending,
               Cropping the blooming branches lately sprong,
               VVhich on the Rocks grewe heere and there among.
               Some combe theyr hayre, some making garlands by,
               As liuing, they had done it actually.
            
            
               And for a trayle, Caisters siluer Lake,
               VVhose heards of Swanns sit pruning on a row,
               By their much whitenes, such reflection make,
               As though in Sommer had been falne a snow,
               VVhose streame an easie breath doth seeme to blowe;
               VVhich on the sparkling grauell runns in purles,
               As though the waues had been of siluer curles.
            
            
               
               Here falls proude Phaeton, tumbling through the clowds,
               The sunny Palfreys haue their traces broke,
               And setting fire vpon the welked shrowds,
               Now through the heauen flye gadding from the yoke,
               The Sphears all reeking with a mistie smoke,
               Drawne with such life, as some did much desire
               To warme themselues, some frighted with the fire.
            
            
               And Drencht in Po, the Riuer seemes to burne,
               His wofull sisters, mourning there he sees,
               Trees vnto women seeme themselues to turne,
               Or rather women turned into trees,
               Drops from their boughs, or tears fall from their eyes,
               That fire seem'd to be water, water flame,
               Eyther or neyther, and yet both the same.
            
            
               A stately Bed vnder a golden tree,
               VVhose broad-leau'd branches couering ouer all,
               Spread their large Armes like to a Canapy,
               Dubbling themselues in their lasciuious fall,
               Vpon whose top the flying Cupids spraule,
               And some, at sundry cullored byrds doe shute,
               Some swaruing vp to get the golden fruite.
            
            
               
               A counterpoynt of Tyssue, rarely wrought,
               Like to Arachnes web, of the Gods rape,
               VVhich with his lifes strange history is wrought,
               The very manner of his hard escape,
               From poynt to poynt, each thing in perfect shape,
               As made the gazers thinke it there was done,
               And yet time stayd in which it was begun.
            
            
               During thys calme, is gather'd that black showre,
               VVhose vglie clowde the clyme had ouer-spred,
               And now drawes on that long death-dating howre,
               His fatall starre now hangeth o're his head,
               His fortunes sunne downe towards the euening fled,
               For when we thinke we most in safety stand,
               Great'st dangers then are euer near'st at hand.
            
            
               And Edward sees no meanes can euer boote,
               Vnlesse thys head-strong course he may restraine,
               And must pluck vp these mischiefs by the roote,
               Els spred so farre, might easely grow againe,
               And end theyr raigne, if he doe meane to raigne;
               The Common-weale to cure, brought to that passe,
               VVhich like a many-headed Monster was.
            
            
               
               But sith he finds the danger to be such,
               To bring this Beare once bayted to the slake,
               And that he feeles the forwardest to gruch,
               To take in hand this sleeping dog to wake,
               He must fore-think of some such course to take,
               By which he might his purpose thus effect,
               And hurt him most, where he might least suspect.
            
            
               A trenched vault deepe in the earth is found,
               VVhose hollownes, like to the Sleep-gods Cell,
               VVith strange Meanders turneth vnder ground,
               VVhere pitchy darknes euer-more doth dwell,
               As well might be an entrance into hell.
               VVhich Archyteckts, to serue the Castell made,
               VVhen as the Dane with warrs did all inuade.
            
            
               Heere silent night, as in a pryson shrowded,
               VVandreth about within thys mazed roome,
               VVith filthy fogs, and earthly vapors clowded,
               As shee were buried in this cliffy toombe,
               Or yet vnborne within the earths great woombe.
               A dampy breath comes from the moysted vaines,
               As shee had sigh'd through trouble in her paines.
            
            
               
               Now on a long this cranckling path doth keepe,
               Then by a rock turnes vp another way,
               Then rising vp, shee poynteth towards the deepe,
               As the ground leuell, or vnleuell lay,
               Nor in his course keepes any certaine stay,
               Till in the Castell in a secret place,
               He suddainly vnmaske his duskie face.
            
            
               The King now with a strong selected crue,
               Of such as he with his intent acquainted,
               And well affected to thys action knew,
               Nor in reuenge of Edward neuer fainted,
               VVhose loyall fayth had neuer yet beene tainted,
               This Labyrinth dertermins to assay,
               To rouze the beast which kept him thus at bay.
            
            
               The blushing Sunne, plucks in his smyling beames,
               Making his steeds to mend theyr wonted pace,
               Till plunging downe into the Ocean streames,
               There in the frothy waues he hides his face,
               Then reynes them in, more then his vsuall space,
               And leaues foule darknes to possesse the skyes,
               A time most fit for fouler tragedies.
            
            
               
               VVith Torches now they enter on his Caue,
               As night were day, and day were turnd to night,
               Damp'd with the soyle one to the other gaue,
               Light hating darknes, darknes hating light,
               As enemies, each with the other fight;
               And each confounding other, both appeare,
               As darknes light, and light but darknes were.
            
            
               The craggy cleeues, which crosse them as they goe,
               Seeme as their passage they would haue denied,
               And threatning them, their iourney to for-slowe,
               As angry with the path that was their guide,
               Cursing the hand vvhich did them first deuide,
               Theyr combrous falls and risings seem'd to say,
               Thys wicked action could not brooke the day.
            
            
               These gloomy Lamps, by which they on were led,
               Making theyr shaddowes follow at theyr back,
               VVhich like to Mourners, waite vpon the dead,
               And as the deed, so are they vgly black,
               Like to the dreadfull Images of wrack;
               These poore dym-burning lights, as all amazed,
               As those deformed shades whereon they gazed.
            
            
               
               Theyr clattering Armes, their Masters seeme to chyde,
               As they would reason wherefore they should wound.
               And striking with the poynts from side to side,
               As they were angry with the hollow ground,
               VVhose stony roofe lock'd in their dolefull found:
               And hanging in the creeks, draw backe againe,
               As vvilling them from murther to refraine.
            
            
               Novv, after masks and gallant reuelings,
               The Queene vnto the Chamber is with-drawne,
               To vvhom a cleer-voyc'd Eunuch playes and sings;
               And vnderneath a Canapy of Lawne,
               Sparkling with pearle, like to the cheerfull dawne,
               Leaning vpon the breast of Mortimer,
               
               VVhose voice more then the musick pleasd her eare.
            
            
               A smock wrought with the purest Affrick silke,
               A worke so fine, as might all worke refine,
               Her breast like strains of violets in milk,
               O be thou hence-forth Beauties liuing shrine,
               And teach things mortall to be most diuine.
               Enclose Loue in thys Labyrinth about,
               VVhere let him wander still, yet ne're get out.
            
            
               
               Her golden hayre, ah gold, thou art too base,
               VVere it not sinne but once to name it hayre,
               Fal
                     •
                  ing as it would kisse her fairer face,
               But no word fayre enough for thing so fayre,
               Inuention is too bare, to paynt her bare;
               But where the pen fayles, Pensill cannot show it,
               Nor can be knowne, vnlesse the minde doe knowe it.
            
            
               Shee layes those fingers on his manly cheeke,
               The Gods pure scepters, and the darts of loue,
               VVhich with one tuch might make a Tyger meeke,
               Or might an Atlas easely remoue:
               That lilly hand, rich Natures wedding gloue,
               VVhich might beget life where was neuer none,
               And put a spirit into the hardest stone.
            
            
               The fire of precious wood, the lights perfume,
               VVhose perfect cleernes, on the painting shone,
               As euery thing with sweetnes would consume,
               And euery thing had sweetnes of his owne,
               The smell where-with they liu'd, & alwaies growne,
               That light gaue cullour on each thing it fell,
               And to that cullour, the perfume gaue smell.
            
            
               
               Vpon the sundry pictures they deuise,
               And from one thing they to an other runne,
               Now they commend that body, then those eyes,
               How well that byrd, how well that flower was done,
               The liuely counterfetting of that sunne:
               The cullors, the conceits, the shadowings,
               And in that Arte a thousand sundrie things.
            
            
               Looking vpon proud Phaeton wrapd in fier,
               The gentle Queene doth much bewaile his fall,
               But Mortimer more praysing his desier,
               To loose his lyfe or else to gouerne all:
               And though (quoth he) he now be Fortunes thrall,
               This must be sayd of him when all is done,
               Hee perrish'd in the Chariot of the Sunne.
            
            
               Glaunsing vpon Ixion, shee doth smile,
               VVho for his Iuno tooke the cloud amisse;
               Madam (quoth hee) thus women can beguile,
               And oft we find in loue, this error is,
               VVhy friend (quoth shee) thy hap is lyke to his:
               That booteth not (quoth he) were he as I,
               
                  Ioue would haue beene in monstrous iealousie.
            
            
               
               (Shee sayth) Phoebus is too much forc'd by Art,
               Nor can shee find how his imbraces bee:
               But Mortimer now takes the Paynters part,
               Tis euen thus great Empresse, so (quoth hee)
               Thus twyne their armes, and thus their lips you see:
               You Phoebus are, poore Hiacinthus I,
               Kisse mee till I reuiue, and now I die.
            
            
               By this into the vttermost stately hall,
               Is rudely entred this disordred rout,
               And they within suspecting least of all,
               Prouide no guard to watch on them without,
               Thus danger falls oft-times, when least we doubt:
               In perrill thus we thinke our selues most sure,
               And oft in death fond men are most secure.
            
            
               His trustie Neuill, and young Turrington,
               
               Courting the Ladies, frolick voyd of feare,
               Staying delights whilst time away doth runne,
               VVhat rare Emprezas hee and he did beare,
               Thus in the Lobby whilst they sporting weare:
               Assayld on sudaine by this hellish trayne,
               Both in the entrance miserably slayne.
            
            
               
               Euen as from snow-topd Skidos frostie cleeues,
               Some Norway Haggard, to her pitch doth tower,
               And downe amongst the moore-bred Mallard driues,
               And through the aire, right down the wind doth scower,
               Commaunding all that lye within her power:
               Euen such a skreame is hard within the vault,
               Made by the Ladies at the first assault.
            
            
               
                  March hath no armes, but the Queene in his armes,
               To fayre a sheeld to beare their fouler blowes,
               Enchayning his strong armes, in her sweet armes,
               Inclosing them which oft did her inclose,
               O had he had but weapons lyke his woes:
               Her presence had redoubled then his might,
               To lyue and dye both in his soueraigns sight.
            
            
               Villians (quoth hee) I doe protect the King,
               VVhy Centaure-lyke doe you disturbe me this,
               And interrupt the Gods at banquetting,
               VVhere sacred Himen euer present is,
               And pleasures are imparadizd in blis:
               VVhere all they powers, their earthly heauen would take,
               If heere on earth they their abode should make.
            
            
               
               Her presence pardons the offenders ill,
               And makes the basest earthly thing diuine,
               Ther's no decree can countermaund her will,
               Shee like the Sunne, doth blesse where she doth shine,
               Her Chamber is the most vnspotted shrine:
               How sacriligiously dare you despise,
               And thus prophane these halowed liberties.
            
            
               But Edward, if this enterprize be thine,
               And thou an Actor heere do'st play thy part,
               I tell thee then base King thy Crowne was mine,
               And thou a King but of my making art.
               And now poore worme since thou hast taken hart,
               Thou would'st hew downe that pillar vnto wrack,
               VVhich hath sustaynd Olimpus on his back.
            
            
               VVhat can he doe, that is so hard beset?
               The heauen-threatning Gyants, heauen could tame,
               Proud Mars is bound within an yron-net,
               
                  Alcides burnt in Nessus poysned flame,
               Great Ioue can shake the vniuersall frame:
               He that was wont to call his sword to ayde,
               Tis hard with him, when he must stand to plead.
            
            
               
               O hadst thou in thy glory thus beene slayne,
               All thy delights had beene of easie rate,
               But now thy fame yet neuer tuch'd with stayne,
               Must thus be branded with thy haplesse fate,
               No man is happie till his lyfes last date:
               His pleasures must be of a dearer price,
               Poore Adam driuen out of Paradice.
            
            
               Halfe drownd in tears, she followes him: ô tears,
               Elixar like, turne all to pearle you weet,
               To weepe with her, the building scarce forbears,
               Stones Metamorphizd tuch'd but with her feete,
               And make the ayre for euerlasting sweet:
               VVringing her hands with pittious shreeking cries,
               Thus vtters shee her hard extreamities.
            
            
               
                  Edward (quoth shee) let not his blood beshed,
               Each drop of it is more worth then thy Crowne,
               VVhat Region is in Europe limitted,
               VVhere doth not shine, the Sunne of his renowne?
               His sword hath set Kings vp, & thrown them downe:
               Thou knowst that Empires neuer haue confind,
               The large-spred bounds of his vnconquer'd mind.
            
            
               
               And if thou feed'st vpon thy Fathers wrongs,
               Make not reuenge, to bring reuenge on thee,
               VVhat torture thou inflict'st, to me belongs,
               And what is due to death, is due to mee,
               Imagine that his wounds fresh bleeding bee:
               Forget thy birth, thy crowne, thy loue, thy Mother,
               And in this breast thy sword in vengeance smother.
            
            
               O let my hands held vp appease this stryfe,
               O let these knees at which thou oft hast stood,
               Now kneele to thee, to beg my lyues true lyfe,
               This wombe that bare thee, breast that gaue thee food,
               Or let my blood yet purchase his deere blood:
               O let my tears which neuer thing could force,
               Constraynd by this, yet moue thee to remorce.
            
            
               But all in vaine, still Edwards ghost appears,
               And cryes reuenge, reuenge, vnto his Sonne,
               And now the voyce of wofull Kent hee hears,
               And bids him followe what he had begun,
               Nor will they rest till execution done:
               The very sight of him he deadly hated,
               Sharpens the edge, his Mothers tears rebated.
            
            
               
               To London now a wofull prisoner led,
               London where he had tryumph'd with the Queene,
               He followeth now, whom many followed,
               And scarce a man, who many men had beene,
               Seeing with greefe who had in pompe been seene:
               Those eyes which oft haue at his greatnes gazed,
               Now at his fall must stand as all amazed.
            
            
               Oh misery, where once thou art possest,
               How soone thy faynt infection alters kind,
               And lyke a Cyrce turnest man to beast,
               And with the body do'st transforme the mind,
               That can in fetters our affections bind:
               That he whose back once bare the Lyons skin,
               VVhipt to his taske, with Iole must spin.
            
            
               
                  Edward and March vnite your angry spirits,
               Become new friends of auncient Enemies,
               Hee was thy death, and he thy death inherits,
               How well you consort in your miseries,
               And in true time tune your aduersities:
               Fortune gaue him, what shee to Edward gaue,
               Not so much as thy end but he will haue.
            
            
               
               At VVestminster a Parliament decreed,
               Vnder pretence of safetie to the Crowne,
               VVhere to his fatall end they now proceed,
               All working hard to dig this Mountayne downe,
               VVith his owne greatnes that is ouer-growne:
               The King, the Earle of Kent, the Spensers fall,
               Vpon his head with vengeance thundring all.
            
            
               
                  
                     The fiue Articles wherevpon Mortimer is condemned.
                  The death of Edward neuer is forgot,
               The signe at Stanhope to the Enemies,
               
                  Ione of the Towers marriage to the Scot,
               
               The Spensers coyne seaz'd to his treasuries,
               Th'assuming of the wards and Lyueries:
               These Articles they vrge which might him greeue,
               VVhich for his creed, he neuer did beleeue.
            
            
               Oh dire reuenge, when thou in time art rak'd
               From out the ashes which preserue thee long,
               And lightly from thy cinders art awak'd,
               Fuell to feed on, and reuiu'd with wrong,
               How sonne from sparks the greatest flames are sprong:
               VVhich doth by Nature to his top aspire,
               VVhose massie greatnes once kept downe his fier.
            
            
               
               Debar'd from speech to aunswere in his case,
               His iudgment publique, and his sentence past,
               The day of death set downe, the time, and place,
               And thus the lot of all his fortune cast,
               His hope so slowe, his end draw on so fast:
               VVith pen and ynke, his drooping spirit to wake,
               Now of the Queene his leaue he thus doth take.
            
            
               MOst mighty Empresse, daine thou to peruse
               These Swan-like Dirges of a dying man:
               Not like those Sonnets of my youthfull Muse,
               In that sweet season when our loue began,
               VVhen at the Tylt thy princely gloue I wan:
               VVhereas my thundring Courser forward set,
               Made fire to flie from Herfords Burgonet.
            
            
               Thys King which thus makes hast vnto my death,
               Madam, you know, I lou'd him as mine owne,
               And when I might haue grasped out his breath,
               I set him easely in his Fathers throne,
               And forc'd the rough stormes backe when they haue blowne;
               But these forgot, & all the rest forgiuen,
               Our thoughts must be continually on heauen.
            
            
               
               And for the Crowne whereon so much he stands,
               Came bastard VVilliam but himselfe on shore?
               Or had he not our Fathers conquering hands,
               VVhich in the field our houses Ensigne bore,
               VVhich his proude Lyons for theyr safety wore,
               VVhich rag'd at Hastings like that furious Lake,
               From whose sterne waues our glorious name we take?
            
            
               Oh had he charg'd me mounted on that horse
               VVhereon I march'd before the walls of Gaunt,
               
               And with my Launce there shewd an English force,
               Or vanquisht me, a valiant combattant,
               Then of his conquest had he cause to vaunt;
               But he whose eyes durst not behold my shield,
               Perceiu'd my Chamber fitter then the field.
            
            
               I haue not serued Fortune like a slaue,
               My minde hath suted with her mightines,
               I haue not hid her tallent in a graue,
               Nor burying of her bounty made it lesse:
               My fault to God and heauen I must confesse;
               He twise offends, who sinne in flattery beares,
               Yet euery howre he dyes, which euer feares.
            
            
               
               I cannot quake at that which others feare,
               Fortune and I haue tugg'd together so;
               VVhat Fate imposeth, we perforce must beare,
               And I am growne familiar with my vvoe,
               Vsed so oft against the streame to row;
               Yet my offence my conscience still doth grieue,
               VVhich God (I trust) in mercy will forgiue.
            
            
               I am shut vp in silence, nor must speake,
               Nor Kingdoms lease my life, but I must die,
               I cannot weepe and if my hart should breake,
               Nor am I sencelesse of my misery,
               My hart so full, hath made mine eyes so dry;
               I neede not cherrish griefes, too fast they grow,
               VVoe be to him that dies of his owne woe.
            
            
               I pay my life, and then the debt is payd,
               VVith the reward, th'offence is purg'd and gone,
               The stormes will calme when once the spirit is layd;
               Enuy doth cease, wanting to feede vpon,
               VVe haue one life, and so our death is one,
               Nor in the dust mine honor I inter,
               Thus Caesar dyed, and thus dies Mortimer.
               
            
            
               
               Liue sacred Empresse, and see happie dayes,
               Be euer lou'd, with me die all our hate,
               Let neuer ages sing but of thy praise,
               My blood shall pacifie the angry Fate,
               And cancell thus our sorrowes long-liu'd date:
               And treble ten times longer last thy fame,
               Then that strong Tower thou calledst by my name.
            
            
               To Nottingham this Letter brought vnto her,
               VVhich is endorsed with her glorious stile,
               Shee thinks the title yet againe doth wooe her,
               And with that thought her sorrowes doth beguile.
               Smyling on that, thinks that on her doth smyle;
               Shee kissing it, (to counteruaile her paine,)
               Tuching her lip, it giues the kisse againe.
            
            
               Faire workmanship, quoth she, of that faire hand,
               All-moouing organ, sweet spheare-tuning kay,
               The Messenger of Ioues sleep-charming wand,
               Pully which draw'st the curtaine of the Day,
               Pure Trophies, reard to guide on valurs way,
               VVhat paper-blessing Charrecters are you,
               VVhose louely forme, that louelier engine drew?
            
            
               
               Turning the Letter, seal'd shee doth it find,
               VVith those rich Armes borne by his glorious name,
               VVhere-with this dreadfull euidence is sign'd:
               O badge of honour, greatest marke of fame,
               Braue shield, quoth she, which once frō heauen came,
               Fayre robe of tryumph, Ioues celestiall state,
               To all immortall prayses consecrate.
            
            
               Going about to rip the sacred seale,
               VVhich cleaues, least clowdes too soone should dim her eyes,
               As loth it were her sorrowes to reueale,
               Quoth shee, thy Maister taught thee secrecies:
               The soft waxe, with her fingers tuch doth rise,
               Shee asketh it, who taught thee thus to kisse?
               I know, quoth she, thy Maister taught thee thys?
            
            
               Opening the Letter, Empresse shee doth reed,
               At which a blush from her faire cheekes arose,
               And with Ambrozia still, her thoughts doth feed,
               And with a seeming ioy doth paint her woes,
               Then to subscribed Mortimer shee goes;
               
                  March following it, ô March, great March she cryes,
               VVhich speaking word, euen seemingly replyes.
            
            
               
               Thus hath shee ended, yet shee must begin,
               Euen as a fish playing with a bayted hooke,
               Now shee begins to swallow sorrow in,
               And Death doth shewe himselfe at euery looke,
               Now reads shee in her liues accounting Booke:
               And findes the blood of her lost friend had payd,
               The deepe expenses which shee forth had layd.
            
            
               Now with an host of wofull words assayl'd,
               As euery letter wounded lyke a dart,
               As euery one would boast, which most preuayl'd,
               And euery one would pierce her to the hart,
               Rethoricall in woe, and vsing Art:
               Reasons of greefe, each sentence doth infer,
               And euere lyne, a true remembrancer.
            
            
               Greefe makes her read, yet greefe still bids her leaue,
               Ore-charg'd with greefe, she neither sees nor heares,
               Her sorrowes doe her sences quite deceaue,
               The words doe blind her eyes, the sound her eares,
               And now for vescues doth she vse her teares:
               And when a lyne shee loosely ouer-past,
               The drops doe tell her where shee left the last.
            
            
               
               O now she sees, was euer such a sight?
               And seeing, curs'd her sorrow-seeing eye,
               And sayth, shee is deluded by the light,
               Or is abus'd by the Orthography:
               Or poynted false, her schollershyp to try.
               Thus when we fondly sooth our owne desires,
               Our best conceits doe prooue the greatest lyers.
            
            
               Her trembling hand, as in a Feuer shakes,
               VVherwith the paper doth a little stirre,
               VVhich shee imagins, at her sorrow quakes,
               And pitties it who shee thinks pitties her:
               And moning it, bids it that greefe refer;
               Quoth shee, Ile raine downe showers of tears on thee,
               VVhen I am dead, weepe them againe on mee.
            
            
               Quoth shee, with odors were thy body burned,
               As is Th'arabian byrd against the sunne,
               Againe from cynders yet thou should'st be turned,
               And so thy life another age should runne,
               Nature enuying it so soone was done:
               Amongst all byrds, one onely of that straine,
               Amongst all men, one Mortimer againe.
            
            
               
               I will preserue thy ashes in some Vrne,
               VVhich as a relique, I will onely saue,
               VVhich mixed with my tears as I doe mourne,
               VVithin my stomack shall theyr buriall haue,
               Although deseruing a farre better graue;
               Yet in that Temple shall they be preserued,
               VVhere, as a Saint thou euer hast been serued.
            
            
               Be thou trans-form'd vnto some sacred tree,
               VVhose precious gum may cure the fainting hart,
               Or to some hearbe yet turned mayst thou be,
               VVhose iuyce apply'd may ease the strongest smart,
               Or flower, whose leaues thy vertues may impart,
               Or stellified on Pegase loftie crest,
               Or shyning on the Nemian Lyons brest.
            
            
               I thinke the Gods could take them mortall shapes,
               As all the world may by thy greatnes gather,
               And Ioue in some of his light wanton scapes,
               Committed pretty cusnage with thy father,
               Or else thou wholy art celestiall rather:
               Els neuer could it be, so great a minde,
               Could seated be, in one of earthly kind.
            
            
               
               And if, as some affirme, in euery starre,
               There be a world, then must some world be thine,
               Else shall thy ghost inuade their bounds with warre,
               If such can mannage armes as be deuine,
               That here thou hadst no world, the fault was mine:
               And gracelesse Edward kinling all this fier,
               Trod in the dust of his vnhappy sier.
            
            
               It was not Charles that made Charles what he was,
               VVhereby he quickly to that greatnes grew,
               Nor strooke such terror which way he did passe,
               Nor our olde Grand-siers glory did renew,
               But it thy valure was, which Charles well knew:
               VVhich hath repulst his Enemies with feare,
               VVhen they but heard the name of Mortimer.
               
            
            
               In Books and Armes consisted thy delight,
               And thy discourse of Campes, and grounds of state,
               No Apish fan-bearing Hermophradite,
               Coch-carried midwyfe, weake, effeminate,
               Quilted and ruft, which manhood euer hate:
               A Car
                        •
                     
                   when in counsell thou didst sit,
               A Hercules in executing it.
            
            
               
               Now shee begins to curse the King her Sonne,
               The Earle of March then comes vnto her mind,
               Then shee with blessing ends what shee begun,
               And leaues the last part of the curse behind,
               Then with a vowe shee her reuenge doth bind:
               Vnto that vowe shee ads a little oth,
               Thus blessing cursing, cursing blessing both.
            
            
               For pen and inke shee calls her mayds without,
               And Edwards dealing will in greefe discouer,
               But straight forgetting what shee went about,
               Shee now begins to write vnto her louer,
               Yet interlyning Edwards threatnings ouer:
               Then turning back to read what shee had writ,
               Shee teyrs the paper, and condemnes her wit.
            
            
               Thus with the pangs out of this traunce ar
                     •
                  ysed,
               As water some-time wakeneth from a swound,
               Comes to her selfe the agonie apeysed,
               As when the blood is cold, we feele the wound,
               And more, and more, sith she the cause had found,
               Thus vnto Edward with reuenge shee goes,
               And hee must beare the burthen of her woes.
            
            
               
               I would my lap had beene some cruell Racke,
               His Cradell Phalaris burning-bellyed Bull,
               And Nessus shyrt beene put vpon his backe,
               His Blanket of some Nilus Serpents wooll,
               His Dug with iuice of Acconite beene full:
               The song which luld him, when to sleepe he fell,
               Some Incantation or some Magique spell.
            
            
               And thus King Edward since thou art my Child,
               Some thing of force to thee I must bequeath,
               
                  March of my harts true loue hath thee beguild,
               My curse vnto thy bosome doe I breath,
               And heere inuoke the wretched spirits beneath:
               To see all things perform'd to my intent,
               Make them ore-seers of my Testament.
            
            
               And thus within these mighty walls inclos'd,
               Euen as the Owles so hatefull of the light,
               Vnto repentance euer more dispos'd,
               Heere spend my dayes vntill my last dayes night;
               And hence-forth odious vnto all mens sight,
               Flye euery small remembrance of delight,
               A penitentiall mournfull conuertite.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   