
      
         
            
            
            The grieuances of the Owners and Maſters of ſhipping trading to the Southwards, againſt the patent for Dungenneſſe lights.
            
               What was conſented vnto. IT is true that ſome of vs gaue conſent to the ſetting vp of a light at Dungenneſſe: which was intended ſhould haue bin a faire ſtone-tower, wherein to hane kept a blazing fire light: and for the charge of building and maintenance thereof, conſent was likewiſe giuen to pay a pennie vpon the tunne of all ſhips that ſhould take benefit thereby; and this penie to be paid, part by the Owner and part by the Merchant, at the returne of the ſhippes The Patentees abuſe of the conſent: in erecting an vnfit light, and ill keeping thereof.from their voyages, and not before.
            But the Patentee hath abuſed this conſent: for in ſtead of a ſtone tower, he hath erected ſleight ſtructures of 3 or 4 maſts: and on the top thereof keepes onely a candle light, which is nothing fit for that place, for that we cannot haue any benefit thereby, becauſe it cannot be ſeene, till ſhips come very neare it: and alſo that candle light is ſo euilly kept, that it is ſuffered in many darke nights to go out, to the often endangering of our ſhips and mens liues.
            
               The Patentee receiueth as much againe, as was conſented vnto, and receiueth it of thoſe that haue no benefit by the light. And in ſtead of a pennie vpon the tunne to be paid at our ſhips returne▪ the Patentee hath inſerted a pennie out, and a pennie in, which is two pence vpon the tunne, euery voyage. VVhich two pence we refuſing at firſt to pay, he procured his Maieſties letter to the Cuſtome-houſe, to haue our entries refuſed, and our Coquets ſtayed vntill payment were made of the ſaid two pence vpon the tunne. And alſo he receiueth the like impoſition of all ſhips that bring ſalt, wines, or oyles out of the Low Countries, 
                  ••
               though they come not neere the ſaid lights by 18 or 20 miles, nor can haue any benefit thereby.
            
               What we now deſire. VVee doe therefore humbly pray this honorable Aſſembly to prouide that a faire tower may be built, wherein may be kept a blazing fire-light, at the charge of a pennie vpon the tunne, to be payd part by the Owner, and part by the Merchant, at the returne of our ſhippes: or otherwiſe altogether to extinguiſh the light: for much better were it to haue none, then ſuch a one, by which we can haue no benefit, but are often endangered to loſe both our ſhips, goods and liues.
         
      
   