
      
         
            
            
            
            
            ¶A LAMENTABLE
diſcourſe of the fall of Hughe Sureau
(commonly called Du Roſier) from the
truth: & his ſhamefull offence to the
church togither with confeſſion of his
faulte, penitent ſubmiſſiō & remorſe.
Seruing for a notable example to al the
world of the fraieltie & vntowardneſſe
of man, & of the great and vnmeaſurable
mercie of God to his Choſen.
            ¶Imprinted at London for
Lucas Hariſon, and George
Biſhoppe. 1573.
         
         
            
            
            ¶THE TRANSLATOVR
TO THE READER.
            
               AS of all the bleſſinges that vve
receue here in earth there is
none that doth ſo liuely expreſſe
Gods inward fauour towardes
man as cōuerſion from
ſinne, ſo truely there is none ſo dreadful a
ſigne of his heauy reuenge as falling from
fayth. Mark but the hiſtory of the people
of Iſrael and you shall finde that ther falling
frō the lawe of God, as it was the greateſt
ſin which they cōmitted, ſo was it the
greateſt plague that euer they had. Their
ſickenes and peſtilence was nothing, their
dearth and famine was nothing, the loſſe
that they endured by warre was nothing,
their captiuity and death was nothing in
compariſon of reuolting from God, who
had choſen them for his people. This was
a plague of al plagues. Likewiſe if we conſider
of Gods benefites towards them, neither
their deliueraunce out of the land of
Egipt, neither their ſafe conduct into the
land of promiſe, neither their well gouerned
common wealth, nor all the victories
obteyned ageinſt their enemies may ons

be compared with that, that it pleaſed him
to turne their hartes from ſinne and Idolatry
to the trewe honoring of his name.
This was a bleſſing of al bleſſings. So that
in theſe two poyntes chiefly, is ſet foorth
vnto vs both Gods iuſtice and mercy. His
mercy in cōuerting vs from ſinne, his iuſtice
in leauing vs to our ſelues. And ſurely
there are perilous examples of renouncing
and denying a profeſſed treuth. The
tragicall hiſtories of Frauncis Speyra and
Iudge Hales are able to make a chriſtiā cō
               ſciēce
to tremble. No doubte it is cōmonly
ſene (& it is a iuſt plague) that who ſo with
his mouth belieth his conſcience, the ſame
with his hand deſtroyeth him ſelfe. Here
I deny not but that God hath his ſecrete
working beyond the reaſon and capacitie
of man, as by the pitifull diſcourſe of this
booke may eaſely appeare. This mans fal
was great, his fact was deteſtable, his mouth
blaſphemous, his hart trayterous and iniurious
to the blud of Chriſt: yet notwithſtanding
al this, did not God ſuffer him to
ſincke down into the pitte of diſpeire, but
did rayſe him vp ageine by the operation
of his holy ſpirite. Vndoutedly this is a

rare exaumple, like vnto the which many
haue not ben ſeene in the church of God.
Therfore I would wiſh all ſuch as are called
to the teſtimony of the trewth, to beware
how grounding hereuppon, they do
tempt god in hope of the like fauour. Let
that hel and torment of conſcience which
they do here plainely ſee in this man terrify
thē likewiſe frō denying the trewth
            He was ſometime one of the chief miniſters
of the reformed church in Orleance,
and becauſe I knew him my ſelf and haue
hard him preach ther ſundry times, I was
the more willing at my frendes requeſt to
putte his booke into english, hoping that
all Chriſten men will reioyce as much at
his penitent conuerſion, as they haue cauſe
to be grieued at his reuolt. I doubt not but
there are that will ſcoffe at this matter and
ſaye that he can not be of a ſounde religion
that hath turned his coate ſo ofte. Of
what religion then are theſe our men, that
haue turned alwayes with the time? Let al
turners with tyme learne of this man to returne
a right. It may be that ſome ſeke to
shew now a more ſtedfaſtnes in error then
in deed they haue▪ to gaine therby the credite

of conſtancy. But alas, it can not be
called conſtancy to abyde in euil, to continew
in Idolatry, to ſtick faſt in ignorance.
This is obſtinacy. They shall neuer be accuſed
of wauering that come out of Babel
to dwell in Sion. If this poore man had abidden
ſtill in the waye of perdition renouncing
Chriſtes veritie, and betraying
of Chriſtians to Romiſh wolues, oh, what
a heauy damnatiō had he procured to him
ſelf: but God in his rich mercy hath better
prouided for this loſte sheepe. Let
all thoſe therefore which are touched in
harte with the care of gods trewth, and do
bewayle the ruinous decayes of Ieruſalem
iudge rightle hereof. To conclude we may
all ſee in this booke the liuely paterne of
a trewe remorſe, here may we ſee how Saul
doeth become Paul. VVhy should not
the teares and mourning of Peter argue
and declare the conuerſion of Peter? remember
what a worthi father of our time
(when he came to the Fyre to be brent)
did to his hand that had ſubſcribed to vntrewth.
The like maye wee hope of thys
man,Cranmer that when tyme shall ſerue, he vvill
make both hand and tongue, body & life,

yea and all that he hath to feele the ſmart
of that his deloyaulty. Therefore (good
Reader) be not haſty in condemning others,
but pray to God to ſtrengthen thy
ſelfe that thou mayeſt not fall, and if thou
doe fall that thou mayeſt ryſe agayne, to
the glorye of GOD, the edifying of hys
Church, and thyne owne ſaluation.
            AMEN.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            ¶Hugh Suriaus fall and penitent
Submiſsion.
            THe church of Chriſte hath had
this cuſtome of all antiquitie, ye
the actes of Martyrs haue ben
faithfully ſet down in writing, &
namely their death, their confeſſion of
fayth, their diſputing & refutation of the
doctrine of the aduerſaries. The reading
of ſuch hiſtories did ſerue to confirme the
faythfull in the faith, & to ſtirre them vp
to the imitacion of the cōſtancy & vertue
of thoſe perſonages. As we reade ye ſame
to haue ben obſerued by S. Luke in the
narration of S. Stephens death: & of all
the other perſecutions done ſens againſt
the church, the ſelfe ſame diligence hath
ben followed euen till our time: wherin
our Lorde hath had worthy members a
great nūbre that haue for his name ſake
ſuffered death, & namely in our countrey
of, Fraunce, firſt by forme & order of iuſtice,
and by ſentence of the Iudge to the

                  ••
               ath of fyre the moſt cruell & horrible yt
may be deuiſed, then afterward by murders
committed without controlement, &
laſt of al by ye vnnatural ſlaughters lately

executed through out ye whole Realm,
wherof the trwe & faithful hiſtories ſhal
in tyme to come beare witneſſe, ſignifying
to poſteritie how God hauing at the
firſt but cropt as it wer certain firſt fruts
of his field, thought good now in theſe later
dayes to make a great and plentifull
harueſt of his choſen. In lyke caſe if ther
haue ben any treaſon, reuolt, or notable
breach of fayth committed by any one during
the tyme of thoſe perſecutions, men
haue not ben ſlacke in noting ſuch accidences,
to ſerue for an admonition to the
faythful to conſider with them ſelues and
to tremble at the dreadfull iudgements
of God, eſpecially when thoſe that committe
ſuch faults be publike perſons, and
in ſome reſpect notable. The fal of whom
as it is a proofe of a horrible vengeāce of
God through the which they haue ben abandoned,
ſo is it a very violent temptacion
to ſhake the weake conſciences and
therewithall to draw a great multitude
to the ſame perdition. And no doubt the
rage of the cruell enemies doth not geue
ſo dangerous a woūd to ye flock of Chriſt,
as doth ſuch treachery and infidelitie.

Moreouer if ther haue ben ani one of the
church, that hath by gods grace preuēted
the hands of the murderers that he hath
not fallen into them, or if ther haue ben
any apprehended and yet eſcaped thens
without hauing eyther ſuffered or committed
any euil, the fauour of god in that
his deliuerance ought not to be buried in
ſilēce, but to be publiſhed to aſſure others
to put their confidence in him that can
drawe fourth his owne out of all perills,
as much as he knowes to be expediēt for
him ſo to doe. Of theſe thrée ſortes, there
are at this day many examples in the extreame
calamity of the preſent perſecution
full of crueltie and falſehood, wherof
in tyme the trewth ſhall be knowen &
publiſhed. But as for me, I hauing ben
of that miſerable and peſtilent ſecte thorough
my fall & offenciue denyall, wherin
I laye wallowing a long tyme: now
after that God hath geuen me grace to
come again to my right witts, I will my
ſelfe be the hiſtoriographer of the deteſtable
cryme that I haue committed, deſcribing
it according to the trewth and as
it happened: then afterward noting the

circumſtances, I wil aſſaye to make confeſſion
of the enormitie and grieuouſnes
therof as much as in me ſhal be poſſible.
Finally whē ye ſhal ſet before your eyes
this writing (Dearly beloued brethren
and readers of this pitifull diſcourſe) I
beſéeche you that through chriſtian compaſſion
ye doe helpe me to féele to the
quicke ſuch an offence, and, in as muche
as good may be drawen from euill, that
ye doe take inſtruction by my example.
            I was then abyding in Fraunce in a
ſmall congregation not paſſing a dayes
iourney from Paris, wher being aduertyſed
of the ſlaughter within the ſaid citie.
I tooke deliberation foure dayes after to
ſaue my ſelfe out of the Realme. And caſting
with my ſelf the difficulties & dangers
that ther ſhould be to paſſe, I determined
after a ſort to counterfet ye papiſt,
by the badge that was worn in the hatts,
by geſture & countenaunce as much as I
ſhould ſee my ſelfe 
                  ••
               ged therunto by neceſſitie.
The morow after being come to
the next town,The white Cr
                     •
                  ſſe. I was demaunded who I
was, wherwith finding my ſelf wonderfully
amaſed, I had not the memory to

ſpeake that which before I had premeditated,
but making an anſwere without
head or foote, they had me in ſuſpicion: &
the Iudge examyning me by othe what I
was, forthwith without ought diſguiſing
I fréely cōfeſſed the whole. By ye meanes
wherof being clapt in priſon, I toke this
reſolution to ſuffer any kinde of death ye
they ſhold lay vppon me, and I felt ſome
peace & reſt in my conſcience if I did defend
the trewth of the Goſpell wherof I
was moſt aſſured. Although I had euen
than my head buſyed with certeyne cogitacions
touching the perſonall ſucceſſion
of the Romiſh church, wherof I then diſputed
againſt ſome that wer ther preſēt,
& the trewth had alwaies the victorie againſt
falſehod. But this boldnes of mine
was but a puffe that did not cōtinew lōg.
For being all alone I began to diſcourſe
with my ſelf touching the grieuouſnes of
the perſecution then befallen, & I founde
the ſame to be farre beyond all the former.
For I alwayes toke the calamities
of the tyme paſt to be but viſitations and
roddes wherwithall God did purge his
church, and had euer iudged them to bée

aſſured marks of ye children of God. But
becauſe that in this laſt ther did appeare
as it were a ruyne and vtter diſtruction
of the whole without any appearance or
hope of reſtabliſhment, I began to valew
it at none other rate then a playne teſtimony
of gods wrath and indignation, as
if he had by this meanes declared, that he
did deteſt and condemne ye profeſſion and
exercyſe of our Religion, for that he had
ſo often turned againe to ſtryke vs, yea &
finally ſo to ouerthrow vs, as if he were
willing wholly to deſtroy and roote out
this cōgregation, & fauour that of Rome.
By this meanes I began to giue ſtrēgth
to this temptation of Sathan, and the
fleſh deſyring to ſaue it ſelf from the preſent
danger got the vpper hand. In ſo
much that I did ſtraight way conclude
with my ſelfe to acknowledge and auow
the church of Rome for the trew church,
wherinto I did deſire to be receued. The
which I did declare the ſame daye to the
Iudge, imagening that without delay I
ſhould be ſet at lybertie, which being obtayned
I wold withdraw my ſelfe with
all ſpéede out of the Realme, to kéepe me

ſolitary, and to apply my ſelfe to do what
I could to paſſe away ye reſt of my tyme.
In the ſame priſon ther were others of ye
Religion, vnto whom I gaue counſell
to do the lyke, alleging to them that the
Romiſh church was the auncient church
whens we wer departed, and wherunto
we ought to returne, with many other deuiſes
tending to the ſame end. Who conſenting
to my curſed allurements & ſuggeſtions
made the ſame proteſtations to
the Iudge, and not long after they were
deliuered, yet not content with yt which
I had done and ſayde, to ſhew that I did
it with hart and good will, I wrote to the
chief of my congregation, and farther, to
them of myne owne famyly, exhorting
them to betake them ſelues to popery, &
to be aſſiſtant at the ſeruice there, as I
for my parte minded to be. And to the
ende that this Metamorphoſis or change
happened in my perſon, ſhould not aſtoniſh
them, I declared that I had reaſons
to moue me therunto, wherof ſome I did
ſet down in writing, as well in the ſaid
letters, as in a certayn ſcrole that I preſented
to the Iudge. Now thought I verely

that betwixt that and the morrow
after, I ſhould be let out of priſon to goe
wher I would, but it happened quite otherwiſe.
For the Iudge hauing geuen
intelligence how I was taken, and of the
great and manifeſt ſignes of my conuerſion
and returne to the catholike church
(as they terme it) kept me vntil he hard
newes frō the Court, whens he receiued
letters of the King, who gaue him commaundement
to ſend me to him to be an
inſtrumēt & to ſerue to perſwade ye King
of Nauarra and the prince of Conde to
renounce the religion wherein they had
ben brought vp, with a proteſtation to
follow the faith and doctrine of Rome,
and to acknowledge the Pope for head.
This newes being brought, I was very
ſory when I ſawe my ſelfe fruſtrate of
myne intent, knowing that I muſte
now play a part on the greateſt ſtage in
all Fraunce, to confeſſe and defend infinite
things which I had heretofore by
word of mouth and writing condemned,
yea and did yet condemne in my hart.
Notwithſtanding hauing already made
the firſt breach into my cōſcience, by the

which Sathan had made his entrey, I
left him the full & peaceable poſſeſſion of
ye whole, minding now to doe al thinges
wholy to the lyking of men, laying aſyde
the reuerence of God, and the reſpect of
his glory.
            Being brought to Paris and preſented
before the King, I declared the ſelfe
ſame aboueſayd, auowing the Romiſh
church to be the trew church, and ſundry
dayes together in the preſence of ye king
of Nauarra and the prince of Conde I
maynteyned ye ſame cauſe agreing with
the Sorboniſts in that point principally,
and refelling that which ſome of the
king of Nauarra his officers (men fearing
God) did alledge to the contrarie,
that the Reformed church was the trew
church, and their religion the trew religion.
Furthermore touching the controuerſies
and points of doctrine commenly
debated, in ſome I ſpake lewdly and againſt
myne owne conſcience, euen as
they are taught in popery: of other ſome,
(as principally of ye Maſſe, the oblation,
and the preſence of Chriſts body) I made
ſome doubt and contradiction, being vrged

therto by the force of the trewth: but
immediatly I let go and abandoned all yt
euer I had truely ſpoken & by a falſe colluſion
I ſuffered them to cōclude as they
wold them ſelues, hauing beſide that ſerued
therin ageinſt myne owne cōſcience,
for a miſerable inſtrument to lead thoſe
young Princes to goe to Maſſe, & by that
means to worſhip a falſe God, & to tread
vnder their féete ye only ſacrifice of Chriſt
his death. And ſithens I haue fallen in
hand with this conference and diſputation,
I wil giue you good aduertiſement of
an edict publiſhed in the name of ye king
of Nauarra, for that they haue not bene
contented ther to Chronycle my name &
calling, but they haue followed therin ye
cuſtome of the Papiſts, who can not ſimply
recyte that which is happened without
ſome addition. For there it is ſayed
that ther were certeyne other miniſters
of the Citie of Orleance, that dyd ioyntly
confeſſe with me them ſelues to be
vanquiſhed by the force of the Popiſhe
Doctors argumentes, in ſo muche that
they ſhould renounce and forſake the
doctrine before tyme preached to the reformed

Churches in Fraunce. Which
I doe teſtify and maynteyne to you to be
falſe: for there was neuer any but my
ſelf. The other Miniſters of the ſayd congregation
were better aſſiſted of God,
then to haue committed ſuch an offence.
Being then theſe twoo Princes through
my falſe perſwaſions drawen in a ſhort
ſpace to the profeſſion of Poperye, with
the ſubmiſſions to the ſame required, I
abode a certeine tyme at Paris, during the
which I was lead vp and downe (as a
byrde to ye call) to certeyne noble Ladyes
and Gentlewomen of the religion, who
not long before had hard me preache the
word of God, or els had knowen mée in
particuler communication to haue exhorted
thē to perſeuer in the doctryne of the
goſpel, who were al maruelouſly abaſhed
to ſée me thus tranſformed into an other
ſhape, & they could not be perſwaded that
in that which they vnderſtoode of mée. I
ſpake as I thought. Neuertheleſſe I tolde
them all indifferently that I ſpake euen
as I did beléeue in my hart touching the
opinion ſo ſtifly maynteyned of me, that
the Romiſh Church was the Catholyke

Church beſide other poyntes ye do depend
therof. And not cōtent to ſerue their turn
at all aſſayes that did thus employe mée
here and there. I went of myne owne accord
to diuers of myne acquayntance or
els to thoſe that them ſelues did ſéeke me
or by fortune mette with mée: to whom
generally I gaue this counſel to acknowledge
this Church, albeit that I did graūt
her to be full of ſuperſtitions and errors
ſo that ſhée had more then néede of a reformation:
with ſundry ſuch other counſelles
of falſe Nicodemites and Temporizers
or (to ſpeake vprightly) of ypocrits
and enemyes to God by outward profeſſion.
And when I founde any diſpleaſed
with them ſelues for the faute that they
had commited to their great grief, I dyd
by and by laye before them the foreſayde
reaſons lulling them a ſléepe therwithall
and laying Pillows vnder their elbows
as ſayeth the Prophet Ezechiel. Namely
I went one day of purpoſe to a certeyne
good and vertuous Lady fearing god, and
to her daughter boothe nobly deſcended.
To conclude, I left no body with whō I
might talke familiarly yt I did not corrupt

wt this pernicious counſell: ſaying
that albeit the body of the Lord be not in
that which is ſhewed at ye maſſe, yet notwithſtanding
yt on might lawfully knele
downe to it, becauſe there is a certeyne
remnant and trace of the trewe Sacrament
of that precious body: and that in
beholding ye Sacrament (although it differ
farre from the inſtitution of Chriſt, &
the adminiſtratiō of the auncient church)
it ſuffiſeth to lift vp our hatts to heauen,
in which place only is the trewe liuing
body where our Lord 
                  •
               deth reigne & ſitteth
at the right hand of God his father.
Thus in this place did I moderate al abſurdities,
and went about to playſter this
old ruinous buylding of popery, to make
there appeare a certeine likelyhoode of a
goodly tabernacle. And ſo I did entyce ageinſt
my conſcience al thoſe that I could
to goe to maſſe the very heape of all Idolatry
and renouncing of Ieſus Chriſt; yea
& I wrote letters to Madame de Buillon
at Sodan by the commaundement of the
Duke Montpenſier her father to drawe
her to the ſame opinion: making her a
ſorowfull and ſimple recompence▪ for the

curtiſy & liberality receiued at hir hands
as wel by me as by diuers others during
ye troubles of the yeare of our Lord God
1568. And albeit that I felt in my ſelfe
the condemnation of myne owne conſcience,
for the poynts now a dayes in controuerſie,
and that no reaſons could content
me to approue the doctrine ceremonyes
and exerciſe of the popiſh religion,
and, 
                  〈◊…〉
                that diuers perſons had ben
ſo bolde to reprooue me of my faultes, to
repreſent the iudgements of God before
myne eyes, to cyte me before the tribunall
ſeate of Ieſus Chriſt where all men
muſt appeare: yet notwithſtāding I was
therwith 
                  〈◊◊…〉
                ſléepe, that I mynded
not to make my abode any wher but
at Paris: now and then ther came vppon
me a certeyne grief of mynd to thinke of
that which was paſt with ye remēbraūce
of the inuocation and ſeruice of God of
the pure adminiſtratiō of the ſacraments
the preachyng of the word, and diligent
practiſe of diſcipline, and I made compariſon
therof with the life, cōuerſation and
exercyſe of the Prieſts and Monkes. But
I was ſo wholy in the poſſeſſion of the

Prince of this world, that I ſmothered
vp this fyre which vppon euery occaſion
did thus enkindle within me, laying before
my ſelf this reaſon emongſt others,
that they of the Church were ſo offended
at this acte of myne, that they would neuer
receiue me ageyne into their ſociety.
And if I had ben let alone in ſome priuate
eſtate wher I might haue found my
ſelf occupied, there is no doubte but I had
abode euen til this houre moyling in that
filth. For after ye firſt heat of deſire (wher
with I had ben thruſt forward to yéelde
my ſelfe to popery) was ſome thing cooled,
I began fourthwith to féele this inward
warre within my ſelfe, eſpecially
when I was employed towards any body
to bring him home ageyne (as they
terme it): But if I had remained a while
by my ſelfe, I did by little and little kill
and weare awaye that worme of my cō
               ſcience.
Wherfore the very way and vndoubted
means to make me bethink my
ſelf was when the ſaid Duke Montpenſier
did ſend me the tewſday the fourth
of Nouembre with Maldonat a Ieſuite
to go to Sedan to bring his daughter Madam

de Buillon, home to the obedience of
of the Pope. For abiding with a certeine
Gentleman on the borders of ye Realme,
whileſt Maldonat was a diſputing at
Sedan, I receiued letters aduertiſements
and aduiſe of my frindes that I ſhoulde
withdrawe my ſelfe towards them, haue
an eye to myne owne ſafegarde, and not
continewe held in that maner within the
pawes of Sathan: As for them they dyd
offer me all the meanes and aſſiſtaunce
they could poſſibly to drawe mée oute of
that curſed ſrinking puddle wherein I
was be myred. Then began I more liuely
to wake out of this dead ſléepe and this
lethargie of my ſens, I began to bewayle
the holy houſe of my father with the chriſtian
entertaynement that his ſeruants
doo receiue ther, too acknowledge my
wretchedneſſe and vyle ingratitude, in
that I had caſt of and abandoned that holy
and comfortable nouriſhment which I
my ſelfe ſometime had diſtributed to others.
Notwithſtanding, becauſe I had
left my wife and children in Fraunce, I
thought in néedefull to returne thither ageyne
to ſée whether I could get them

thence, and chiefly for that I had left my
wife extreame ſicke. Therefore tarying
til Maldonat were come ageyne, I reſolued
to putte this deliberation in execution.
But he being returned gaue me to vnderſtand
that the Earle of Retz had ſent
for him & me with him to come to Mets.
Which was to mée a grieuous delaye
wherby my enterpriſe was ſtayed. Thither
muſt I go then to turne ye pore faithfull
Chriſtians oute of the right waye to
ſaluatiō. To the which place being come
I ſpake once opēly as I was cōmaunded
to declare to thē (as I had done els wher)
that the Romiſh Church was that wherin
we ought to ſetlte our ſelues & abyde.
The reſt of the tyme that we were there
I harkened to the Sermons of the Ieſuite
who labored hard to prooue the ſacrifyſe
of the Maſſe and Purgatory, to learne if
he taught any new thing. I hard another
alſo named Maurus who preached of the
inuocation of Saintes and worſhipping
of Images. But I was ſo farre of frō being
brought to beléeue any whit of theſe
thinges for oughte that they did ſaye, that
cleane contrary I was farther of then euer:

becauſe I did clearely perceyue
with what violence and boldnes they did
wreſt and falſefy the ſcriptures, as by
Gods grace, I ſhall make knowen heareafter,
hauing to that ende gathered theyr
proofes and allegations by note in my
memory. Now the fryday being ye xix. of
December, the Earle being come home
from a Iourney that hée had made, gaue
vs to vnderſtand that we muſt depart the
morrow after, which was the houre that
I deſired aboue al thinges, for the cauſes
alleged. But the ſame day a little before
ye gates were ſhut, letters were broughte
me whereby I was aduertyſed that my
wyfe & children were out of the Realme,
that I ſhould looke to my ſelf and beware
howe I did returne thither where I had
nothing to doe. Hereuppon I conſidered
that it was not without the ſinguler prouidence
of God that ſuch aduertiſement
was come euen as I would wiſhe, and
that I ought not to let ſlippe ſuch an occaſion.
Therfore after I had prayed to God
at night for the danger that was in ſuche
an enterpriſe, ye morrow after accordyng
to the meanes that God had offered mée

vppon the ſodayne, I ſet forth about nine
of the clocke in the morning without being
knowen, ſtayed or caught ageyne, albeit
there were men ſent after mée. By
this meanes GOD hauing drawen mée
thenſe hath in the end conducted me into
this citie making an end of the ouerlong
abode which I made in the middeſt of
Idolatry.Heidelberg.
            
            Behold my brethren the tragicall and
miſerable diſcourſe of my fall, treachery,
and rebellion ageynſt my God, wherein
there are ſo many circumſtances yt make
it offenſiue and deteſtable, that whē they
are now preſented before myne eyes, I
doe not thinke all my whole lyfe ſufficient
to acknowledge and comprehend the
ſame as it ought to bée. There is not any
one at this daye among ſo many thouſands
ye doe ageynſt their conſcience honor
to that Idole, but he ought to confeſſe
that he doeth offend god horribly in diſhonoring
hym by that means, and in worſhipping
the creature in ſteade of the
creator. And although there bée none
but maye allege weakeneſſe and infirmitye
in thys acte, (and in déede it is not

likely but that many doe beléeue in their
hart that which they are compelled to doo
outwardly) yet notwithſtanding yt their
allegatiō can not ſerue for an excuſe, but
rather for their condemnation & reproch,
becauſe it is to ſette God behind himſelf,
to loue more this tranſſitory life than the
glory of God, it is to feare thoſe that can
kill the body, and not him that can caſte
both body and ſoule into euerlaſting fire.
To cōclude, it is plainly to renounce Ieſus
Chriſt before that ouerthwart & baſtard
generation. What may one ſaye of
mée then, who haue not only ben of the
Church of God, a partaker of thoſe gracious
bleſſings that are there diſtributed,
but alſo haue therin borne the moſt honorable
rancke, preaching the goſpell there
more then ten yeare, that haue ben of on
of the goodlieſt congregatiōs of al Fraūce,
the which within this foure or fiue yeare
hath not ceaſed to furniſh to God an innumerable
multitude of witneſſes, by ye
murders & bluddy flaughters ſo often cō
               mitted
wherof the inhabytants haue yet
their handes died and their hartes ſwilled
with innocent blud? Alas what imaginations

ſhould now enter into ye minds
of thoſe poore wretches yt yet remayne,
whē they ſhal hear of this yt I haue done?
Is it not as if I did condemne ye cauſe for
yt which ſo many godly men haue ſuffered?
what a trouble of conſcience haue I
putte into the hartes of thoſe yt did before
time cōfort them ſelues vppon ye death of
their Parentes and frinds prayſing god,
who had done them this honour to ſuffer
for his name? Now are they grieuouſly
tempted to miſtruſt the vprightneſſe of
the cauſe, becauſe they can not bée reſolued
on the opiniō that men ought to haue
of the honorable death that ſo many godly
Martyrs haue abiden through the crueltie
of Antichriſt & his Suppoſts. Héere
behold an ineſtimable iniury done to the
dead (of whom the memory ought to be
bleſſed for euer) to the liuing, & to Chriſt
him ſelf for whoſe treuth they haue ſhead
their blud. And if I had long abidden empriſonment,
honger, darkenes and rough
handeling, & that to conclude this frayle
fleſh ouerwhelmed with ſo many miſeries,
had made the ſpirit to yelde & ſtoupe
to ſuch perſecution, it might wel haue ſauered

of ſome humane fraylty, to haue
moued compaſſion thereof. But I at the
very firſt rumour of the ſlaughter reſolued
to ſaue this myſerable lyfe to diſſemble
yea & to renounce the treuth. Trew it
is yt not long before my minde was ſomething
diſquieted touching the perſonall
ſucceſſion of the Church. In ſo much that
I ſtode in doubte whether it were not a
dangerous matter, to depart frō ye church
of Rome in the which I founde this ſucceſſion.
Neuertheleſſe this is the trewth,
that as ſone as I had intelligence of that
which was bruted, the feare of death, the
loue of this lyfe and commodities therof
ſeruing their turne of this my trouble of
mind, cauſed me to yeld more force thervnto
then the thing required: Inſomuch
that I was cleane out of taſt with that
doctryne in generall, which for al that, I
neither did nor could doubt of. But I loſt
all will and inclination to confeſſe and
maynteine the ſame: And albeit that I
had rather haue eſcaped out of ye Realme
(as in déede I had prepared my ſelfe ther
vnto) thā to haue ſtayed ther any longer,
& yt of myne own méere diſpoſition without

any maner of cōpulſion, I had neuer
the affection to bend my ſelfe againſt the
doctryne: Yet notwithſtanding I was
vtterly diſcouraged to take in hande the
defence of the ſame, & I rather tooke this
reſolution, to doe what ſoeuer was offered
me at the inſtant to cleare me of al
ſuſpectiō euery wher wher I ſhuld paſſe.
So the great and righteous Iudge did
not fayle on his part to handle me thereafter.
For hauing ben ſo many yeares
together taught by him the nature of the
Goſpell of his ſonne, which is called the
word of the croſſe, it had ben my part,
to haue ben ye more and more aſſured of
my vocation, and of the trewth of his
Church, becauſe I ſawe the croſſe continew
ſtill, and the perſecutions to grow
dayly more violent. But perceyuing
the affliction to excéede the meaſure that
I would haue preſcribed to GOD, I
fell to doubte, not of the doctryne in it
ſelfe, but of the Church in the reſpect of
the perſonall ſucceſſion. For this cauſe
GOD did iuſtly deliuer me to the deſyer
of myne owne harte, to committe
a faulte not onely foule and deteſtable,

but alſo cleane ſounding ageynſt reaſon
and mans iudgement: that is to ſay: to
immagine I had ſome reaſon not to confeſſe
a trewth whereof I was fully perſwaded.
Others that fal by infirmity doe
acknowledge that they doe ageynſt that
they ought to do, in inpugning & deniyng
a knowen and vndoubted trewth, but I
toke it to be a pointe requiſite in my ſelf
to ſpeake ageynſt mine owne conſcience,
and ageinſt ye aſſured knowledge of mine
owne harte. Thus in the iudgement of
God thoſe that thinke them ſelues wyſe
are prooued fooles: neither did god in this
beginning ſuffer mée to ſcape awaye ſo
lightly, but ſithens I would néedes dally
with him, thinking that I ſhould be eaſely
ſet at liberty, he payed me the iuſt reward
of my firſt leudnes and treachery,
puniſhing ye former offenſe by later enormities
as ye haue vnderſtoode. The firſt
prancke of my deloyaulty was that I did
ſhewe my ſelfe not a hyreling that doeth
Abandon hys charge when hée ſéeth the
Woulphe come, but I was my ſelfe a
Woulphe yea & a rauening Woulphe,
ſcatering and diſſipating mine own propre

flock. For I wrote immediatly to the
principalls of that aſſembly where I had
ben, admoniſhing them to acknowledge,
& follow the church of Rome: I dyd the
lyke to myne owne famyly which I had
before inſtructed in the feare of God: and
my little children conſecrated to Ieſus
Chriſt, were by this meanes plonged in
the popiſh filthy polutions, to proſtrate
them ſelues before the Idole of Idoles.
Being thus foundred in this firſt quagmyre,
I ceaſed not to wade from euill to
worſſe: and after I had betrayed myne
owne flocke, myne owne fleſh and bones,
and the little young imps that God had
geuen me, no maruell, if I played ſo lamentable
parts towards others. Neyther
then did this falſe dealing of myne kéepe
it ſelfe within theſe bounds. For I was
brought to Paris to be tyed as a carthorſe
to the Charet wher Sathan ſate in triumph
ageinſt the mēbers of Ieſu Chriſt
bringing them after him conquered and
captiues. Theſe two young princes buds
of the flower de Luce royall, vertuouſly
and faythfully inſtructed in the doctrine
of the trewth, conſecrated to the glory of

God, called to be nurces of the Church, of
whome ſhe might one day hope for ſome
comfort & perfection, wer by me diuerted
from the trew reformed Church, brought
(as touching their perſōs) to go to Maſſe,
and conſequently to ſet vp ageyne & reſtabliſh
that curſed Idolatry within the places
and lymits of their dominion & ſeigneury.
To be ſhort, they were by me deliuered
vp as it wer, to the tyrannical clutches
& grypes of Antichriſt, to ſweare obedience
to him, and to make war ageinſt
the children of God. For although they
had great occaſions to ſhrink: conſidering
the murders that they ſawe committed,
the practiſes that wer vſed to terrefy thē:
and although that the brute was already
ſpread that they went to Maſſe, yet had
they continewed pure and conſtant vntil
my arriuall. Wherfore ther is no doubt,
but that my tongue trayterous & vntrew
to my God did more preuayle with them,
then all the threates, dangers, and horrible
ſlaughters which they hard and ſawe
dayly before theyr eyes: whereof alſo, if
they be now wholly changed with a willing
mynde to perſecute the Goſpell,

(which God forbid) I am alas the principal
cauſe. If they do yt which they do ageynſt
their will, they may chiefly laye
the faute in me, for that payne and anguiſh
of mynde wherewith they be tormented.
            Touching this poynte be ye aduertyſed,
(ye that reade this) to praye to GOD
for thoſe perſonages, that it will pleaſe
him to take pytie vpon them, and when
he ſéeth good to repayre that ineſtimable
loſſe. In the meane ſeaſon, I was not
without remorſe and trouble in my conſcience,
ſéeinge the pytteous woorke
that was a building, whereof I was an
inſtrument, or rather ſeing the ruine and
ſubuerſion of the Churche, where I my
ſelfe gaue the greateſt blowes to ouerthrowe
it. And manye tymes there
came to my memory a verſe of a certeyn
poet alleadged by Tertulian: Vſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ad eòne
morj miſerum eſt? I felt my ſelfe mooued
with heauenly inſpirations to mainteyn
gods trewth. I dyd after a ſorte conſider
of the wounde that was made by my
meanes, ſome tymes the force of reaſon
and trewth did pricke me forewarde to

ſpeake againſt the doctors of Sorbona in
certeyne points: but the ſame vaniſhed away
immediatly, becauſe that I had already
paſſed furth to the chiefeſt difficultie,
hauing a vowed theirs for the trewe
Church. And certenly I remember that
being often preſſed with my ſelfe, & féeling
a kinde of conuiction in that I dyd
let paſſe ſo many falſe things ageinſt the
trewth, at night I prayed to God that he
would not ſuffer me to liue to the day folowing,
forſéeing that the morrow after
I ſhould yet be driuen to conſent and agrée
to many things which I thought and
knew to be falſe, but this was not a well
ordered prayer becauſe I ſhould rather
haue craued his ſpirit of ſtrength & magnanimitie
to ſuſteyne and defende that
which he had reuealed to me to be trewe,
& referre to him the iſſue and falling out
of the whole. Neyther was I hard of him,
but was ſtill abyding in ye middeſt of the
enemies of his poore afflicted Church, being
forced to heare the ſcoffes and ieſtes
that they did ſpewe out, laughing at the
preſent affliction, as dyd the Id
                  •
               means
when they reioyſed at the deſtruction of

               Ieruſalem. Thus went I cleane depriued
of all ſens & féeling to enure my ſelfe lyke
a brute, beaſt with this moſt miſcheuous
& accurſed haūt. The murderers haue killed
the bodies with their moſt cruel hād▪
but in the meane tyme the ſoules are eſcaped
and paſſed from trauel to reſt. But
I haue ben a murderer of ſoules ſubuerting
the fayth of many through my word,
and taking from their vnderſtanding the
iudgemēt & knowledge of the euill which
they went about to doe. And beſyde thoſe
that haue hard me ſpeak with myne own
propre mouth, there are infinite others yt
may haue read that which I had ſundry
tymes written touching the ſame, the copies
wherof were ſpread all abroade, amplyfied
with prety gloſes and additions,
wher I had not written playn enough to
the contenting of the papiſts, as I my ſelf
haue both ſéene and perceyued. And thoſe
that haue not read them might therof be
informed by others: In ſuch ſort that I
can not expreſſe nor cōprehend how great
a ruine and decay hath enſued of this my
fal▪ From al the which miſhaps one only
death had at one inſtant preſerued me if

I had abyden it after the example of ſo
many poore ſhéepe of Ieſus Chriſt layed
furth to the ſlaughter without mercie.
Such a death had béen precious before
God, honorable for me and myne, and
of a good ſauour to the congregation of
the Lorde. And yet for any thing that I
haue done I ſhall not eſcape death, which
ſhall come at the houre and in the maner
that God hath appoynted it after I haue
lyued in ignomyny in the ſight of all good
men. Wherfore when I conſider all the
circumſtances, I can hardlye pycke out
an example to be ballanced with this acte
of myne. Sainct Peter did renounce
Chriſt, but it was in his firſt weakneſſe
before he was yet fortyfied, whereas I
ought to haue ben a leader and a captain,
conſidering how long I had ben called to
the ſeruice of God. Saint Peter at the inſtant
withdrew him ſelfe and went out
to wéepe: as for me I was in a good way
to haue continewed all my lyfe long in
the botomleſſe pitte of perdition. Sainct
Paule did perſecute the Church of God,
but it was in ignoraunce and through an
vnaduiſed zeale, hauing not the fayth,

wheras I did put my helping hand to the
réedifying of that which before I had pulled
downe, declaring my ſelfe a ſinfull
tranſgreſſour. Iohn Marke left of his
labour and the voyage that he hadde in
hands, for the which Sainct Paul did not
thinke it reaſonable that hée ſhould be
afterwarde employed. Demas forſoke
his vocation for the loue and deſyre of
this preſent worlde. But none of theſe
did for all that perſecute the trewth as
I haue done. Touching the facte I finde
but one comparable to my ſelfe, and that
is he that layed his head together with ye
ſacryficers and tooke money of them to be
traye and make ſale of the innocent blud
as he confeſſed himſelf. Euen ſo did I acquainte
my ſelfe with ſuch kinde of people
the very ſucceſſors of the Pharyſeyes,
ſweare my ſelfe into the hands of the byſhop,
and receyued the hyre of vntrewth
as did Balaam, with a promiſe of a yearely
penſion in time to come.
            Briefly, I ſée my ſelf paynted out in that
which Sainct Peter ſayeth: that this
man hath ben the leader of thē that haue
taken Ieſus, who (ſayth hée) was

accompted in the numbre of vs, and had
receyued his parte of the adminiſtration
of his word▪ Sée here then (my brethren)
on part of thoſe enormities that I do note
in mi reuolt. I did not only giue occaſiō to
men to yelde to the infirmitie of ye fleſh,
but more then that I did fill the conſciences
of ye well affectioned with ſcrupelous
vexatiōs, of the weake with troubleſome
offences, to make them fall neuer to ryſe
ageyne: to the ypocrites I did ſerue for
a maſke and cloke to couer them ſelues,
in aſſiſting to thoſe things that they condemned:
to the open enemyes I gaue occaſion
to boaſt and glorify them ſelues in
exercyſing cruelty ageynſt the members
of Ieſu Chriſt, and to confirme thē ſelues
in an 
                  〈◊◊〉
                they haue, yt they doe
God good ſe
                  •••…
               ce, that they aduaunce hys
honor, that they mayneteyne the trewe
Church when they kill and murder the
innocent. I haue offended God almighty,
condemned the cauſe of his ſonne Chriſt,
reſiſted the holy ghoſt, made ſorowful the
Aungels of heauē, ben a ſtumbling block
to the Church in earth, boldened and hardened
ye wicked in their fury, defiled my

mouth with blaſphemy, which was before
honored with preaching of the Goſpel.
Sainct Cyprian excuſing him ſelf for
yt he had ſéemed to haue ſomewhat lightlye
eſtabliſhed Aurelius reader in the
Church, giueth a good reaſon, that it was
very méete & ſéemely ye the mouth which
had confeſſed Chriſt in time of perſecution,
ſhould be employed to reade his word
in the Church. Contrariwiſe I by myne
infidelity haue ſtopped mine own mouth
that I might not hereafter ſpeake in the
holy aſſemblyes▪ I beſéech you (brethren)
that euery one of you doe adde what yée
can to this that I haue ſayed: which is
not hard to doe in ſo 
                  〈◊…〉
                a caſe. And
all you that maye any wayes make mée
vnderſtand it, ſpare me 
                  〈◊…〉
                to pulle mee
downe according to the deſert of ſo haynous
a 
                  〈◊…〉
               : ſpurne at the féete yt ſalte
that hath loſt his ſauor, ſee how iuſtly my
candleſtick is taken from his place. Alas
I haue good cauſe to tremble at yt which
our Lord hath denounced, that at ye great
day he will be aſhamed of thoſe, that are
aſhamed of him & his word before men.
Let my exaumple ſerue you for a glaſſe,

and haue a dilygent eye to your ſelues,
you that haue abode vpright till this preſent,
ſée that you kéepe preciouſly that ſo
ſinguler a benefite that God hath ſo carefully
kept for you: ſuffer not that vncorruptible
crowne to bée taken from you,
but conſtantly finiſh your courſe, knowing
that he that contineweth to the ende
ſhall be ſaued. And you alas that are the
greateſt number, who eyther by myne
exaumple are ſlipte out of the way or by
myne occaſion confirmed in your reuolt,
take héed the Deuil doe not bewitch you,
to make you fynde that ſwéete which is
bitter, to call lighte darkenes and darknes
light: bu kéepe the ſéede of the feare
of God which is yet remayning in your
harts, nurriſh and cheriſh it as a languiſhing
fyre, wayting the meanes to eſcape
out of the captiuity more griouous then
that of Egipt, and vſing the ſame when..
God ſhal offer them vnto you▪ Eſpecially
your grace Syr, that haue receyued
thys good and holye inſtruction from
your youth in the trewe knowledge of
GOD.
            Remember the fayth that was in your

mother and Grandmother Quéenes of
Nauarra. And as Sainct Paule doeth by
ſuche exaumples exhort his Timothe, ſo
thinke the ſame to apperteyne to you, to
the end that you may be as well heyre to
the fayth of thoſe holy Ladyes, as you
haue ſuccéeded them in the Realme. And
pardon mée the iniury that I haue done
to you: humbly beſéeching you in the
name of GOD that as I haue ben a
peſtilent inſtrument to peruert you, ſo
nowe my exaumple may ſerue to conuert
you to the Lord. You alſo moſte
noble Prince, be myndfull of the zeale,
godlines, and conſtancy in trewe religion
whereof you haue ſéene the liuely
paterns of your late (of worthy memory)
Grandmother, Father and mother: I
haue ſerued you in ſteade of a wicked
ſpirite and euill counſeler, but lette not
that which was ſayed in tyme of force
and violence, beare ſo much ſway and
authoritye wyth you, that for the ſame
you ſhould forgette the holye inſtructions
which haue ben gyuen yow by
aduiſed deliberation many years before.

Compare the preſente eſtate whereunto
you be now brought receyuing no comfort
or edificatiō at al of that which your
Amner doeth read or ſing before you in
his Porteſſe or Maſſebooke, with ye when
you were preſent at the holy exhortatiōs
and enterpreting of Gods word, where
you your ſelf did help to ſing prayſes vnto
his name. And for as muche as manye
may be kepte back in this reuolt through
the reaſons yt they then vnderſtood of mée
at ſundry tymes and in ſundry places, or
els through certeyne writings that haue
ben ſcattered abroad, touching the trewe
Church, and by what markes ſhe oughte
to be diſcerned, by the which at that time
I went aboute to conclude that ye Church
of Roome deſerued this title: I beſéech al
Chriſtian readers not to ſtay vppō thoſe
reaſons ſo vayne and of ſo ſmall importaunce.
Trew it is that ſee that time yea
and ſomewhat afore I had be ſhakē therwithall
as I haue confeſſed. But ſens, hauing
withdrawē mi ſelf into theſe parts,
I haue learned and found out that they
are but abuſes and fallacyes eaſye to bée
diſcouered and refuted, for the which (let

it be graunted that they had greater appearance
of ſound reaſons) yet can not
I be excuſed, but that I did leudly and villenouſly
to refuſe to witneſſe that treuth
with my mouth which I did verely beléeue
in my harte, & to exhort thoſe that I
could ageinſt my cōſciēce to go to Maſſe,
and to yéeld obediēce to Antichriſt. Now
as I doe by this preſent writing make open
confeſſion of my to too haynous enormity,
for a piece of amends and reparation
of the offence publikely geuen: ſo am
I determined (God willing) to write of
this matter of the Church to take away
all doubt and ſcruple from the wauering
cōſciences that be not yet fully reſolued,
for that they haue hard the ſayd reaſons.
To conclude, being now at full liberty to
ſtick boldly without feare to that Church
which in my harte I doe alowe of, I proteſt
before god to recognyſe and acknowledge
that for the trewe Church whiche
hath for the rule of her fayth ye holy ſcripture
of the old & newe Teſtament, the
olde conteyned in the lawe, Pſalms, and
Prophets (as our Lord him ſelf doeth deuide
it) the newe in the writinges of the

               Euangeliſtes and Apoſtles, anowyng
for trewe markes of the Churche not
the ſucceſſion of perſones and of menne,
but of the Doctryne of the Prophetes
and Apoſtles: Sithens it is manyfeſt
that we can not acknowledge any for
the houſe of GOD, but that which
is the piller and ſtaye of the treweth,
nor anye to bée of the folde of Chriſt,
but thoſe only that heare hys voyce and
follow him: and that ſhée is the trewe
Spouſe, that hath Chriſt for her Spouſe:
briefely that it is neceſſary to goe out of
that Church wherein one can not abyde
wythoute renouncyng of Ieſus
Chriſt, and to be ſhorte without loſſe
of bodye and Soule by diſhonoring and
offending of GOD.
            According whereunto I doe alſo embrace
the confeſſion of Fayth publiſhed
in the name of the reformed Churches
of Fraunce, acknowledging and auowing
the ſame to be a Chriſtian confeſſion
by the conformitye and agréement that
it hath with the holy Scripturs, and
ioyntly the Eccleſiaſtycall diſcyplyne
to bée the conducte and gouernement

of the people of GOD. Wyth lyke
aſſuraunce I holde and beléeue with
all my harte, and confeſſe as well by
mouth as by writyng, that thoſe which
for thys reformation haue a fewe yeares
ſence ſuffered death, eyther by order
of Iuſtyce, or by the late blouddy murders
more cruell then thoſe of the Gotes
or Vandales, are trewe and bleſſed
Martyrs of Ieſus Chriſt, dead for hys
name, and his holy trewth. And for the
commendation and prayſe of them, together
for their comfort and conſolation
that are yet liuing, women, children, parentes
and frindes, this ſentence of
Sainct Paule to the Theſſalonians maye
by good right be applyed: yée are made
followers of the congregacions of GOD
that are at Iudea in Ieſus Chriſt, becauſe
yée haue ſuffered the ſelfe ſame thynges
by them of your owne natyon as they
dyd by the Ievves. Who likewyſe haue
kylled the Lorde Ieſus and their owne
Prophetes, and haue banyſhed vs, they
pleaſe not GOD and are aduerſaries
to al men, not ſuffering vs to ſpeak to the

Gentils for their ſaluation: to the ende
that they may dayly heape vp their ſins,
for the wrath of god is come vppon them
to the vttermoſt.
            Wherfore O ye faithful paſtors of the
Chriſtian Church, Stewards of ye miſteries
of god, that hath giuen you the word
of reconciliation, to the end that ye maye
be Ambaſſadors for Chriſt, ye that ſometymes
haue taken me for your fellow in
the work of the Lord, continew in that
holy vocation, wayting for the rewarde
promiſed in that great day, wherin thoſe
that haue inſtructed many to righteouſnes
ſhall ſhyne lyke ſtars. God hath preſerued
the greateſt part of you whole and
ſound, ſo well, that ye haue not ben at all
apprehended, or els ye haue gotten out of
the enemyes handes, without any thing
done that might ſéeme vnworthy the conſcience
of a Chriſtian man. A fewe are
fallen and bent ageynſt the Goſpell, and
I miſerable wretch was the firſt in that
ſmall numbre. I haue darkned and defaced
the beuty and excellency of that heauenly
doctrine that I had my ſelfe ſometyme
preached. But ye know the aſſured

foundation wherō it is grounded. Accurſed
be he that ſhall announce any cōtrary
thing yea were he an Angell in heauen.
O ye happy and bleſſed of God, that haue
in your harts the teſtimony of an vnſpotted
conſcience, to haue walked in ſincerity
and playnnes: bleſſed that ſhal heare at
the later daye, enter into the ioye of thy
Lord, thow good and faythfull ſeruant, for
that thou haſt increaſed the talents committed
to thée, whereas I haue not onely
buried in the earth the talent that I had,
but haue employed the ſame in making
warre ageynſt the trewth. God graunt
you the grace to cōtinew and gyue a happy
ſucceſſe to your godly trauells. Aſſiſt
me with your prayers that the heauenly
father may receyue me now that I returne
to him after this horrible ſliding and
reuolt, and pardon me my ſo grieuous
enormity. O Lord almighty and wholy
wiſe, how eaſy is it for thée to entrappe
the crafty in their deceypte. O how thy
iudgements be iuſt and righteous.
            
               Who knoweſt ech one of all our works
               And ſeeſt what we doe
               
                  
To good, to pure, to cleane of harte
               Thou ſheweſt thy goodnes to.
            
            
               To thy beloued and electe
               Thy loue thow doeſt reſerue
               And thow doeſt vſe the wicked men
               As wicked men deſerue.
            
            Euen ſo haſt thou drawen out of the
bottome of my hart that which was ther
hyd, not ſuffering that I ſhould beguylé
the world any lenger. For hauing determined
to abandō my charge and to ſlipps
thens couertly for certeyne doubts and
difficulties that I had in my mynd, to
the end to continew as it were a neutre
touching thy outward profeſſiō: thou haſt
iuſtly caſt me of to myne owne ſens. By
that meanes gyuing more force to myne
owne illuſions, thē reuerēce to thy word.
I am fallen where I well deſerued. For
in ſteade of being but a forſaker of the
charge where thow haddeſt placed me,
I became a formall enemy, reproouing
and cōdemning it: of the other ſyde being
willing to authoryſe and alowe the vocation
of them that doe teache popiſh ſcyſmes

and errors, thow diddeſt cauſe me to
come ſo neare it, that I was driuen to be
better acquaynted with them then I deſyred.
Such was the puniſhment yt thou
diddeſt caſt vppon thy people in tymes
paſt: who when they wold not kéepe them
ſelues pure frō idolatry after long ſufferance,
thou diddeſt in the end deliuer thē
vp into thy enemyes hand, who brought
them into Babilon, where they were lothed
with the fight of falſe Gods.
            But the ſame did ſerue this people to
take theſe idoles in ſuch diſdayne and horror,
that they neuer fell into that faute
ageyne, after their returne into Ieruſalem.
Euen ſo my GOD graunt me this
grace, that the diſpleaſure & grief that I
haue of ſo greate a faute, doe engendre in
my ſoule ſuch a hate and deteſtation of
the euill that I haue committed, that I
may beſtowe my whole lyfe in lamenting
and bewayling the ſame, crauing
thy mercy, to the end that thou mayeſt
forgyue it me. Thou haſt brought me
meruelous lowe, puniſhing the pryde
wherwith I was fully infected, and the
conceyte that I had of my ſelf: as thou

art accuſtomed, to take from him that
hath nothing, euē that which he thinketh
to haue. To thée be all glory, and to me
confuſion of face. Notwithſtandinge
my God, who haſt put in my harte the
affectiō to acknowledge the danger of the
horrible and euerlaſting perditiō, where
into I did throw my ſelf hedlong, reſtore
me thy ſpirite that may comfort me, and
gyue me hope of mercy. And in this tyme
of extreame affliction, graunt me ye grace
to follow the exaumple of thy ſeruaunt
Moyſes who choſe rather to be afflicted
with thy people, then to enioye for a time
the pleaſures of ſinne, eſtéeming the reproch
of Chriſt to be greater ryches then
the treaſors of Egypte. Thy Church
is at this day ſtraungely oppreſſed and
threatned with an vtter and perpetuall
ruyne and deſtruction: but by thy ayde
and aſſiſtance I doe mind to accompany
her, and to drinke my parte of her afflictions,
praying thée to this ende O Lord,
to make me féele in what miſerable eſtate
they be that doe withdraw them ſelues
towards the enemyes of thy trewth
euen then when they thinke themſelues

moſt in thy fauour. Strengthen & maynteine
this deſyre in me to the end: that if
I be once more called to the profeſſion of
thy name, I doe abandon my ſelfe in ſacrifyce
for that godly quarrell as I am
bound. Take compaſſion of thy poore and
deſolate Church, and mollefy the ſtrypes
wherewithall at this day thou haſt ſtroken
her. Appeaſe thy wrath towards thy
people, for whom thy deare ſonne hath
ſhead his bloud, and with thy ſpirite fortify
thoſe that are at this day vnder the
Croſſe for thy ſacred trewth, giuing them
hope ageynſt all hope, and making
them inuincible ageynſt all
the aſſaults and violent
enforcements of thy
aduerſaryes.
Amen.
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            ¶Imprinted at London
by Thomas Eaſt, for
Lucas Hariſon,
and George Byſhop.
         
      
   