
      
         
            
            
            THE
PRACTISE OF
Chymicall, and Hermeticall
Phyſicke, for the preſeruation
of health. WRITTEN IN LATIN
By Ioſephus Querſitanus, Doctor of
Phyſicke. And Tranſlated into Engliſh, by Thomas
Timme, Miniſter.
            
               LONDON.
Printed by Thomas Creede,
1605.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, SIR
Charles Blunt, Earle of Deuonſhire, L. Mounti
                  •
               y, Lieutenant
general of Ireland, M. of the Ordinance, Gouernour
and Captaine General of the Towne and
Gariſon of Portſmouth, and the Ile of Portſey,
Knight of the noble Order of the Garter,
and one of his Maieſties moſt
honourable priuie Councell.
            
               I I may ſeeme (Right Honorable) an
admirable and new Paradox, that
Halchymie ſhould haue concurrence
and antiquitie with Theologie, the
one ſeeming meere Humane, and
the other Diuine. And yet Moſes,
that auncient Theologue, deſcribing
& expreſſing the moſt wonderfull Architecture
of this great world,Geneſis 1. 2. tels vs that the Spirit of God moued
vpon the water: which was an indigeſted Chaos or
maſſe created before by God, with confuſed Earth in
mixture: yet, by his Halchymicall Extraction, Seperation,
Sublimation, and Coniunction, ſo ordered and
conioyned againe, as they are manifeſtly ſeene a part
and ſundered: in Earth, Fyer included, (which is a
third Element) and Ayre, (a fourth) in Water, howbeit
inuiſibly. Of which foure Elements, two are fixed,
as earth and fire: and two volatil, as water & ayre.
            That ſpiritual Motion of the firſt mouer, God, hath
inſpired al the creatures of this vniuerſal world, with
that ſpirit of Life (which may truely be called the ſpirit
of the world) which naturally moueth,Eccle. 3. 19. and ſecretly
acteth in all creatures, giuing them exiſtence in three,
to wit, ſalt, ſulphure, and Mercury, in one Hupoſiaſis.
Mercurie congealing Sulphur, & ſulphur Mercurie,
neither of them being without their Salt, the chiefeſt
meane by whoſe helpe Nature bringeth forth al vege
               
                  •••
               ls,
Minerals, & Animals. So that of theſe 3. whatſoeuer

is in Nature, hath his original, & is compacted of
them, and ſo mingled with the 4. Elements, that they
make one body. Therefore this Diuine Halchymie,
through the operatiō of the ſpirit (without the which
the elemental & material Character, letter, and forme,
profiteth not) was the beginning of Time, & of Terreſtrial
exiſtence,
               Acts 17. 28. by which all things liue, moue, and haue
their being; conſiſting of body, ſoule, & ſpirit, whether
they be vegetals,1. Theſs. 5 23 minerals, or animals: reſeruing only
this difference,Heb. 4. 12. that the ſoules of men & angels are reaſonable
& immortal,Gen. 1. 16. according to the Image of God
himſelf,Wiſd. 11. 17 & the ſenſuals (as beaſts and ſuch like) not ſo.
            Moreouer, as the omnipotēt God, hath in the beginning,
by his diuine wiſedom, created the things of the
heuēs & earth, in weight, mūber, & meaſure, depēding
vpō moſt wonderfull proportion & harmony, to ſerue
the time which he hath appointed: ſo in the fulneſſe
& laſt period of time (which approacheth faſt on) the
4. Elements (whereof al creatures conſiſt) hauing in euery
of thē 2. other Elements, the one putrifying and
combuſtible, the other eternal & incombuſtible, as the
heauen, ſhall by Gods Halchymie be metamorphoſed
and changed. For the combuſtible hauing in them a
corrupt ſtinking feces, or droſſie matter, which maketh
thē ſubiect to corruption, ſhal in that great & generall
refining day,2. Pet. 3. 10. 13. be purged through fire: And then God
wil make new Heauens and a new Earth,Apoc. 21. 5. and bring all
things to a chriſtalline cleernes, & wil alſo make the 4.
Elements perfect, ſimple, & fixed in themſelues, that
al things may be reduced to a Quinteſſence of Eternitie.
            
            Thus (right Honourable) you ſee a Paradox, no Paradox,
& a Hieroglyphick plainly diſciphered. For Halchymie
tradeth not alone with tranſmutation of metals
(as ignorant vulgars thinke: which error hath made
them diſtaſte that noble Science) but ſhee hath alſo a
chyrurgical hand in the anatomizing of euery meſenteriall

veine of whole nature: Gods created handmaid,
to conceiue and bring forth his Creatures. For
it is proper to God alone to create ſomething of nothing:
but it is natures taske to forme that which he
hath created.
            VVherefore if the foole which hath in his hart ſaid,Pſal. 14. 1.
               There is no God, will put away the miſt of ignorance
and infidelitie, and behold the power and wiſedome
of God in his creatures, manifeſted more particularly,
and inwardly by the Art of Halchymie, imitating nature
in ſeperating from one ſubſtance, be it Vegetall,
Mimeral, or Animal, theſe three, Salt, Sulphur, and
Mercurie, ſhal by that miſtery, as in glaſſe, diſcerne the
holy and moſt glorious Trinitie, in the Vnitie of one
Hupoſtaſis Diuine.Rom. 1. 20. For the inuiſible things of God
(ſaith the Apoſtle) that is, his eternal power and God-head,Col. 2. 8.
are ſeene by the creation of the world, being
conſidered in his workes. This Phyloſophy therefore
(my good lord (is not of that kind which tendeth to
vanity and deceit, but rather to profit and to edification,
inducing firſt the knowledge of God, & ſecondly
the way to find out true medicine in his creatures.
            
               Plato ſaith, that Phyloſophy is the imitating of God,
ſo farforth as man is able: that we may knowe God
more and more, vntill we behold him face to face, in
the kingdome of heauen. So that the ſcope of Phyloſophy,
is to ſeeke to glorifie God in his wonderfull
workes: to teach a man how to liue wel, and to be charitably
affected in helping our neighbour.Gen 30. 37. This Philoſophy
natural,Iob. 9. & 26. & 28 &. 37. 38. 39. both ſpeculatiue & actiue, is not only
to be found in the volume of nature, but alſo in the ſacred
Scripture: as in Geneſis, in the booke of Iob, in the
Pſalmes, in Syrach, and in other places.
            In the knowledge of this Philoſophy, God made Salomon
to excel all the kings & Phyloſophers that were

in the world, whereby the Queene of Sheba was allured
to take a long Iourney, to make an experiment of
that wiſedome,2. Cron. 9. 2 whereof ſhe had heard ſo great fame,
and found it by effect farre greater.Mat 12 4.
            
            
               Anaxagoras a noble gentleman, but more noble in
wiſdome and vertue: Crates, Antiſthenes, with many others,
contemned the pleaſures of the world and gaue
thēſelues to the ſtudie of naturall Philoſophie. Philoſophers
haue brought more profit to the world then
did Ceres, who inuented the increaſe of corne & grain:
then did Bacchus, that found out the vſe of wines: then
did Hercules, which ridde the world of monſters. For
theſe things belong to the maintenance of bodily life
and pleaſure: but Philoſophy inſtructeth and nouriſh▪
the ſoule it ſelfe.
            This phyloſophy, together with the moſt rare, excellent
& healthful Phyſicke linked to true grounds; and
vpholden by daily experience, the very marow of true
medicine, & the quinteſſence of marow it ſelfe, I moſt
humbly preſent vnto your honours hands, as a Iewel
of priſe, to procure and preſerue health: which Ptolomeus
the ſonne of Antiochus valued at ſo high a rate,
that he gaue to Eraſiſtratus a noble Phyſitian, on hundred
talents for the curing of Antiochus.
            
            My labour herein, be it but as the apple, which Acontius
gaue to beautiful Cydippe to make knowne his
amorous affection: yet being tendred with no leſſe
good wil, in al humilitie I beſeech your honour to accept:
hartily wiſhing that as you are a principal piller
of this Common wealth, ſo it may be a meane to preſerue
you in health with long life, to your countries
good (as heretofore) and to Gods glorie.
            Thus crauing pardon for my bold conceit, I euer
reſolue to be,
            
               At your Lordſhips Honourable pleaſure and
command, right humbly T. Timme.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE FORE-SPEECH TO
the Reader.
            
               ALbeit the profeſsion of Theologie, ſtandeth
vpon the infallible foundation of
Gods Word, yet among Diuines, there
haue riſen diuers opinions and Sects. Among
the 
                  〈…〉
               
people) were Phariſies, Saduces, Eſſeis,
and Gauleniſts: beſide the falſe worſhip
of Turkes, Affricans, Tartars, Perſians, Cataians, and Indians.
Among Chriſtians, there are Papiſts and Proteſtants. The Papiſts,
which call themſelues Catholiques, haue diuided themſelues
into Dominicans, Franciſcans, Ieſuits, Seminaries, Seculars,
Scotiſts, Tomiſts, Occamiſts, &c. Among Proteſtants,
haue ſprung vp, Anabaptiſts, Familiſts, and Browniſts.
            
            As in Diuine, ſo in Humane Sciences ſpeculatiue, grounded
only vpon probable coniectures, there haue riſen alſo among
the Profeſſors thereof, diuers and contrary opinions, & Sectaries.
Among the Phyloſophers, were Stoicks, Peripaticks,
Platoniſts, Cinnicks, and Epicures. Among Phyſitians, there are
Empericks, Dogmaticks, Methodici, or Abbreuiators, and Paracelſians.
            
            The more part of theſe, plunged in humane error, & miſled
by carnal reſpects, as ſingularitie, enuie, pride and ambition,
hath diſſented from others of ſound and vpright iudgement.
But ſome of theſe ayming at perfection, and hauing
the aduantage of ſucceſsion and other helpes, haue by Tyme
procreated a plaine and naked truth. For this latter Age of
the world, abounding in all maner of Learning, & with men
of mature and pregnant wits, haue greatly inlarged, illuſtrated,

and refined all Artes and Sciences.
            If Therfore Endymions diligence, which firſt found out the
courſe of the Moone: If Amphions Muſical brayne, which
firſt conceiued Harmonie: If Appolonius Memphites, whoſe
induſtrie firſt deſcribed the Anatomie of mans body: If Chyron,
which firſt diſcerned the vertue of Hearbes, and taught
Aeſculapius Phyſicke: If Hermes Triſmegiſtus, the firſt that
reached & attained the Aethereal and Quinteſſentiall Phyſick:
If (I ſay) theſe, and many others, in their rare inuentions,
haue deſerued ſingular commendation: then Hypocrates, Galen,
Diſcorides, Ʋalerius Cordus, Paracelſus, learned Querſitanus,
& others moe, which haue added any thing to the enlarging
and perfecting of that noble Science of Phyſicke, are
to be imbraced and honoured, albeit they agree not together
in opinion for that they all by their labours haue ſought the
good of mankinde.Eccle. 38. 
               Honour therefore the Phyſitian (ſaith Ieſus
Syrach) for the Lord hath created him, and giuen men knowledge,
that he might be glorified in his wonderous workes.
            
            But ſome Readers of their works, not carrying this moderation,
like Midas, preferre Pan before Appollo, condemning
Chymicall Phyſicke, Halchymie, and the Spagericke
Art, as too curious, dangerous, and deſperate to bee dealt
withall. Alleaging alſo (which is too true) that many Halchymiſts
are notable Sophyſticators and deceiuers.
            The meaning of ſome, by theſe and ſuch like pretences,
is nothing elſe, but like bad and vnskilfull Herboriſts,
to ſowe Rocket, and to weede Endiue. Yet let ſuch carpers
know, that the abuſe of Art doth not abrogate the right
vſe thereof. For as if the tree be blaſted that bloſſomes, the
fault is in the winde, & not in the roote: ſo the fault is not to
be aſcribed to Arte, which is not in Arte, but the Artificer
which is vnworthy the name. And in very deed, it were to be
wiſhed, for common vtillities ſake, that all ſuch cozoners and
deceiuers, might be baniſhed out of Cittie and Countrey, and
from all ſocietie of honeſt men, which without lawfull allowance,
take vpon them ſuch profeſsing and practiſe: or at the
leaſt, that they might be reſtrayned, that through their leaudnes,
that art be not diſgraced, which the ancients did not let to

call Holy. And for my part, I doubt not, but that one Aomus
or other, wil recompence me with Balme, and ſay that I am
out of my element, in that I being a profeſſed Diuine, ſhould
take vpon me to meddle with Phyſicke, & to publiſh that in
the vulgar tongue, which was more fit to be in the Latine, as
I found it.
            To this I anſwer, that a generalitie in humane learning, beſeemeth
a Diuine: and of all Sciences none more ſutable to
profeſsion than Phyſick, as I could eaſily proue by many reaſons.
And therfore the wiſedom of Chriſt appointed the myracles,
wrought by himſelf & his Apoſtles, to conſiſt chiefly
in healing corporal infirmities. S. Luke was both a profeſſed
Phyſitian, & an Euangeliſt. It cannot be but a commendable
labour, & a charitable worke in whomſoeuer, to ſeeke by
good means to preſerue life,Luke 14. verſe 5. be it but of thy neighbors Oxe,
or Aſſe: This my labor I am ſure is wel intended, hoſoeuer
cōſtrued. But a wand thruſt neuer ſo right into the water, ſeemeth
crooked or broken: euen ſo a bad heart miſconceiueth
good actions. As concerning the publiſhing of this in Engliſh,
I haue theſe Inducements. Firſt, the common good of all
men. For euen the ignorant ſhall learne hereby, to haue in
high reputation (as is fitting) that which before they vnderſtood
not, & ſo wil the more readily in time of need haue recourſe
to the learned Phyſitian. Moreouer, if the knowledge
of holy writ be conuenient for al ſorts of men, as the Phyſick
proper for the ſoule, why ſhould not natural Phyloſophy, and
Phyſick ſpeculatiue, be common likewiſe to al for the health
of the body?Num. 11. 29. Therfore herein, I ſay as Moſes ſaid: Enuieſt thou
for me? I would al the Lords people were Prophets. So I wiſh, that
all which are capable, had the true ſpeculatiue knowledge of
Phyſick. Then ſhould Phyſick and Phyloſophy, not only haue
a more great and general eſteeme, but alſo euery meane Apothecarie,
the Phyſitians left hand, ſhould wel vnderſtand how
to Elixerate, which is greatly to be wiſhed.
            As for the time which I haue ſpent herein, it is my gaine:
happily extracted from idle time, whereas otherwiſe for my
recreation, I might vnhappily haue done nothing: and yet
haue not neglected my paſtorall function.
            
               
If therefore (courteous Reader) by this my painfull pleaſure,
thou mayeſt procure to thy ſelfe, but one ſcruple of
knowledge more than before thou haddeſt, and in time of
neede, one dramme of health, it is that which I ſeeke,
wiſhing thee thy full contentment in all the gifts
and graces of God, to thy further profite,
and to Gods glorie: to whoſe
protection, I now
leaue thee.
         
      
      
         
            
            THE FIRST
BOOKE OF THE PRACTISE
of Chymicall Phyſicke.
            
               CHAP. I.
               
                  NOt only Hypocrates, but alſo all other famous
Philoſophers which haue ſucceeded
him, haue receiued their moſt principall
grounds of Phyſicke & Phyloſophy, from
the Aegiptians. For the Aegiptians had
a moſt ſingular knowledge of Aſtronomy
and of the celeſtial courſes, together with
the vniuerſal Science of the Mathematickes, and of ſuch like
Sciences. But the more generall knowledge of all Sciences,
is by Strabo aſcribed, before al others, to that admirable Hermes
Trimegiſtus: as doth alſo Diodorus Siculus, who affirmeth,
that the Aegiptians were the firſt inuentors of Sciences,
taking their originall and infallible grounds from the
ſame Hermes, or Mercury: whoſe diuine monuments are to be
ſéene at this day.
               From this ancient Author Hermes, which liued in the firſt
worldes, haue ſprung vp all our Hermetical Philoſophers and
Phyſitions, whoſe traditions, haue bene receiued and imbraced,
not onely of all ſorts of learned men in all countries, but
alſo by the moſt noble and famous Princes and Kings, both
Gréekes, Arabians, and Latines.
               Yet it muſt be confeſſed that the moſt ancient learned Philoſophers▪
neither haue nor could deliuer ſuch a general knowledge,
wherin there was not ſomething wanting, and whereof
themſelues were not ignorant.
               
                  
For (to vſe the words of learned Guido) we are infants
carried vpon the ſhoulders of thoſe great and lofty Gyants,
frō whoſe eminence we do behold, not onely thoſe things
which they ſaw, but many other miſteries alſo, which they ſaw
not. For no man is ſo ſottiſh as to imagin that thoſe firſt founders
of Phyſicke had attained to the exact & perfect knowledge
of Medicine, or of any other Science: which Hypocrates himſelfe
acknowledged in his Epiſtle to Democritus.
               
               The ſame Hypocrates, howſoeuer otherwiſe ſingularly
learned, and of all learned men for his monuments of Medicine,
to be had in great reputation and reuerence; yet hath bewrayed
his ignorance in mineralls, and metalline miſteries: as
appeareth in his booke of Simp. where he intreating of Quick-ſiluer,
affirmeth that he neuer made tryail thereof, neither inwardly
taken, nor outwardly applyed: bewraying his error in
thinking that Hydrargyre, & Quick-ſiluer, were two ſeueral
things: ſuppoſing that it was a medicine of Siluer diſſolued
into water, like vnto potable golde.
               Hereby (I ſay) he hath bewrayed his ignorance in metalline
ſubſtance, in that he knew not Hydrargyre, and Quick-ſiluer
to be all one. Whereof neuer any man doubted, except he
were ſo addicted to his teacher, that he wold ſay black is white,
becauſe his maſter ſaith ſo, which none of meane wit will do.
               For as we thinke them worthy of blame, which with newe
found phantaſies & toyes, do go about to burne & couer the errors
of the reuerend fathers & ancients, as do many Empiricks
and deceiuers, vnder the name and profeſſion of Paracelſians:
who alſo, do too ſtiffely and falſely aſcribe to Paracelſus, as to
the onely author, the knowledge of hidden things & cauſes, the
finding out of myſteries, & the true preparation of al remedies
and medicines: ſo in like manner they are to be reprehended
which holde it ſufficient, ſo as they talke of Galen without all
reaſon, and affirme that he was ignorant of nothing, and that
he came to the full knowledge of Medicine.
               It is therefore well ſaid of a learned & wel experienced lawyer,
that it is a token of great raſhnes, for wiſe men, either at
the firſt to ſubſcribe error, or to ſubuert that which might

pleaſe, moderated with a temperate reſolution. And yet learned
men againſt all truth, do oftentimes barke againſt auncient
writers, thinking it great honour and praiſe vnto them, if
they be able in any ſort to contend with their greatneſſe.
               Thoſe Phyloſophers which haue written of Chymiſtrie,
haue to maintaine their Science, Nature, Arte, and Experience:
by auncient practiſe deriued from the Hebrues, Chaldeis,
Aegiptians, Perſians, Greekes, Latines, and Arabians.
This Science therefore is not grounded (as ſome ſuppoſe) vpon
a vaine an imaginarie ſpeculation, but is found moſt certaine
and infallible to the procuring of health, and length of
dayes to many, by the goodneſſe of Almighty God.
               Neither doth this Science onely affoord, common extractions
of oyles and waters, by ordinary Diſtillations, (as many
Emperis doe imagine) but alſo moſt precious Elipirs & Quinteſſences,
much laboured, circulated, and wrought, by digeſtious
concoctions, and fermentations, by the meanes whereof
all impure and corrupt matter is defeked and ſeparated, the
euil quality corrected & amended, & that which is bitter, is made
ſwéet. Without the which operations, our bread, béere, & wine,
the ordinary and moſt principal meanes of our nouriſhment,
become hurtful & pernicious vnto vs. For if we ſhould eat raw
wheate, or hoyled onely in water: what & how many diſeaſes
would grow in vs? For this cauſe we ſeparate the pure from
the impure, that they may be profitable for vs, as the meale
from the bran, the which meale or flower, we mixe with water,
we leauen and bake, whereof ariſeth a great magiſtery, namely
bread fit for nouriſhment: and by his artifice, apt to paſſe and
turne into our fleſh: in the working whereof, if there be but a
little error, it wil not be ſo pleaſing to the taſt, nor ſo fitting to
nouriſhment, as is to be ſéene in bread, either ill ſeaſoned, or
not wel baked: the which we reiect through theſe defaults.
               The like practiſe & worke is to be vſed in wines, if we deſire
to haue them fitte for our vſe. For the pure muſt be ſeparated
from the impure, by boylings, digeſtions, and firmentations,
ſeparating from the kernells and ſkinnes, the liquor of the
grapes, that it may be brought into pure wine.
               
                  
This done, and being put into veſſels, it worketh newe ſeperations,
fermentations, diſgeſtions, and purgations, ſeperating
the dregges and lées, from the pure ſubſtance of the wine;
the which ſo ſeperated, it becommeth fine and cleare, and is fit
to be dranke for nouriſhment: Whereas otherwiſe taken
with the lees & not fined, it bréedeth diſſenterie, fluxes, the ſtone,
paine in the head, and procureth ſuch like diſeaſes.
               
                  Chymiſts therfore immitating nature in theſe kind of workings,
and haue learned them in her ſchoole: finding by effect in
natures worke, that if common & ordinary meates & drinkes
vnprepared, vnſeaſoned, & rude, cannot be taken into our bodies
without perill, then Phyſitians, and Apothecaries, ought
to prepare, ſeperate & purge thoſe ſimples which they ſhal vſe
for medicine, by arte ſeperating the croſſe impurity, that they
may not be more hurtful to the weake and ſick, then profitable.
               If Hypocrates or Galen himſelfe, were now againe aliue,
they would excéedingly reioyce to ſée art ſo inlarged & augmented
by ſo great and noble addition, and would patronize and
vpholde with their owne hands, that which was hidden from
the old fathers in former ages: and reiecting many of theſe
things, which before pleaſed them, yéelding to reaſon and experience,
would gladly imbrace the new. For it is euident by
their writings, how vncertaine and doubtful they be in many
things, by reaſon of the weakeneſſe of the foundation whereon
they haue builded. Whoſe buldings notwithſtanding, vtterly
to ouerthrow, no wiſe and modeſt Phhloſopher wil goe
about, but will rather endeuour to vphold them, that poſterity
may well and aſſuredly knowe that we were not barren, but
endued with the ſame wit that they had, and that our mindes
were ſeaſoned with that more noble ſalt. The which ſhall appeare,
it not reiecting the writings of our elders, we ſhall inrich
and adorne them with newe inuentions.
               For artes come by tradition, and are deliuered as it were
from hand to hand, and euery one adorneth his arte with new
inuentions, according as he excelleth others in dexteritie of
wit. And albeit, it may be ſaid, that it is an eaſie matter to adde

to that which is inuented, yet both the Inuentors, and alſo the
augmentors, are to be thankfully imbraced.
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               
                  THere are thrée principall things mixed in
euery Naturall bodie: to wit, Salte, Sulphur,
and Mercurie. Theſe are the beginnings
of all Naturall things. But
he, from whom all things haue their beginning
is GOD, vppon whome all
things do depende, hée himſelfe ſubſiſting
by himſelfe, and taking the Originall
of his Eſſence from no other, and is therfore the firſt and
efficient cauſe of all things.
               From his firſt beginning, procéedeth Nature, as the ſecond
beginning, made by GOD himſelfe through the power
of his worde. This Nature, next vnder God, ought to
be religiouſly eſtéemed, thought of, enquired, and ſearched for.
The knowledge hereof is very neceſſary, and wil be no leſſe
profitable: the ſearche and raunſacking thereof will be ſwéete
and pleaſing. The profite which commeth hereby, appeareth
in this, that the knowledge of all things which conſiſt thereof,
and wherof they borrow thei
                     •
                   name and are called Naturall
things, procéedeth herehence whether they bée ſubiect to our
ſences, or aboue our ſences. Hereupon great Philoſophers,
both Chriſtians and Ethnicks haue bene mooued to make the
ſignification of the name of Nature, to ſitte and ſerue almoſt
all things. Inſomuch that Ariſtotle himſelfe, in that diuiſion
which he maketh of Nature, diuiding the ſame into the firſt
and ſecond Nature, and ſpeaking of the firſt, he calleth it Naturam
naturantem. Naturing nature, by which he meaneth
God. So in like manner Zeno, a Prince of Stoikes, openlie
taught, that Nature was no other thing then God.
Therefore the firſt Naturing nature is God; but the ſeconde
which properly is ſaid to be Nature, is ſubdiuided into vniuerſall

and particular.Lact. lib. de Ira Dei, cap. 10. The Vniuerſall is that ordinarie power
of God, diffuſed throughout the whole worlde, whereof it is
ſayd,Plin. lib. 2. cap. 7. that Nature doth ſuffer this or that, or doth this or that,
as Auguſtine teacheth in his booke De ciuitate Dei:
                  Sen. lib. 4, de benet. cap. 7. and Lactantius:
and among heathen wryters, Pliny and Seneca.
               
               This vniuerſall Nature, is alſo taken for the diuine vertue,
which God hath put and implanted in all creatures: by the benefite
whereof, certaine notes of the Diuinitie, are to be diſcerned
in them. Hereuppon ſome olde Fathers were woont
to ſay, All things are full of Goddes, as did Heraclitus among
others.Thomas lib 9 ſuper. 2. lib. de coelo. Some others take this vniuerſal nature, for a certaine
influence and vertue, whereby the Starres do worke in theſe
inferior things: or elſe for an acting vertue in an vniuerſall
cauſe,Plato in Timaeo. that is to ſay, in a bodie Celeſtiall.
               Furthermore, that is vniuerſall Nature, wherof Plato ſpeaketh
when he ſaith: Nature is a certaine force and ſtrength infuſed
throughout all things, the moderator and nouriſher of all
things, and by it ſelfe the beginning of motion and of reſt in
them. The which Nature Hermes Trimegiſtus, almoſt in
the ſame words ſaith, to be a certaine force riſen from the firſt
cauſe, diffuſed throughout all bodies by it ſelfe, the beginning
of motion and reſt in them.
               This force the Pythagoreans called God. And therefore
Virgil, a great follower of the Pythagorean diſciplne, wrote
thus, ſaying; The ſpirit nouriſheth inwardly, &c. And the
Platonicks called the ſame, the Soule of the worlde.
               
               But yet the Platonicks haue not defined & ſhewed, in what
maner, & by what means this Soule of the world, doth moderate
and order all theſe interior things, and doth ſtirre vp in
the generation of things: neither can they yet determine.
               But the more witty and learned ſort of Philoſophers, holde
& affirme, that this world, which comprehendeth in the circumference
and compaſſe therof the fowre Elements, & the firſt beginnings
of nature, is a certaine great bodie, whoſe partes are
ſo knitte together among themſelues, (euen as in one bodie
of a liuing Creature, all the members doe agrée) that there

is no one part of the parties, of that great body, which is not
inlyned, quickened, and ſuſteined, by the benefite of that vniuerſall
ſoule, which they haue called the ſoule of the worlde:
affirming alſo, that if the bodyes of liuing creatures doe deriue
life and beeing from the ſoule which is in them; the
ſame is much more done and effected in the farre more noble
and more excellent body of the whole world, by the meanes
of the more potent and farre more excellent ſoule, with the
which this body of the vniuerſall world is indued, and by
which it ſubſiſteth. For it all the parts of the world haue life,
(as manifeſtly appearing it hath) then muſt it needes follow,
that wholely it liueth, for that the parts drawe and deriue
their life from the whole, from the which they being ſeparated,
cannot but periſh and die. And héereupon they inferre,
that the Heauen compaſſing all things, is that Soule,
which nouriſheth and ſuſteineth all things. Alſo, further they
affirme, that all the formes, virtues, and faculties of things,
by which all things are neuriſhed, ſuſteined, and haue their
being doe come from the worlds Soule.
               
               And as the body and ſoule are gathered and ioyned together
in one, through the benefite of the Spirits bond, for that
it is partaker of both Natures: ſo the ſoule and body of the
world are knit together by the meanes of the Aethereall Spirits
going betwéene, ioyning each part of the whole into one
ſubſiſtence. And yet hereof we muſt not conclude as did Aphrodiſaeus
and Philoponas, which were Platoniſts, that
the worlde is a moſt huge liuing creature, indued with ſenſe
and vnderſtanding, wiſe and happie: the which is a moſt
abſurde and falſe opinion. But the Platoniſts by the ſoule of
the world, gaue vs rather to vnderſtand a certaine ſpirit,
which cheriſheth, quickeneth, conſerueth, and ſuſteineth all
things,Gen. 1. as it were a certaine ſpirit of that Elohym, or great
God, which mooued vpon the waters: which Plato might remember,
as one not ignorant of Moſes, and thereupon frame
his ſoule of the worlde. Whereupon alſo it muſt needes come
to paſſe, that all theſe inferior things, otherwiſe tranſitorie and
infirme, ſhould ſoone come to deſtruction, without they were

conſerued and continued in theyr being by that diuine power,
perpetually maintaining and ſuſpecting them: the which being
diſſeuered, a great confuſion & perturbation of the whole
worlde ariſe therof. Which ruine and deſtruction, God of his
great goodnes would preuent, creating that vniuerſall Nature,
which ſhould defende all this great worke, and kéepe it
ſafe and ſounde, by his vertue and moderation: and that by
the yearely and continual rotation and reuolution of the right
Heauen, and by the Influences and vertues of the Starres,
Planets, and Celeſtiall powers, all things might be well gouerned,
and might conſtantly remaine and abide in full faſtnes
of theyr eſtate, vntill the predeſtinated time of theyr diſſolution.
               To this Aethereall ſpirit, or rather Diuine power, euery
effectuall and Omnipotent, Plato in his Timaeo giueth teſtimonie,
when hée ſpeaketh thus: When the ſempiternall
GOD had created this Vniuerſal, hee put into it certaine
ſeedes of reaſon, & brought in the beginning Life, that he
might beget with the world the procreating force. Wherein
our explication which I brought before concerning the Soule
of the worlde is confirmed. Which alſo agreeth with that
which the Prophet Moſes hath written, and which King Dauid
hath in his Pſalme, in theſe wordes: By the worde of
the Lorde were the Heauens made, and all the vertue of
them by the ſpirit of his mouth. By which vertue of the
quickning ſpirit, that great Trimegiſtus more conuerſant
and exerciſed in Moſes writings, then all other Philoſophers,
vttered theſe diuine wordes in his ſecond booke, which is called
Aſclepias: All ſpirit (ſaith he) in the world, is acted and gouerned
by the ſpirit. The ſpirit telleth all things: the
worlde nouriſheth bodies, the ſpirit giueth them ſoule. By
the ſpirit all things in the world are miniſtred, & are made
to growe and increaſe. And after that he ſaith againe: All
things haue neede of this ſpirit. For it carryeth all things,
and it quickneth & nouriſheth all things, according to the
dignitie of eache thing in it ſelfe. Life and the ſpirit is
                  
brought forth out of the holy fountaine. By which diuine
words it appeareth plainely, that this eternal and quickening
ſpirit is infuſed and put into all things: ſo that it is not obſerued
to deduce and deriue the actions, forces, and powers: alſo
all naturall things, from the ſpirits, as from the cauſes.
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               
                  HAuing ſpoken ſufficiently of the firſt and
ſecond beginning, that is to ſay of God &
vniuerſal Nature: God the firſt cauſe
vſing that generall Nature as his handmaid:
it reſteth that ſomewhat be ſpoken
of nature natured, that is to ſay, of that
which is particular. To make an apt and
conuenient definition whereof, let vs knowe that it is no other
thing, than euery naturall body conſiſting of forme and
matter. For of theſe two cauſes, and not onely of the cauſes,
but alſo of the parts of the whole compound, all nature, that is
to ſay, euery naturall body conſiſteth. For the Peripateticks
do thinke, that whatſoeuer is the beginning of generation,
ought to be called nature by a certaine peculiar right. And Ariſtotle
ſaith, that the ſame, from whence any thing is made
at the firſt, and whereof it hath the firſt motion, mutation is
the very beginning.Metaph. 5. I ſay the beginning, from whence the eſſence
of all natural things ariſeth. The which nature Ariſtotle
in another place defineth to be the beginning ſubſtantiall
and the cauſe of motion, and of the reſt thereof,Cap. 1. in the which
it is at the firſt, and not by Accidents: the explication of which
definition he hath comprehended in eight bookes. And Ariſtotle
doth rightly call Nature, the cauſe and the beginning
of internall motion. For thoſe things which are made by
Nature, and are therefore called naturall, haue a certaine
beginning of motion, whereby they are moued of their owne
accord, not by force. Whereby plainly appeareth the difference
betweene thoſe things which are naturall, and which

are endued with an effectuall ſpirit; and with power to worke
by it ſelfe: and thoſe things which are made by Arte, which
haue no force nor power of doing, but are dead, and deuoided
of all ſenſe and motion.
               By theſe things it appeareth, that things natural are called
properly naturall exiſtences or beings, and ſuch as haue nature.
And they are ſaide to haue nature, which poſſeſſe in themſelues
the beginning of their motion, and of their reſt: the
which beginning of motion of euery thing, is either the forme
or the matter, wherof we haue ſpoken. Forme, which is wholly
ſpiritual, hath all her motion likewiſe ſpiritual. So the ſoule
is of this ſame nature in a liuing creature, the motions and
ſences plainely celeſtiall, ſpirituall, and a light beginning.
Whereas the Matter is terreſtriall, ponderous, and corporal,
the other beginning of naturall motion. By whoſe waight
and groſſeneſſe, the body tendeth downeward, ſo as this kind
of motion procéedeth not from the ſoule, or ſpirituall forme, but
from the corporall matter, which is terreſtriall and heauy by
his owne nature. Hereof it commeth, that the name of nature,
is giuen as well to Matter as to Forme: but more aptly and
conueniently to Forme: becauſe Forme doth manifeſtly
giue to a thing his being, actually: whereas Matter alone cannot
performe that.
               For not euery liuing creature, hath ſenſe and motion
from that body which is ſolid, terreſtriall and ponderous: but
onely from the ſpiritual forme: that is to ſay, the ſoule mouing
the body, and informing it with the vitall vertues. As for
example.
               A horſe is in act, and in truth a horſe, when he neither moueth,
leapeth, nor runneth: but theſe motions which are ſpiritual,
are the effects & operations of the ſoule or forme, whereas
otherwiſe the body hauing nothing but the lineaments,
and viſible forme, whereby it ſéemeth a horſe is meere
terreſtriall, heauie and deade. Howbeit, neither the ſoule
alone of the horſe, can bée ſaide to bée a horſe, except it be
coupled with the body.
               
                  
For both being ioyned and coupled together make a horſe.
               Knowe therefore that the Forme is far more noble and
excellent then the Matter: and that Nature as touching her
effects and operations, is of that power that it generateth,
and giueth being to all things, it putteth matter on the formes,
it beautifieth, and ſuffereth nothing to bee corrupted, but
preſerueth all things in their eſtate. Th
                     •
                  ſe her vertues, faculties
and powers, ſhe very apparantly ſheweth, when as ſhe
worketh and cauſeth all ſorts of beings out of the 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
and out of the ſeedes and beginning of all things, Salt, Sulphur,
and Mercurie: and informeth with great variety of
impreſſions of the vitall ſpirits, colours and taſte, and with
the properties of ſuch kinde of powers and faculties, that
it giueth to euery thing ſo much as concerneth the office
and dignity thereof, in all ſufficiencie. The which
building and 
                     〈◊〉
                   of things, ſo apt
                     ••
                   and conueniently
formed in order, in number, and meaſure, wee may w
                     •
                  ll
call diuine, not terreſtriall and corporall 
                     〈…〉
                   ſame be
naturall, according to the power which God hath giuen vnto
Nature.
               
               And yet wée muſt not thinke that God hath ſo forſaken
the frame of this wor
                     •
                  d, that he ſitteth idle, as hauing giuen
ſuch admirable and potent 
                     •
                  ffects to nature onely, according
to the opinion of An
                        •
                     xagoras, Protagoras, and many other
Athe
                     •••
                  i all Philoſophers, which acknowledge no other
God but Name, as alſo did the Epicures. 
                     〈◊〉
                   it they be to
be accuſed and condemned for ſo wicked an opinion, then do
they deſerue no ſmall reprehenſion, which denie nature her
partes and offices in working.
               For the offices pecu
                     ••
                  ar both of her firſt and ſecond cauſe,
are to be attributed to either, according to 
                     〈…〉
                  .
Neither are theſe places of Scripture any thing repugnant.

                     
                        〈◊〉
                      is God which worketh all in all. And againe: in him
wee liue, moue, and haue our beeing. For albeit
this is true, yet God hath appointed Nature as a meanes
to fulfill his will, the which Nature hee hauing 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  
with the vertues of working, he by the ſame beginneth, furthereth,
and perfiteth all things. Therefore the ſecond cauſe, is
called Nature, becauſe by the ſame, as by a vital inſtrument,
God, who is the firſt cauſe worketh all things. For thus God
féedeth men with bread, the which he hath indued with a natural
faculty of nouriſhing, that the nature of bread may be
ſaid to féede and nouriſh, whereto he hath predeſtinated the
ſame, by the forme of natural bread.
               Thus therefore theſe things are to be reconciled, that we
acknowledge God to bee the firſt cauſe of working in all other
cauſes, becauſe hée hath made the cauſes, and hath giuen
power of working, and doth himſelfe worke together
with them, and that we belieue that hée ſtirreth vppe, prouoketh,
directeth and moderateth Nature, by the power, force,
and vnitie which hée hath giuen to her, to doe all things by
her proper motions. So that we muſt ſéeke the cauſe and
forme of all natural actions in Nature, which God hath made
potent with ſpiritual vertues, by which it acteth and worketh
in the matter: for that nothing can procéede from the matter it
ſelfe being dead, which is Vital, or indued with the faculties of
working.
            
            
               CHAP. IIII
               
                  THis word (Beginning) extendeth very
farre. For as Artes and Sciences, ſo
alſo all other things haue their proper
and ſet beginnings. Plato intreating of
Beginnings, one while appointeth three:
namely, God, Patterne, and Matter:
another while he appointeth two onely,
that is to ſay, that which is infinite, and that which is terminable,
and to be limited. By the word Infinite, he meaneth
Matter: and by the word Terminable, he meaneth Forme, as
bringing a thing within a certaine compaſſe, and reſtraining a
matter excurrent within bondes and limits.
               
                  
                  Ariſtotle varyed not much from the opinion and ſentence
of his Maiſter, albeit he declared the ſame in other wordes,
calling that Forme which Plato named Terminable. And
that which Plato called Infinite; Ariſtotle nameth, Matter:
appointing Priuation, by it ſelfe, for a third beginning.
               Let it not therefore ſéeme abſurde to any, that we appoint
thrée beginnings of all things, Salt, Sulphur, and Mercurie,
as if it were thereby intended to ouerthrowe, by our conſtitution,
the beginnings of the ancient Phyloſophers, whereas
we ioyne and agrée with them. For if wée grant to Ariſtotle,
his beginnings, what difference will there be betwéene him
and vs. Wée admit (if you pleaſe) the diſtinction, by which
he diuideth his beginnings, namely, into the firſt matter, into
the ſimple matter, and into that which is remote, enduring all
alterations of formes, or wherein there is power to bée made
ſubiect to all formes, and in two contraryes, to wit, Forme,
and Priuation: the which habilitie of taking forme, is in the
ſubiect.
               Wée graunt that theſe beginnings, of all other, are the
more parciptible in vnderſtanding than in ſenſe. As therefore
our beginnings, which we appoint out of which al mixt things
are compounded and be, cannot by the Ariſtotelian Philoſophers
be ouerthrowen: ſo in like Ariſtotelian beginnings
cannot by ours, be deſtroyed. For all this whole world is diuided
into two Globes, to wit, into the inferior Heauen,
which is Aetheriall, and Airie: and into the inferior Globe,
which comprehendeth Water and Earth. The ſuperior,
which is Aetheriall hath in it Fire, lightning, and brightneſſe:
and this firery Heauen, is a formall and eſſentiall Element.
               What things ſoeuer are comprehended in theſe foure bodyes,
which are the Elements and receptacles of all things,
are eyther ſimple things, or bodyes, mixed and compounded
of them.
               They are ſimple which are without mixture, exiſting apart

and ſeuerall by themſelues: of the which all things are
made, and into the which all things are reſolued. They are
compound or corporeat, which both are made of ſimples, and
into ſimples.
               And ſimples may be diſtinguiſhed into thoſe things which
are ſimple formes, and into thoſe which are ſimple matters:
or into thoſe things which are ſimply formals, and into thoſe
which are ſimply materials. So bodyes are diuided into materiall
bodyes, and into bodyes formall.
               Thoſe things which are ſimply formall are aſtrall and
ſpirituall: the Elements are formall: Seedes are formall: and
the three beginnings are formall: that is to ſay, ſo ſpirituall,
that they come not within the compaſſe of our 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
               But the formal Elements (whereof we ſpeak
                     •
                  ) are they
in w
                     •
                  oſe cloſet the aſtral ſéedes o
                     •
                   things, and the formal beginnings,
are defuſed and layd vp, as in their proper rec
                     ••••
                  
                  cles:
in the which ſimple and ſpiritual Elements of ſeedes,
and ſpiritual beginnings, the 
                     〈◊〉
                   and quickening Sciences,
properties, and rootes of propagating 
                     〈◊〉
                   increaſe
of al things, lye hid, wherein alſo all habites, 
                     〈◊〉
                  ,
and figures, qualities, quantities and dimentions, ſauours,

                     •
                  dours and coolours are included, which doe budde 
                     〈◊〉
                   and
floriſh out of their boſome in their due time, by opertune maturitie.
And theſe ſimple Elements or beginnings, doe imbrace
the ſpiritual ſeedes, with ſo great ſimphathy and friendſhip,
and doe render to the Elements and beginnings, mutual
reciprocation of loue, that being brought by the parents into
ſome particular kinde, or forme, they neuer make an ende,
(by the recordation of their vnion with the ſimple Elements)
but that at the laſt againe, the predeſtination and 
                     〈◊〉
                   of
the natural bodies being conſummated, they returne backe againe
to their graundfathers, and great graundfathers, and
doe reſt there: euen as the floods paſſing and iſſuing out of
their Element of the ſea, & running in their courſe hither and
thither, leauing at the length euery where behinde them their
generation (or their wombe e
                     •
                  o
                     •
                  erated) they returne to their

beginning againe: wherupon by mutuall copulation they receiue
new force and ſtrength to increaſe their iſſue.
               And this is the perpetuall circulation, by which the heauen
is marryed to the Earth, and the inferior Elements doe conioyne
with the ſuperior. For the continuall vapours ariſing
from the center of the earth, being expulſed into waters, and
being caryed from waters into ayre, by the attraction of the
Coeleſtiall Starres: and alſo by the force and appetite of the
inferior Elements to bring forth iſſue, and to conceiue from
heauen, the ſéedes paſſing too and againe, at the laſt the Elements
returne to their parents full and impregnated with Celeſtiall
formes, and doe there nouriſh their ſéedes, vntill at the
length they bring foorth in due ſeaſon, and doe exclude
their generation. The which impregnation commeth
from no other, than from thoſe aſtrall ſéedes, and thoſe
thrée ſeuerall beginnings, Mercurie, Sulphur, and Salt,
furniſhed and fulfilled with all ſcience, properties, vertues,
and tinctures; and doe borrowe and fitte to themſelues,
out of their ſpirituall body, a materiall, and doe
animate and adorne it with their properties. For it belongeth
vnto Mercurie to giue life vnto the partes: to
Sulphur, to giue increaſe of body: and to Salt, to
compact thoſe two together, and to conioyne them into
one firme body.
               
                  GOD the Creator of all things, made the world after
his owne Image, which may plainely appeare in this, that
albeit the whole world is one, yet it ioyeth in the number of
thrée, being framed in order, number, and meaſure, in whoſe
boſome theſe thrée ſimple bodyes were included, Salt, Sulphur,
and Mercurie.
               
               Therefore let vs compare the workes of God a little
with the ſimilitude of the Trinitie. The worlde is diuided
into theſe thrée partes, Intellectuall, Coeleſtiall, and
Elementall. The Elementall (to let the other two alone, as
leſſe known vnto vs) conſiſteth of Minerals, Vegetables, and
animals: beſide the which, there is nothing to bée found in

this world. Of Minerals, there are thrée differences, Stones,
Metals, and meane Minerals. In like maner among Vegitables,
there are thrée ſorts: Herbes, Trees, and Plants.
               
               Alſo of Animals there are thrée orders, créeping things,
ſwimming things, and flying things. If we ſhould proſecute
euery particular at large, wée ſhall finde this Teruarie euery
where and in all the parts thereof. But we will conſider of
man onely in this point.
               Man conſiſteth of Spirit, Soule, and body: as holy Writ
teſtifieth. The Spirit ſaith, Hermes is repreſented by Mercurie:
the Soule is repreſented by Sulphur: and the Body,
by Salt.
                  1. Theſ. 5. 23. The Spirit conſiſteth of minde, reaſon, and phantaſie.
The Soule hath thrée factulties, naturall, vitall and Animall.Heb. 4. 12.
The Body is cut into thrée partes in Anatomie: to
wit, into head, belly, and members. Theſe haue thrée principall
members, wherunto others are ſubiect: the braine, the
heart, and the lyuer. The braine hath thrée helpes to purge
by, the mouth, the noſtrils, and the eares. The purgers and receiuers
of vncleanneſſe from the heart, are, the Midry
                     •
                  e, the
Lungs, and the great Arteries. The purgers of the Lyuer,
are the Milt, the bladder of the Gaule, and the Reines. So
there are thrée principall veſſels which doe ſerue the whole
body, namely, the Arteries, the Sinewes, and the Veines.
Further if we conſider the head againe, it hath thrée ſkinnes.
The braine hath thrée bellyes, two ſoft before, and one hard
behinde. There are thrée principall inſtruments of voyce,
the throate, the pallate, and the kernels. To conclude this
point, if all theſe ſhould bée diſſeuered and ſeparated into
their beginnings, they might be reſolued into Mercurie,
Sulphur, and Salt, whereof they conſiſt.
               Therefore theſe thrée formall beginnings, which we haue
deſcribed by their offices and propertions, albeit they are more
ſpirituall than corporall, yet being ioyned with ſimple Elements,
they make a materiall body mixt and compound, they
increaſe and nouriſh it, and preſerue it in his eſtate vnto the
predeſtinated ende.
               
                  
And ſéeing the properties, Impreſſions, and faculties are
inſet and included in thoſe beginnings, and haue thoſe vitall
qualities of taſtes, odours, and colours hidden in them, how
materiall ſoeuer thoſe ſéedes be: yet notwithſtanding they rather
contende to come néere to Forme, than to Matter: but
the Elements doe more cleaue and inclyne to Matter than to
Forme. And therefore the Phyloſophers call them properly
ſimple beginnings formall, becauſe they are more principall,
adorned and inriched with the firſt and chiefe faculties of
aſtral ſéedes. But the Elements, they call beginnings, materiall
ſimple. To the one, they attribute actuall qualities, and
to the other paſſiue. And ſo of them both, as it were ſecondarily
and ſo neere as may be, all mixt bodyes are compounded
and doe conſiſt.
               If therefore we ſhall throughly diſcuſſe and ranſacke euery
particular indiuidiall in his kinde, and their generation,
we ſhall finde that which is ſaid to be true: namely, that
ſome ſimple beginnings are formall and ſpirituall: others
materiall, corporall, and viſible. And that the Inuiſibles are
the Elements ſimple, formall, the aſtral ſéedes, and ſpirituall
beginnings. Alſo that the viſibles are all one and the ſame,
but yet couered with a materiall body. The which two bodyes,
ſpiritual and material, inuiſible and viſible, are contained
in euery Indiuiduall, albeit, that which is ſpiritual, cannot
be diſcerned, but by reaſon of motion of life, and of functions,
and yet is within it.
               Theſe viſible and material bodyes are
of thrée ſortes.
                     Séedes.
                     Beginnings.
                     Elements.
                  
               
               Of theſe 3. ſome are
                     
                        Actiue, as Séeds, and Beginnings.
                     
                        Paſsiue, as are the Elements.
                  
               
               The Actiue bodies of viſible
Séeds, wherein there
is any vertue, are
                     The ſéedes of liuing creatures,
put forth by Venus.
                     
                     The ſéedes of herbes & trées, in
their ſeueral caſes & trunkes.
                     The ſéeds of Mines, ouerwhelmed
wt a great heape of impediments.
                  
               
               
                  All which lye hidden in themſelues haue Spirits.
               The Actiue bodies of
beginnings, haue
                     Two moyſt,

                           Mercurie.
                           Sulphur.
                        
                     
                     One drie: Salt.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Mercurie is a ſharpe liquor, paſſable, and penetrable, and a
moſt pure & Aethereall ſubſtantiall body: a ſubſtance ayrie,
moſt ſubtill, quickning, and ful of Spirit, the foode of life, and
the Eſſence, or terme, the next inſtrument.
               
                  Sulphur is that moyſt, ſwéet, oyly, clammy, original, which
giueth ſubſtance to it ſelfe: the nouriſhment of fire, or of natural
heat, endued with the force of mollifying, and of giuing
together.
               
                  Salt, is that dry body, ſaltiſh, méerely earththy, repreſenting
the nature of Salt, endued with wonderfull vertues of
diſſoluing, congealing, clenſing, emptying, and with other infinite
faculties, which it exerciſeth in the Indiuiduals, and ſeperated
in other bodyes, from their indiuiduals.
               Theſe thrée beginnings, were by Hermes the moſt ancient
Philoſopher, called Spirit, Soule, and Body. Mercurie
the Spirit, Sulphur the Soule, Salt ye 
                  Body, as is already ſaid.
               The body is ioyned with the ſpirit, by the bond of Sulphur:
the ſoule, for that it hath affinitie with both the extreames,
as a meane coupling them together. For Mercury
is liquid, thinne, flexible. Sulphur is a ſoft oyle paſſable; ſalt
is dry, thicke, and ſtable. The which notwithſtanding are ſo
proportionate together, or tempered equally the one with the
other, that a manifeſt ſigne, and great analogie or conuenience
is found in this contrarietie of beginnings. For Sulphur, or
that oyly moyſture, is (as I haue ſaid) a meane, which with
his humidity, ſoftneſſe, and fluidity or paſſablenes, ioyneth the
two extreames, that is to ſay, fixed ſalt, and flying Mercurie:
that is to ſay, the drynes of ſalt, and the moyſtnes of Mercurie,
with his viſcus and clammy humiditie: the thickneſſe
of ſalt, and the ſubtiltie of Mercurie (vtterly contrary) with
his fluiditie: which holdeth the meane betwéene ſtable, and
flying. Moreouer Sulphur, by reaſon of his excéeding ſwéetneſſe,

doth contemper the ſharpneſſe or ſowernes of Mercurie,
and the bitterneſſe of ſalt: and by his clammynes, doth
conioyne the ſubtill flying of Mercurie, with the firmneſſe
and faſtneſſe of ſalt.
               
            
            
               CHAP. V. Concerning Salt.
               
                  OF all other, the Philoſophicall ſalt is
of greateſt vertue and force to purge,
and is as it were the generall clenſer of
whole nature, deliuering the ſame from
al impuritie; whether it bée the belly, by
ſiege; the ſtomacke, by vomit; the reines,
by vrine; or the body, by ſweate; opening
& clenſing obſtructions, comming of what cauſe ſoeuer.
               This kinde of purging is very large: whoſe partes albeit
they tend to one end, yet they haue as it were diuers & contrary
effects, procéeding frō one ſubiect, which cannot be ſeen. And
as the effects are diuers, ſo are there diuers kindes of Saltes,
which according to their diuerſitie, haue diuers taſtes and ſundery
properties of euacuations, and clenſings, and diuers other
faculties.
               But among Salts, that which is more bitter and néereſt
to the taſte of Aloes or Gaule, ſheweth his proper working in
purging the belly by ſiege. Such Salts Chymiſts call Salt-Niter,
or Niterous ſalts. Saladine, an ancient & great Phyſition▪
ſpeaking of Salts, ſaith thus: There are foure famous
kinds of Salt, to wit, the ſalt of bread, that is to ſay Common-ſalt,
ſalt-gem, ſalt-naptie, and ſalt-Indi
                        •
                     . And afterward
he ſaith, that this laſt is of all other the moſt b
                     •
                  tter,
ſharpe, and moſt violent, and therefore of greateſt force to
purge. And he ſaith, that al Salt is as it were a ſpurre to other
medicines with the which it is mingled: for that it maketh
them to worke more ſpéedily. Laſtly, hée ſaith, that all
Salt, bringeth foorth groſſe Phlegmaticke humors.
               Among Salts, ſome are earthie, ſome watery, and ſome

aierie, or ſuch as haue in them predominant, eyther the Element
of that earth, of water, or of ayre: inſomuch ſome of
them are fixed, & are of the nature of earth: other ſome are betwéene
fixed & flying, and doe retaine a certaine middle watery
propertie. But Sal Armoniac is of nature ſpiritual, (as is
alſo the common Armoniac) & of all other moſt flying & ayrie.
               And al Salt, whether it be flying, or fixed, is no otherwiſe
diſſolued and commixed in waters, than with the water of
Water, and if one be a dry water, the other is moyſt.
               Theſe thrée kindes of Saltes, which lye hydden in the ſecret
parts of things, whether they be metalline, vegitable, or animal,
and which are principally ſeated in that element, which
produceth his generations out of the earth, they do participat
of the nature of the thrée beginnings. For the common ſalte,
and that which is of the ſea, paſſing through the philter of the
earth, and boyled and digeſted with the heates of the bowels
of the ſame earth, doth participate of the nature of fixed and
firme ſalt, the father and original of all others. But Niter,
being partly fixed, and in part volatile, doth participate of the
ſulphurus beginning of things: euen as Sal Amoniac doth
participate of the Mercuriall beginning ſpirituall and ayrie:
whoſe extreames, to wit, fixed and volatile, of the ſulphurus
ſalt, or the Niterus, partaker of the volatile nature in part,
and partly fixed, are coupled together by interceſſion. By this
ſtraight and wonderfull bond of the thrée beginnings, thrée diuers
ſubſtances of Salts, of ſundry properties, doe manifeſtly
appeare, like in eſſence, but not in natures of qualities. For
beyond all expectation, a good wittie Salt-maker, wil extract
out of a fat and fertile earth, (by waſhings) theſe three kindes
of Saltes: namely, the marine and fixed, which is diſſolued
in lye made of aſhes, the Niterus by it ſelfe, which is there
coagulated or congealed: and the Armoniac volatile & ayrie,
flying in part out of the Lye, and partly contained in both the
Saltes and therefore hydden from the ſences. This may bée
done by a ſkilfull Salt-maker, albeit he were vtterly ignorant
of all the myſter
                     •
                  es which here are hidden.
               
                  
Which thrée diſtinct differences of Saltes, as they are to be
found in euery fat kind of earth, ſo out of both the ſaltes, namely
the marine and fixed, and the Niterus volatile, they may be
thenceforth ſeparated. For thoſe Saltes, being put into a retort
together, or apart by themſelues, with a receiuer, firſt by the
force of fire ſtilleth forth a Volatile Salt, ſower, ſharpe and
Mercurial: then, with a greater heate, commeth forth a Salt
Sulphurus and Niterus, and ſwéete: the third Salt, which is
Salt vpon Salt fixed, will not moue with any force of fier, but
remaineth conſtantly in the bottome of the glaſſe.
               All taſtes are brought forth out of theſe thrée ſundry Saltes,
common to that triple beginning of things, ſo as we ſhall not
néede to haue recourſe to hot and cold, moiſt and dry. For they
are procreated out of thoſe beginnings alone. Fixed Salt, conſider
as it is ſimple, and without commixtion, maketh ſimply a
ſalt taſt. A Sulphurus Salt alſo ſimply vnderſtoode, yéeldeth
out of it a ſwéete oylely taſte. But Mercurial Salt, in like ſort
conceiued by it ſelfe and apart, repreſenteth a ſower taſte. All
which taſtes mixed together in equall proportions, yéelde a
pleaſant and delightful taſte, without any ſenſe or taſte of any
of the particulars.
               Theſe thrée beginnings cannot be found ſimple in a mixt
body, in ſuch wiſe, but that they haue ſome compoſition, and do
in mixture communicate their qualities together: as may bée
ſéene in ſea-ſalt, and ſalt-péeter, out of the which may be ſeparated
not onely a ſalt and ſharpe taſte, but alſo a ſwéete taſte.
And it is certaine, that in things ſulphurus and oylely, and alſo
in Mercurial liquors, there is to be found a coniunction of
ſuch taſtes.
               For this cauſe we affirme, that all fixed Salt of a mixt body,
is very briniſh and excéeding bitter: the ſulphurus, of a fat and
ſweete taſte: and the Mercurial, ſower, ſharpe and fiery. So
that vpon theſe ſimple qualities, ſalt, ſwéete, and ſower, (which
are to be found in all bodies minerall, vegitable and animal) all
others taſtes do depend.
               And as touching the elementary qualities paſſiue, which

are as organical and inſtrumentall cauſes, they little appertaine
to this matter: whether it be the terreſtrial and drie paſſiue
quality, & paſſiue coldneſſe, or whether it be the aiery moiſt
vapor, the which taſtes of this ſort, or potent qualities, procéedeth
from theſe thrée beginnings, do either further to this or
that nature, or elſe doe impaire and weaken them. To make
this plaine by manifeſt reaſons, and to lay it open before our
eyes, we will begin to intreat of mixed bodies, the which notwithſtanding
according to the Elements, are moſt ſimple.
            
            
               CHAP. VI.
               
                  IT is already ſaid, that taſtes by a certaine
priuate right are aſcribed to Salts, or to
their ſpirits: which euidently appeareth
hereby, that the differences of taſtes, are
not produced but from the differences of
Saltes: or contrariwiſe, the differences of
Saltes, are produced from the differences
of taſtes.
               In the boſome of nature, there are found almoſt ſo many
kinde of Saltes, as there are variety of taſtes. Digged or minerall,
and marine Salt, is endued with a ſalt qualitie. Niter
with a bitter quality: Allum, with a ſharpe: Vitriol, with
a ſower: Armoniac, with a ſharpe and ſower quality. But
ſwéete Saltes do manifeſtly appeare, not onely in Manna,
and in Sugar, but alſo in marine ſalt, and in ſalt of Vitriol, out
of which they are to be ſeperated. And (as we haue ſaid) in euery
of theſe ſalts, theſe thrée firſt beginnings, Salt, Sulphur,
and Merucry, are contained ioyntly together: one aiery, mercurial,
or ſpiritual, the which is ſharpe and ſower; the other
earthly, which is ſower, and bitter: and the third oylely & ſweet,
which is a meane betwéene them both. In Vitriol alone, is
manifeſtly to be ſéene, egar, ſharpe, ſower, and aſtringent, for
that of all other Salts, it is moſt corporal.
               But thoſe taſtes or qualities, which are mixed with paſſiue

and Elementarie qualities, haue not the full force of euery
of theſe, but are made more weake by mixtion: for the ſharpe
(which is not extracted and ſeperated but by the force of the
fier with the aiery part) is mixed with a mercurial liquor:
the ſower is mixed with a flegmetique, or watery humour:
and the eger, with a terreſtrial drineſſe: the which, the more
they haue of the Elementary qualities, and the ſame paſſiue,
ſo much the more weake they are and impaired. But if the
actiue qualities be ſeparated from the paſſiue, as by arte it is to
be done, then the tarte and ſower do obtaine their full force,
and doe manifeſtly and fully burne the tongue with their fiers:
for the ſharpe hath a more fiery and burning qualitie: and the
ſower, a more watery propertie. For the ſharpe partaking of
the nature of fire, hath ouermuch vertue to attenuate, diſſipate,
and to fret: the ſower, as, aiery, watery, & of thinne parts, hath
vertue to cutte, to open, to refrigerate, and alſo to put away
putrifactions. The eger and more tarte, which remaineth in
the Colchotar (after the extraction of the ſharpe oylely, and
ſower water, with the aiery parts of the elemental qualities)
do poſſeſſe a nature and force to thicken and binde, by reaſon
of the earthy and groſſe propertie.
               But if from that terreſtrial parte, the pure (which is Salt)
be extracted, it wil haue a ſalt taſte, by the vertue whereof it
wil bée made, both deiectiue, and vomitiue. And in the ſwéete
Sulphur of Vitriol, there is a manifeſt ſwéetneſſe, which is
plainely ſtupefactiue.
               Finally, in all Salts, almoſt, (diſſeuered by Chymicall ſeperation)
theſe thrée are to be diſcerned, Sower, Swéete, and
Bitter, which haue force of actiue qualities, and yet not deſtitute
of the moiſt paſſiue, terreſtrial and groſſe, but with them,
in ſundry wiſe ſo ſeaſoned and tempered, that they bring to the
Salts, varety of taſtes.
               And let this ſerue for demonſtration, by which it may
plainely appeare, that thoſe ſundry differences of taſtes, are
manifeſtly contained in Salts, both ioyntly and ſeuerally,

eſpecially in their ſpirits: And according to the opinion of
Hermes ſchollers, we deny that thoſe inſet and naturall qualities,
vertues, and properties, are to be arrogated to hotte,
moiſt, and drie, but rather to the eſſences of a nature which is
ſalt, bitter, eger, ſharpe, ſower, tarte, ſwéete, and oylely.
               For there are ſixe hundred frigidities or coldes, ſixe hundred
heates, humidities, & 
                     ••
                  gities or drineſſes, then the which
nothing doth more heate, coole, moyſten, and dry. But they
haue neuer brought any ſauour or taſte to pure or ſimple water,
or to other Iuices or liquors, which haue béene deſtitute
of Salt.
               
               Whatſoeuer is without Salt, or deſtitute of a briniſh ſpirit,
can neuer be diſcerned by taſte, but is vtterly vnſauory.
Yet notwithſtanding, it ſimple water be powred vpon aſhes,
with a little heate, that water wil drawe vnto it ſaltneſſe, bitterneſſe,
or ſharpneſſe, more or leſſe, according to the nature of
the ſalt, more or leſſe ſalt, or bitter, which is contained in the
aſhes.
               And if any man obiect, that Hony and Sugar by boyling,
or by the force of fier, may be made ſharpe or bitter: we anſwer
that it commeth ſo to paſſe, when the aiery ſulphurus, and watery
partes, which bring and preſerue the ſwéetneſſe do periſh
and are ſeparated by decoction. But terreſtrial Salt, whoſe faculties
are inward, haue this property, that of their owne nature
they poſſeſſe, this or that ſharpe or bitter taſte, how extreame
ſoeuer it be. So if thou ſhalt drawe out of onions and
garlicke a Volatile and aiery ſharpe Mercurial Salt, which ariſeth
in the ſuperficies & vppermoſt of their bodies: thou ſhalt
make them more ſwéet and pleaſing, and to put off their ſharpneſſe,
by which they bite the tongue: but yet they will retaine
and repreſent their hot qualitie, with the which they abound,
by reaſon of their fixed Saltes. As out of Saltes, ſo out of odours
alſo, we may drawe certaine faculties, without the helpe of
hotte qualities. For ſéeing they are referred to the diuers properties
of Sulphur, ſundry odours doe ariſe therfrom, and not
from the qualities. Which if they be ſwéete and pleaſing, the

braine receiueth them with pleaſure and delight, whereas
vnpleaſant ſauours or odours, are offenſiue both to the noſe
and to the braine, and are reiected. Such is the marcotical
and ſtefactiue odour of Poppie, and Hemlock, and ſuch like
which do ſtinke, and aſtoniſh the braine, by reaſon (as Phyſitions
affirme) of their colde qualitie: Wherein they breake
the Lawe of their axiomes, for that they holde that their odours
are of a hotte qualitie, as moſt true it is. For that
which is ſtupefactiue in the Poppeis, and in Opium, is
no other thing, but a certaine oylely and ſulphurus parte
conceiuing flame, (much like to that kinde of oyle, which
is extracted out of the ſéedes of Poppey) the which albeit it
do readily burne, yet as it is commonly thought, it ſheweth
moſt colde effects. The common Phyſitians, to correct
ſuch coldneſſe attributed to Opium, vſe helpes, as is to bee
ſéene in their opiat and antidotarie medicines, wherein Opium
is an Ingredient. Of theſe kind of cōpoſitions Myrepſus deſcribeth
aboue foure ſcore: where Euphorbium (which is of a
fiery and burning facultie) is no more forborne then either of
the Peppers, or ſuch other like cauſticke and burning ſimples,
of extreame hotte qualitie: when as the true and proper
corrector of Opium (that I may ſo ſpeake) wel knowne to
Hermeticall Phyſitians, is Vineger; which putteth away
ſtupefactiue vapours and fumes, that they aſcende not
to the braine, ſo ſuppreſſing them by the ſharpneſſe thereof, that
it retaineth them: whereas their hot correctors do more ſtirre
them vp and multiple them. Hereof come ſiniſter and deadly
paſſions and paines, by reaſon whereof men are conſtrained
to vſe the imperfect Laudanum of Empiricks, againſt the
deadly daunger of ſuch medicines.
            
            
               
               CHAP. VII.
               
                  NOw ſomewhat ſhall be ſaide concerning
colours. The dogmatical Phyſitians,
that they might not diminiſh any whit
of the qualities of colours, are woont to
referre to thoſe qualities a certaine variety
of colours: and haue obſerued and noted
certaine friuolous and light obſeruations:
as when they ſay, that in a white onion, or in white
wine, a man may iudge by the colour a great coldneſſe, than
in a read onion, or in red wine. Whereas white ſublimate,
and Arſnic, albeit they are moſt white like vnto Chriſtall: yet
neuertheleſſe vnder this whiteneſſe, they foſter and hide a moſt
burning and deadly fire. Yea Sugar it ſelfe, which is ſo ſwéet,
white, and pleaſant, doth hide in the innermoſt parts thereof, a
wonderfull blackneſſe and ſharpneſſe, from whence may bée
extracted moſt ſharpe liquors and waters, which will diſſolue
and breake the moſt hard metalls. Therefore it is abſurd,
to ſharpe and forme colours from hotte and colde, which
do procéede from the ſpirits only, or elſe from the moſt thinne
and aiery vapours, which lye hid in the Salt: eſpecially in that
Salt which by nature is ſulphurus, ſuch as is Niter, or Salt-Peter,
as men call it. Niter throughly depured and clenſed,
will be as white as ſnow; from which whiteneſſe, may be
drawen infinite ſorts of colours, moſt excellent to beholde.
Which colours come from the onely ſpirits of Salt-peter,
which are able to pearce the moſt hard kind of glaſſe, by the
force of fire thruſt forth in the likeneſſe of volatile meale, and
cleaning in the ouerture of the glaſſe Alembic. By which colours,
a mā may behold the body of the Alembic to be tained &
dyed, as well within as without in the ſuperficial part: Which
colours are of no leſſe varietie, then are the flowers of the
earth in the time of the Spring. Hereby it appeareth plainely,
that this diuerſitie of all colours is to be taken from the ſpirits,

no leſſe nor otherwiſe, then are all other properties and vertues
of all other things to be referred vnto them.
               If therefore the foundation of theſe thrée things be laid vpon
thrée beginnings, & vpon their ſpirits, it will be very firme
and ſtable, in ſuch wiſe, that in the ignorance of any cauſe, it
ſhal not be néedful to fly to hidden properties.
               If this doctrine, according to the truth thereof, be receiued,
learned, and ſtudied, being vpholden alſo with the authorities
of that great Hypocrates, it ſhal eaſily driue from vs
the darkeneſſe of ignorance, and ſhal bring with it the light of
knowledge, which will remoue all difficulties: For out of
this ſchoole are learned moſt certain and infallible Thearemes
and Axiomes, againſt which, as againſt moſt aſſured grounds,
there can be no oppoſition or reſiſtance: but wil be allowed by
the general conſent of indifferent Iudges.
               Let vs take an example from Vineger: whereof many famous
Phyſitians, cannot tell what certainely to affirme. For,
becauſe it is ſharpe, and therefore cooleth, they wil haue it to
be colde. But contrariwiſe, when they behold the facultie
thereof, to be attenuating, cutting, and diſſoluing, alſo their

                     •
                  ernor and boyling thereof, when it is put vpon earth or claie,
they are conſtrained to forſake their opinion, vncertaine what
to iudge thereof. Who, if they had bene acquainted with
the Hermeticall doctrine, they ſhould haue knowne, that the
cauſe of ſuch tartneſſe or ſowerneſſe in vineger, commeth by
the ſeperation of the ſpirit, from the wine: as is plainly ſéene by
experience. For the longer that wine ſtandeth in the Sun, or
in a hotte place, the more by little and little it waxeth ſharpe;
and whatſoeuer is aiery therein, and of the quinteſſence of the
wine, by the force of the heat vaporeth away. This eternal and
celeſtial eſſence being gone, which was the cauſe of the wines
ſwéetnes (which ſwéetnes hath alwaies ioyned with it neuertheleſſe,
a certaine pricking very acceptable to the pallate, by
reaſon of a ſingular temper of ſharpneſſe Vitriolated by
ſwéete and Sulphurus ſpirits, put by the inſtinct of nature
into wine) at the length it waxeth ſower: the cauſe of
whoſe ſharpneſſe, is not to be referred to the colde qualities,

but to thoſe hidden and ſower ſpirits of Salt, which by the
bonde of the ſulphurus ſubſtance, were contained and kept in
their office and working in the wine: the which bond being
diſſolued, the ſpirits range at will, and doe make manifeſt
their nature, which was afore hidden. Hereupon it commeth,
that vnegers are ſharper in one ſort, then in another, according
as they haue in them more or leſſe of the nature of Salt
Armoniac, and 
                     •
                  o whit of the ſulphurus ſubſtance. For ſimple
water deuoide of all Salt, can neuer by reaſon of the coldneſſe
therein waxe ſower. But as from wine, ſo from meat,
and from ale or béere, and from boyling new wine, may be ſeparated
the proper water of life, and ethereal ſubſtance, the
which being ſo ſeparated, they become eager, becauſe they containe
in themſelues a ſharpe ſalt of nature.
               Such is that ſharpe ſalt, which Phyloſophers call their
Mercury, or Salt Armoniac, Volatile and ſpiritual (becauſe
of al metalline ſalts, the common Armoniac is moſt Volatile,
ſuch as in the forme of moſt white and ſalt meale, may be
carried vp vnto the cloudes by ſublimation, and yet hath a dry
and ſpiritual nature, which the Phyloſophers call their dry
water: becauſe this Salt is ſo farre forth Volatile and flying,
that it is lifted vp together with the aiery or watery vapour,
of the which is made the mixture of the compound: and ſo
great is the ſharpneſſe of this ſalt, that one ſcruple or eightéene
or twenty graines of this ſalt perfitly refined and made
moſt ſimple, diſſolued in a pot of commom water, doth make
all the ſame wonderfully ſower.
               And this is the Salt, (the ſulphurus eſſence taken away)
which ſheweth it ſelfe euidently to be ſéene by his ſharpneſſe
in vineger, with watery ſubſtance. But the more ſtrong the
wine ſhal be, the more ſharpe the ferment of the vineger, and
the more vehement the tartneſſe thereof will ſhewe it ſelfe: out
of the which the pearcing, attenuating, & diſſoluing ſpirits, are
extracted by a ſkilful workmā: the which forces & faculties cannot
procéed from any other thing, then from that ſpiritual and
Volatile ſalt Armoniac, mixed with a watery humour.
               
                  
And to make this more plaine, and to proue it by effect,
take the moſt ſtrong Vinegar, white or red: diſtil the ſame in
Balneo Mariae, till it be drie, with a gentle fire, out of a pinte
and a halfe, you ſhall extract thrée partes or more, like moſt
cleare water, but moſt ſharpe and ſower, the bottome of the
matter as the léeſe and pheſes remaining in the bottome of the
glaſſe with the moſt ſharpe and byting Salt, the which, becauſe
it is fixed, and cleauing to the terreſtrial part of the Vinegar,
cannot be extracted but by the great violence of the fire.
By which meane a moſt ſharpe oyle, like in nature to Aqua
Regia, moſt corroding and fretting, is extracted, not by reaſon
of the heate of fire, but by the force and power of a briniſh ſubſtance
which is expelled in forme of an oyle with the Salt
from the reſt of the 
                     •
                  eces, by fire.
               But leauing that ſharpe fire of the Léeſe, let vs take in
hand to explicate the ſowernes of the Vineagar diſtilled. By
a ſoft and gentle diſtillation, is firſt of all extracted, a certaine
watry elementary phleme, which is drawne out of the whole
body almoſt without taſte, leauing in the bottome of the glaſſe,
another liquour, farre more ſower and ſharpe, and therefore
more ſtrong to diſſolue, which otherwiſe before was nothing
ſo ſharp, becauſe the Salt Armoniac was tempered and mixed
with a watery Phleame. Whereof if thou deſire to know
the quantitie, take ſo much of the beſt Salt Tartar, which is
of the ſame nature, but fixed, by which if thou drawe by little
and little thrée pintes of this Vinegar diſtilled, and diſph
                     •
                  eamed,
to the waight of one ounce, thou ſhalt finde the volatile
Salt Armoniac to be conioyned with the ſharpe fixed Salt:
and that which ſhall be diſtilled from the ſame, will become altogether
without taſte, or a little ſwéetiſh, the volatile Salt
Armoniac being gone, through the paſſage in the fixed Salt.
So that the ſaid ounce of Salt Tartar, is increaſed by one
ſcruple or more of volatile Salt, increaſing the quantitie of
the other fixed. Thus that volatil Salt Armoniac which vaniſheth
out of the Vinegar with the watry and aierie ſubſtance
is retained by paſſage, in the proper fixed Salt, and
there abioeth, and by his abſence, diſpoyling the diſtilled liquor,

of all ſowerneſſe: the which is therefore of no vertue, or
of leſſe efficacie, then pure and ſimple water. Hereby it appeareth,
how litle ferment is néedful to a great quantitie of paſte,
to acuate and augment the ſame, as Phyloſophers ſpeak: without
the which, the elementary water wil haue no ſharpeneſſe.
For if that Salt Armoniac be wanting, as touching the force
and vertue thereof, water hath neither tartneſſe, nor taſte at
all.
               Therefore a Hermetical Phyloſopher & Phiſitian, which
is wel acquainted with the liuely anatonie of things, wil teach,
that the ſharpe, ſower, and attenuating taſte of vineger, and
the diſſoluing facultie thereof, ariſeth herehence, becauſe tart
things, whether they be waters, or iuices, are mixed and infuſed
with ſalt Armoniac: and that therefore Vineger, not
onely in regard of the tarneſſe thereof, but alſo that moſt thin
ſpirituous ſower eſſence of Salt, doe pierce into the moſt inward
parts euen of the hard bodyes. And if it ſhewe foorth
any cooling effects, it commeth thereof, becauſe the ſulphurus,
and fierie qualitie of the wine, that is to ſay, the Aqua
Vitae, is ſeperated: without the ſeperation whereof it
can neuer bée made vineger, and can at no time yéelde any
taſte of Aqua Vitae. And that ſharpeneſſe by which it burneth,
is the chariot or carrier away, of the elementarie and colde
water, by the which it is carryed and pierceth into the
moſt inward and ſecret partes, as wée haue learned by
often experience, that in that water, the ſame ſharpneſſe
is contained, and moſt néerely conioyned therewith.
               Nowe, as we haue ſhewed that the ſower and mercuriall
liquor of things, doth borrow that tartneſſe, from a certaine
Armoniac ſalt, and volatile, which ariſeth from the fixed:
euen ſo the ſulphurus and oylie liquor, doth receiue and
taketh his vertue from no other thing, than from that
ſwéete Niterous ſulphurus ſalt, which borroweth the ſame
from fixed ſalt: ſo that, in the fixed ſalt, and out of that ſalt,
that mercuriall ſowerneſſe, and ſulphurus vertue doe ſpring,

and doe receiue their fruits therefro, as from the roote and
firſt originall.
               As alſo héere it is to be noted, and to be wondred at, that
a tryple ſubſtance is ſeuerally to be extracted, out of one and
the ſame Eſſence: from whence all things created, do ſucke
and drawe their faculties, vertues and properties: and that
the ſame doe ſo ſubſiſt in one and the ſame ſubiect, that two others
are to be produced from one other. And the ſame thrée
eſſences, when they are ſeparated, and coupled together againe
and vnited, are then inriched and increaſed with wonderfull
vertues and faculties, and haue gotten excéeding perfection.
The which, the more often that they be ſeparated
and vnited, the more perfect and high degrees of power and
force they obtaine: in ſuch wiſe, that it is to bée reputed
the vniuerſall and moſt excellent Medicine of all others.
            
            
               CHAP. VIII. Concerning the excellent goodneſſe of Salt
in Medicine, according to
auncient preſcription.
               
                  IT is manifeſt in the Writings of Galen,
and other Greeke Phyſitians,
as alſo in the Traditions of the Arabians
and Latines, with one conſent,
that Salt is good and profitable, not
onely to ſeaſon and ſawce meates,
but alſo for Medicine: Albeit in the
dyet of ſicke perſons, they commanded them to abſtaine from
ſalt things: They defended the vſe of Salt, to be neceſſary
for the curing of diuers diſeaſes, for that it hath vertue, to
clenſe, to open, to cut, and to make ſhinne, to moue ſweates,
to further vrine, and to prouoke vomit.
               
                  
And in this manifold facultie and vertue, it is more profitable
than the moſt of other remedies. For the proofe whereof
we will bring certaine examples of ſome of the moſt auncient
and famous Phyſitians.
               Firſt of all Aegineta,
                  Lib. de remed. 7. cap. 3 concerning the facultie of Salt, ſaith
thus: All Salt, hath great facultie to drye and to binde:
Wherefore it conſumeth all whatſoeuer is moyſt in mens
bodyes: and compacteth the reſt by binding. For this
cauſe it preſerueth from putrifaction. But burnt Salt hath
greater force to reſolue and conſume.
               
                  Oribaſius is of the ſame opinion,Lib. colle
                        •
                     . 15. Saltes, (ſaith he) whether
they be digged out of the earth, or whether they come out
of the ſea, haue like facultie: and is mixed with two qualities,
that is to ſay, of clenſing, and binding. In this notwithſtanding
they differ, that Saltes digged out of the earth, are of a
reſoluing and conſuming eſſence, by reaſon that they are of
more groſſe parts, and do more binde.
               The ſame Oribafius,
                  Lib. 2. de virtute ſimp. medi. ad Eutrapi. ſaith alſo, ſpeaking of Aloes, digged
and marine ſalt haue all one force, and are mixed of two
qualities, the one of clenſing, the other of binding. But it
is plaine, that both kindes doe drie. For the which cauſe it
conſumeth all humor in the body, and thickeneth the ſolyde
parts by binding. Burnt ſalt hath greater force to clenſe:
but it doth not contract and thicken ſo much as the other.
               The flower of ſalt, hath thinner parts, than burnt ſalt, and
is of a ſharpe qualitie and much digeſting.
               
                  Aetius hath alſo almoſt the ſame wordes;Tetr. 1. ſerm. 2. cap. 43. & 4. 6. ſauing that hée
addeth this concerning the froth of ſalt: The flower of Salt
ſaith hée, is frothy, cleaning to the rockes that are next adioyning,
and it hath by nature more thinne partes, than Salt it
ſelfe, therefore it can much more attenuate and reſolue: but
the reſt of the ſubſtance, cannot thicken as Salt doth.
               
                  Paulus Aegineta, in the ſame Booke and chapter before
quoted, writeth that the ſame 
                     •
                  roth of Salt, is the flower of
Salt, and is of more thinne parts, and more conſuming, then
is Salt it ſelfe, but doth leſſe compact. By whch it doth euidently

appeare, that the ſcience of Calcination, of attenuation, and
of eſſences, was not vnknowen to them of olde time. For by the
working and ſtyrring of the ſea, they learned the Art of diſtillation,
by which they ſeperated the more ſpirituous, from the more groſſe:
euen as we ſée the truth hereof to appeare in the experience of charming
and working ſimple milke. For by that meanes, three ſundrie
ſubſtances, are diuided one from the other, namely Butter,
Curdes, and Whaye.
               
                  Aetius,
                  Ter. 
                        •
                     . ſerm 1. cap, 24. ſpeaking of cruditie, and of thoſe things which do helpe
concoction, according to the opinion of Galen, and other Phiſitians,
ſetteth before vs Saltes: In the deſcription whereof, he putteth
in, one pound of ſalt of Cappadocea, the which ſurmounteth
the doſe of all other the Ingredients of that compoſition: the which
pouldred, he preſcribeth to be taken in a reare egge, to the quantitie
of halfe a ſpoonefull, faſting in the morning. The effect whereof
he ſheweth in theſe words: No man can ſufficiently commende the
worthines of this medicine, for the helping vertue which it hath in
colde diſtemperatures, correcting raw humors: for the which cauſe
it helpeth the collicke, and doth gently looſen the belly.
               Hée deſcribeth alſo other ſaltes which looſen the bellie, which
drawe fleame from the head, with other helpes beſides. And into
one compoſition, hee appointeth to be put of cléere dryed ſalt, 144.
dragmes. In the which compoſition, hee added of the flowers of
C
                     •
                  amamil, of Coniza, of mountaine Calamynt, of the roote of the
mountaine Eringium, of Origan, of Sylphium, of Pepper of each
a thirde parte. The which Ingredients put to the quantitie of the
ſalt aforeſaid, come nothing neere to the quantity therof.
               He appointeth another compoſition of Salte: where to thirtie
ounces of parched ſalt, hee appointeth a farre leſſe doſe of Hyſope,
of wilde Tyme, & of Cummine: the continuall vſe wherof, hée appointeth
in ſtéede of common ſalte, not onely for to make the meate
ſauory, but alſo for medicine. For (ſaith he) who ſo vſeth the ſame
continually, ſhall at no time be troubled with any diſeaſe. It helpeth
headache, it quickeneth the ſight, it cleanſeth the breſt from
fleame, it maketh good concoction in the ſtomacke, and purgeth
the kidneys.
               
                  
Hereby it appeareth, that the auncient Phyſitians did not only
vſe Salt, but alſo that they made choyſe of the beſt and moſt cleare
ſort, the which alſo they dryed and parched with heate of the fire,
to make it the more forcible to helpe in all obſtructions. For Salts
are of that power, that they take away all manner putrifaction and
corruption of wormes, and doe put away the originall of other vices
and diſeaſes, and do amend them. The which being ſo, what
other thing can be found out, for the conſeruation of life and health,
or for the expulſion of all diſeaſes, more profitable.
               
                  Actuarius, alſo deſcribing certaine purgatiue Salts, doth giue
vnto them great efficacie in helping and eaſing ſundry diſeaſes,In lib. de metho. me
                     
                        ••
                     . cap. 9.
and 
                     〈◊〉
                   preuenting many ſickneſſes.
               
                  
                     
                        •
                     yrepſius deſcribeth moe then twenty ſundry Salts. And among
their compoſitions, hée calleth one the Apoſtles Salt, the
which preſerueth the ſight to a very great age, clenſeth the lunges
from tough fleame, preuenting coughes, and inlarging the breath.
Another compoſition hée attributeth to Saint Luke the Euangeliſt,
which is almoſt of the like vertue, the which the Prieſtes of Aegipt,
(as he ſaith) vſed for fulneſſe, that they might be the more fitte
to apply themſelues to their ſtudies: being alſo of force, to remedie
ſundry diſeaſes.
               
                  Marcellus Empiricus, diſcribed two maner of purging Salts.
Many other authors might be alleaged,Li. de medidica. cap. 30. as Gregorius Theologus,
Plinius Secundus, and others, which haue giuen great commendation
to the vertue of Salts, whoſe wordes for breuities ſake, I
omit.
            
            
               CHAP. IX. Concerning the extractions of Salts out of all
things, and Chymicall calcinations and incinerations,
knowne to the ancient Phyſitians,
and vſed in Medicine.
               
                  
THere are ſome which contemne and deride our Artifice cōcerning
the extractions of Salts. But no wiſe man will ſpeake
againſt the thing which he knoweth not. For the auncient Phyſitians,
haue vſed calcinations like vnto ours: as may appeare by the
wordes of Oribaſius, when he maketh mention of the Calcination
of Tartar, and of the feces of vineger, put into an earthen potte,
cloſe paſted or lated. For he ſaith that the matter which is to be calcined,
being faſt luted in a potte, and ſet ouer the fire to be baked, ſo
long, vntill it waxe white, Alchimically.
               
               
                  Plinius Secundus, vſed the aſhes of beaſtes and foules, as moſt
ſingular and familar remedies.
               All the auncient writers, ſpeake of a little bird like a Wrenne,
which is called Regulus Troglodites, and haue taught that the
ſame being brought into aſhes, is ſingular remedie for the Stone.
Alſo they ſay, that glaſſe calcined and burnt into aſhes, hath the
ſame effect. And many of our later Phyſitians, doe vſe the aſhes of a
ſpoonge, drunke in white wine, for the cure of the Broncoceles,
which is a diſeaſe aryſing from the throates kernells, of ſome called
the Hermis of the throate. This they preſcribe to be drunke for
the ſpace of one whole Moone: which is a moſt certaine experience.
               
                  Aelius propoundeth many and ſundry remedies,Ter. 1. which they of
olde time vſed, which being calcined and diſſolued into aſhes, according
to the cōmon faſhion of Chymiſts,
                  Ser. 2. he moſt highly eſtéemed▪ as
ſecrets of excéeding price. His words are theſe. It is ſaid, that it harts
horne be burnt and waſhed,Cap. 156. it cureth the diſentery Fluxe, and the
ſpitting of blood: and is giuen with great profit to them that haue
the Iaundiſe: being giuen in the quantitie of two ſpoonefulls. And
in another place he ſaith:Cap. 157. Some burne the clawes of Swine, and
giue the aſhes to thoſe that are tormented with the collicke, in
drinke. Other ſome ſay, that Aſſes hooues burnt, drunke daily & doe
cure the falling ſicknes. Againe he ſaith▪ All burnt bones haue power
to driue away & to dry vp:Cap. 161. but more eſpecially mens bones. Much
more might be brought out of Aetius concerning theſe things, to
proue that they of olde, did vſe calcinations and aſhes, in diuers and
ſundry maladies. Albeit all aſhes in generall, ſo farre forth as they
containe in them their proper Salt, haue power in them to dry vp,
& to clenſe, yet neuertheleſſe they retaine in them ſome property of
that matter out of the which they are extracted.
               
                  
And this agreeth with that which Aegineta teacheth,Lib. 7. de re medica. ſaying:
Aſhes haue not exactly one temperature, but do differ according to
the difference of the matter which is brent. And therfore the aſhes
of ſharp things, as of Oakes, or Holme, do binde very much, and
do ſtoppe the eruption of bloud without any other thing. But the
aſhes of more ſharp things, as of the figge, and Tythimal, or ſpurge,
are more ſharpe and cleanſing.
               
                  Oribaſius wryteth in like manner,Coll lib. 15. ſauing that he procéedeth
further. For he plainely teacheth the Chymicall extraction of ſalt
out of ſuch aſhes, ſpeaking thus: Aſhes (ſaith hee) haue in them,
partly that which is Earthie, and partly that which is fumie, and
theſe partes are thinne, and the aſhes ſteeped or infuſed in water,
and ſtrayned, do paſſe through together: that which remaineth being
earthie and weake, and without byting, is made hotte, hauing
put of his force in the watering or infuſion. And thus Oribaſius
calleth the ſeparation of the actiue from the paſſiue & earthie (which
he calleth infirme, or weake, but the Chymiſts, the deade and damned
earth) Seperation.
               All whatſoeuer our more ſkilfull Chymiſts of this age could
adde vnto the Calcinations and I
                     •
                  cinerations of the more ancient,
is this one thing, that out of ſuch kinde of Aſhes (whereof Oribaſius
maketh mention) they drawe out the whole water, and drye
it vp: and that which remaineth in the bottome, being impure ſalt,
they diſſolue againe with common water, or with the proper water
thereof, (which is better) diſtilled from it, before the Incineration of
the matter, that they may make the ſame cleane and pure, and as
cleere as Chriſtall. For they diſſolue manie times, they fylter, and
coagulate, not to the vttermoſt poynt of dryneſſe: but drawing out
onely of that water twoo thirde partes and more, by the pipe of the
Alembick, they afterward remooue the ſame from the fire, that 
                     •
                  he
ſalt therein contained, and ſet in a colde place, may growe into a
chriſtalline I
                     •
                  e, which is the moſt pure ſalt of the matter without
all doubt. This ſalt muſt be gathered together, and ſeparated with
a woodden ſpoone. And if there remaine any parte of the water, let
it bee vapoured againe, and then putte into a veſſell to ſtand in the
colde ayre, where will bée coniealed a chriſtalline reſidence anew,

which muſt be ſeperated againe, ouer and ouer ſo many times, vntill
more it can growe into a Iellie or Iſe. Theſe kinde of Iſ
                     •
                  e recidences,
are the true beginning of Salts, vital and qualified with
admirable vertues. And this ſalt hath in it ſtill the other twoo ſubſtantiall
beginnings, Sulphur, and Mercury. For from the ſame,
the mercurial and ſulphurous beginning, the one ſwéete and vnctuous,
the other ſharpe and Etheriall, may yet bée drawen by a ſkilfull
workeman the more fixed parte, namely that of Salt, remaining
ſtill in the bottome. Saltes haue their corporall Impurities,
but the ſpirituall Balſam which lyeth hidde in them, is the Chymicall
ſalte, knowen to a fewe. Some of theſe Salts are bytter as
worme
                     •
                  ood, ſome ſwéete as ſugar, ſome ſharpe as vitriolls, ſower
as Quinces or grapes, by whoſe balſame they are nouriſhed, 
                     •
                  oſtered,
and conſerued. Theſe ſalts haue diuers ſpirites, ſome reſoluing,
ſome coniealing: And as they haue diuers ſpyrits, ſo do they
worke ſundrie and admirable effects.
            
            
               CHAP. X. Wherein is prooued, that the naturall and originall moyſture
in Saltes, is not conſumed by calcination, but that
the very formes do lye hidde in that conſtant
and vitall beginning.
               
                  THe Naturall and originall moyſture, with the
which Saltes are repleniſhed (as is aforeſaid)
is not conſumed with the force of fire, and by
Calcination. For it ſhall be here ſhewed, that
all the more forcible tinctures and impreſſions,
and the property of things, together with their
moſt potent qualities and powers, as taſtes,
odours, colours, with the very formes themſelues, & ſuch like, are
concluded, and do lie hid, in that firme, conſtant, & vitall beginning.
               For the truth whereof, I will deliuer vnto you certaine demonſtrations,
oftentimes prooued and confirmed by my owne experience.
One, I learned of a friend which lodged at my houſe, who

was the firſt Inuentor therof. Another, I receiued frō a moſt learned
& famous Polonian, a ſkilfull Phyſitian, aboue 26. yeers ſince.
               This man was ſo excellently, and phyloſophically ſkilfull in
the preparing of the aſhes out of al the parts of any maner of plant,
with all the Tinctures and Impreſſions of all the parts of the
plant, and would in ſuch wiſe conſerue all their Spirites, and
the Authours of all their faculties, that hée had aboue thirtie
ſuch plants prepared out of their aſhes of diuers ſorts, conteyned
in their ſeuerall glaſſes, ſealed vp with Hermes ſeale, with
the tytle of each particular plant, and the propertie thereof, written
vpon the ſame. So, as that if a man deſired to ſée a Roſe or Mary-gold,
or any other flower, as a red or white Poppey, or ſuch like:
then would hée take the glaſſe wherein the aſhes of ſuch a flower
was incloſed, whether it were of a Roſe, a Marie-golde, a Poppey,
a Gilly-flower, or ſuch like, according as the writing of the
glaſſe did demonſtrate. And putting the flame of a Candell to the
bottome of the glaſſe, by which it was made hote, you might ſée
that moſt thinne and impalpable aſhes, or ſalt, ſend foorth from the
bottome of the glaſſe, the manifeſt forme of a Roſe, vegetating and
growing by little and little, and putting on ſo fully the forme of
ſtalkes, leaues and flowers, in ſuch perfect and naturall wiſe in apparant
ſhew, that a man would haue beléeued verily, the ſame to
be naturally corporeat, whereas in truth it was the ſpirituall Idea,
indued with a ſpirituall eſſence: which ſerued for no other purpoſe,
but to be matched with his fitting earth, that ſo it might take vnto
it a more ſoly body. This ſhadowed Figure, ſo ſoone as the veſſell
was taken from the fire, turned to his aſhes againe, and vaniſhing
away, became a Chaos and confuſed matter.
               When I had ſéene this ſecret, & endeuouring with al my might to
attaine to the ſame, I ſpent much time about it, but yet loſt my labour.
But as touching the demonſtration following: I affirme vpon
my faith and credite, to be moſt certaine, and haue often proued
and experimented it by my ſelfe & may eaſily be done by any man.
               The Lord de Luynes Formentieres, a man of great account,
both for his learning and office, being noble, and of all men
ſingularly beloued, long ſince departed this life: with whom in
his life time, I conuerſed with great familiaritie. This noble man

                     〈◊〉
                   very great paines, to ſearch and finde out the moſt excellent

ſecrets of nature, but ſpecially thoſe which appertained, either for
the preſeruatiō, or for the reſtoring of health. And ſéeking long to find
ſuch remedies, for that he had languiſhed in a crazed body a great
while without any helpe, and was iudged by Phyſitians to be paſt
cure, he was at the laſt holpen, and wonderfully reſtored to health, by
one only Loſſenge of a certaine Chymical electuary of great vertue,
which the Lady de la Hone, a moſt noble and wiſe matrone gaue
vnto him. This Loſſenge, prouoked him to eaſie vomit, by which
he caſt vp from his ſtomacke all impurity, tough and diſcous, like
the whites of egs, diuerſly coloured, in great quantitie: by which hee
was reſtored to health againe, to his great ioy and comfort.
               Hereupon he greatly deſireth to know this ſecret, the which he
not onely obtained at the hands of that noble Lady, but ſome others
alſo no leſſe vertuous, by his own endeuour afterwards: the which
he vſed both for his owne health, & alſo for the good of others as need
required, in the way of Chriſtian charity. This man cōming out of
France, in the time of the ciuil wars, & conuerſing with me, applyed
his mind to extract Salt out of mettals: that thereby he might prepare
a remedy againſt the ſtone, diſſoluing it with chriſtall. This
Salt being mixed with the lye made with aſhes of 
                     〈◊〉
                   mettals, by
often powring warme water vpon the ſame, & drawing it through
too and againe (as women are wont to make their cōmon lye) ſhewed
a proofe of his eſſence, included in the lye after this maner.
               The lye being ſtrained through a Filter, & oftentimes very well
clenſed, was put into a veſſell of earth, hauing a narrow bottom, and
a wide mouth, which is called a Terime. And when the ſaid veſſell
had ſtood without the windowes in the cold aire, by the ſpace o
                     •
                   one
night, it grew into an Iſe, through the cold of the winter. The window
being opened earely in the morning, and the lye clenſed, there
appeared a méere and firme Iſe, wherein there appeared a thouſand
formes of mettalls, with all the parts thereto belonging: as
leaues, ſtalkes, and rootes, being very plaine and apparant to the
eye of the beholders, in ſuch ſort as no man could but acknowledge
them to be mettals.
               When the noble man beheld this, and gazed vpon it, as on a miracle,
he haſtily ranne vnto me, and ſpake to me in the words of
Archymides, crying, I haue found, come, and ſee. And when
I came into his worke-houſe, I tooke the Iſe, and brake of 
                     〈◊〉
                   good

péece, which I handeled ſo warily, that it might not melt with the
warmth of my hand, and carryed it to men of great woorth, which
dwelt with vs in that Citie: who beholding the Iſe, affirmed moſt
conſtantly that they were mettalls, and did no leſſe maruaile then I
my ſelfe did, wondering what it ſhould intende, and from whence,
and how ſo excellent a thing coulde procéede out of Nature: wée all
calling to minde this ſentence of holie writ: Remember man, that
thou art Aſhes, and to Aſhes againe thou ſhalt returne: conſidering
that the forces of ſuch things do lye hydde and abide in their aſhes,
from whence the Reſurrection of our Bodies is moſt aſſuredlie to
bée expected.
               This gallant experiment being afterwards oftentimes by mée
wrought, & rightly performed by Art, brought alſo to my minde that
Hiſtory wherof I ſpake before, concerning a Poleland Phyſitian:
the which when I ſaw, I ſtroue, and endeuored all that I coulde,
with meditation and practice to bring it to paſſe. And firſt I thought
vpon the reaſons how ſo excellent a woorke might be finiſhed: and
what it was, that gaue forme ſo perfectly to a Roſe, or to any other
Plant, according to the verie life, with all the Naturall colours
thereto belonging, in a moment, occaſioned through a light heate. I
ſay, I had diuers and ſundrie cogitations with my ſelfe how this
thing might bée. And amyddeſt theſe thoughts, and as I was buſied
in other woorkes, I perceiued that the forme and figure of a
thing is included in his ſalt, without any colour: and that there are
no other colours in water, then waterie, that is to ſay white: And
further, that the mettalls in that I ſée ſhould be deuoid of all colour,
ſauing waterie and white, by reaſon that the Ethereall and Mercuriall
ſpirites Vaporous and ſulphurous▪ do vaniſh away, by their aſſation
and calcination in the Sunne-ſhine, from the which ſpirits
the colours doe ariſe, as is to be ſéene in Salt Niter: which al beit
whyte in ſhewe, yet put into a cloſe Lembic, and ſet ouer the fire in
ſande to be fixed, it ſendeth foorth his flying ſpirits, euen through
the harde bodie of the Alembic, of ſixe hundreth ſeuerall colours, and
cleaning to the vttermoſt part of the veſſell like volatile meale. Séeing
therefore there lye hid ſo many ſundrie colours in Salt-peter,
(which is a fatte ſalt of the earth) there is no doubt but that the like

Saltes alſo are contained in all other things, which containe in
them their proper colours alſo drawen out of the power of the
earth, which ſhew foorth themſelues in theyr due ſeaſon by the induſtrie
of Art.
               Thus after long deliberation had with my ſelfe, I fullie reſolued
to make tryall hereof. And firſt I tooke one whole ſimple
being in this perfect vigor and ſtrength in the ſpring time, hauing
fulneſſe of Iuice, and impreſſions of vitall tinctures, which natures
are included in the ſpirites of Saltes. This ſimple (I
ſay) I determined to beate in a marble morter, with his ſtalkes,
leaues and flowers, together with the rootes, and ſo to reduce it
into a Chaos or confuſed maſſe, & to put it into a veſſell of glaſſe,
cloſed with Hermes ſeals, and ſo to remaine to be digeſted, macerated,
and fermented a conuenient time, out of the which at the
length I might 
                     〈◊〉
                   thoſe thrée principles, Salt, Sulphur, and
Mercurie, & to ſeparate them according 
                     〈…〉
                   preſeruing with
all diligence the ſpirtes: & out of their mercuriall and ſulphurous
liquor actiue, ſeparating the Elementall water paſſiue, whereby
is extracted out of the drie Feces artificially calcined, a Salt,
brought to the puritie of Chriſtall, which is a moſt white aſhes,
and moſt full of life.
               Then after this, I would put to this Salt by little and little his
Mercuriall liquor, which I would diſtill from it, that I might
conioyne with the fixed ſalte, the volatile armoniac, which is included
in that liquor, and from whome the liquor borroweth his
whole force, which I perceyued to be deteyned and ſwallowed
vp by the fixed ſalte: for ſo nature imbraceth nature, and like reioyceth
with the like, as ſalt with ſalte.
               Theſe things thus finiſhed, that is, theſe ſaltes being vnited
together againe, then would I adde by little and little the ſulphurous
eſſence, which I would bring into earth ſoliate, that is
to ſay: the moſt ſimple eſſence, full of all vitall Tinctures and
properties.
               But wanting leyſure to go forward in this courſe, I haue not
as yet attayned the vndoubted experience of this ſo noble a ſecrete:
whereof I will make proofe and aſſaye, if God permit,

when occaſion ſhalbe giuen. For ſéeing it is a matter in nature,
and hath bene alreadie done, there is no doubt but that it may
be done againe, by other diligent woorkemen. Neyther doe I
thinke that there can be a more ready way of working prepared,
than that which I haue already ſpoken of, and which is knowen
and familiar to true Philoſophers, and Chymiſts. For this
courſe obſerued, euery thing wel wrought, hath his moſt effectual
and actiue vertues, and vital qualities. But ſome other better
learned and more exerciſed in Chymical philoſophy then my ſelfe,
can more readily ſée this thing, and looke further into the workemanſhip,
who hauing better leyſure, may make trial of this working,
and finde out in very déede the truth and certainty of the artifice.
Wherunto if any man by his induſtry do attaine, let him
not kepe the ſecrete to himſelfe alone, but let him beſtow the ſame
vppon men of good parts, for the which benefite they ſhal ſtant
bounde foreuer.
               For albeit, it is a matter more pleaſant to beholde then profitable,
yet it openeth and awaketh the drowſie eyes of the more
witty and learned ſort of men, to beholde and take in hande for
greatter and more profitable things for mankinde: who afterwarde
wil guide into the right way, the blinde, and ſuch as doe
erre through ignorance, and wil ſteppe the mouthes of euil tongued
and malicious men.
            
            
               CHAP. XI. Concerning the viſible bodies of
the Elements.
               
                  IT now reſteth that ſomewhat 
                     •
                  ee ſaid
                     •
                  ,
concerning the viſible Bodies of the Elements,
which of all things, as wel of Mineral,
as of Vegetable, and Animal, doe alwayes
appeare to be two: the one drye, the
other moyſt. The drye is a Sandy earth
or aſhes, 
                     〈◊〉
                   of all ſalt, by reaſon of the

waſhing of Waters, and is called by the Chymiſts, Terra damnata,
or Damned earth. Becauſe it hath no other force, but that
which is drying.
               The m
                     •
                  yſte which is called vnſauorie Phleame, is peſtered
with all Sulphur and Mercurie, hauing no odour or taſte, or
other vital vertue, which can onely moyſten, without any other
force at all.
               And as theſe are of no force, ſo doe they onely poſſeſſe
paſſiue qualities, and vnprofitable. But Ayer, the thyrd Element,
cannot be ſeparated by it ſelfe, but doth eyther vaniſh into
ayre, or elſe remayneth mixed Sulphur and Mercury, and doth
more chiefely cleaue vnto Mercury, which is ſo ſpiritual, that the
moſt experte woorkeman cannot ſeparate the ſame from it ſelfe
alone, but doth alwayes paſſe away into aire, with the aire or
vapour of that thing, whereof the ſeparation is made: to which
aier Mercury is ſtraitely combyned, that it can neuer be ſeparated
from the ſame, without it be done by the great induſtry of a
ſkilful workeman, who knoweth that Mercury or ſalte Armoniack
volatile, is ſo conioyned with aier, or with the aiery parts,
that it doth alſo breathe away with the aiery parte, and with the
ſame is reduced into ſpiritual Water, which is knowen to be the
mercurial water, by the ſharpe, ſower, and vehement, which
ſpringeth from the Mercury or ſalt armoniack, of nature ſpirituall.
The which the workeman ſéeking to ſeparate, conioyneth
this ſpiritual liquor, with a Chriſtalline ſalt, naturally fixed,
from the which, he ſeparateth that aiery liquor, by Diſtillation,
which by that ſeparation is vtterly ſpoyled of all force, and remaineth
an vnſauory aiery liquor, for becauſe that Mercuriall
ſpirite poſſeſſing the nature of volatil Salt, remaineth fixed,
with his proper Salt, with the which hée hath the moſt chiefe
analogie and proportion. And thus the Philoſophers teſtify,
that nature is delighted with nature.
               Thus we ſée how the Elementary aier is to be ſeparated
from that Mercuriall ſpirite, namely by bringing the E
                     ••
                  ment
of aier, into water deuoyde of taſte, and by cutting the Mercuriall

ſpirit, into the ſalt, of his proper preheminence.
               Furthermore, hereby it appeareth, that Mercury is a certaine
aiery thing, or aier it ſelfe: and yet ſomewhat more then the elementarie
aier, which wanting the ſpirit of Mercurie, is a ſimple
aiery liquor of no vertue or power, but ſimplie to moyſten and
penetrate. And ſo the actiue qualities doe belong to the beginnings,
Salt, ſulphur, and Mercurie, and the paſſiue to the Elements.
This thing wée haue made plaine before, by the example
of Wine, and Water of life. Theſe things are therefore
ſpoken, that all men may ſée by the Anatomie and reſolution of
things, that the element of aier, cannot be ſeparated by it ſelfe
alone, neyther is it ſo to be ſéene of any, but of the true Philoſophers,
and by ſuch as are moſt conuerſant in this art.
               Thus certaine demonſtration is made of the viſible bodies of
things procreated, both out of the ſéedes and beginnings, and alſo
out of the elements; albeit in the reſolution of the bodies, thou
doeſt not diſcerne the viſible bodies of the ſéedes, put a parte by
themſelues. But it is an eaſie matter to diſcerne the ſeuered
partes of thoſe thrée beginnings, and alſo of the Elements, in the
which partes of the thrée beginnings, the vertues and powers of
actions (wherwith the ſéedes are indued) are included and mixed
together. Whereby it commeth to paſſe, that their bodies are filled
together with the vitall forces and faculties of the Aſtrall and
ſpirituall ſéedes, as the receptacle of th
                     •
                  ſe vertues.
               But the Elementall bodies, haue only paſſiue qualities: the
which elementall bodies, a w
                     •
                  rkeman cannot onely ſeparate by
themſelues, but can alſo bring them to nothing, in ſuch ſorte that
the paſſiue and materiall Elements being ſeparated, there ſhall
onely remaine thoſe thrée Hypoſtaticall, Formall, and Actiue beginnings,
ſalt, ſulphur, and mercury, which being drawen into
one body, do make a mixed body, which the Philoſophers call a
fifth or a fourth Eſſence, which is frée from all corruption, abounding
with quickening ſpirits: whereas contrariwiſe, the ſole elements
ſeparated from thoſe thrée beginnings, doe bring nothing
but impurities, corruptions, and mortification.
               In this Chymeſtry is to be extolled, that imitating nature, it

rateth Elements, and their beginnings, by which all the partes
of a compund body, are anatomized and made manifeſt. And
yet thoſe naturall ſubſtances, are not ſaid to be begotten, by ſuch
ſeparations, as if they were not before: neyther yet as bring before,
are they corrupted by the arte of ſeparation, but they were
in compounde, and after ſeparation, they ceaſed not to bee, and
to ſubſiſt. And as the thrée beginnings are coupled together, by
the benefite of an oylelie liquor ioyning them in one: ſo the thrée
Elements, Ayer, Water, and Earth, are combyned together, by
the comming in of Water as a meane. For water by her analogie
and conuenience partaketh both of the na
                     •
                  ure of aier, and
of earth: whereby it commeth to paſſe, that one while it is eaſily
turned into aier, another while into earth: and ſo it combyneth
both the extreames. In things that haue likeneſſe, an alteration
is eaſily made. For, by reaſon of likeneſſe and conſent,
aier made thicke with colde, paſſeth into water, and water made
thinne, becommeth aier: and water alſo made groſſe and thick,
becommeth earth: euen as earth alſo made thinne, paſſeth into
water, and is chaunged.
               Wherefore, forſomuch as aier and earth, two extreames, are
fitlie ioyned together, by a thyrd, which is water, a meane betwéene
them both: Ariſtotle did more than was néedefull to appoynt
a quaternarie number of Elements, out of the quaternary
number of the fower qualities, Hote, Colde, Drie, Moyſt. Howbeit,
it cannot be denied but that he had great probability hereof,
as is to be ſéene in his ſecond booke of the generation of liuing
creatures, where he goeth about by many reaſons to prooue, that
it is moſt neceſſary for the production of things, to appoynt a
fourth element, namely Fyer, hote and drie.
               But forſomuch as Moſes in the firſt Chapt. of his Geneſis
(wherein he ſheweth the creation of all things) maketh no mention
of Fier: it is more conuenient that we leaue it rather to the
opinion of the diuine Prophet, then to the reaſons of an Ethnick
Philoſopher. And therfore wée acknowledge no other Fier
then Heauen, & the fiery Region which is ſo called of burning.
               Therefore it ought to be called the fourth formall Heauen,

and eſſential element, or rather the fourth eſſence, extracted out of
the other elements: bicauſe it is indue
                     •
                   with far more noble vertues,
then the moſt ſimple elements. For the Hermeticall Philoſophers
deny that there is a quinteſſence becauſe there are not
fower elements, from whence there may be drawen a fifth eſſence,
but thrée onely and no more, out of which a fourth may be
extracted. So great is the power of this fourth eſſence, that it mooueth,
ſharpeneth, and mightily animateth the bodies of the thrée
principles, and of the more groſſe elements, to come into a perfect
mixture of one thing which neuer after can be di
                     ••
                  des. Wherevpon
the Indiuidualls, or ſimples which cannot be diuided, doe
borrow from Heauen, & from no other, all thoſe forces, faculties,
and properties, which they haue no ſhewe foorth. Herevpon it
commeth that the proper qualitie of that eſſence, is neither drye
nor moiſte, nor colde, nor hote. For it is a far more ſimple thing,
that is to ſay, a moſt ſimple and pure eſſence, extracted out of the
more ſimple and more ſubtil beginnings and elements, which maketh
a moſt ſimple, moſt pure, moſt thinne, and moſt ſwifte body,
indued with the greateſt force of generating, nouriſhing, increaſing,
and perfecting, which commeth ſo néere vnto the nature of
fier, that in very déede the Heauen is no other thing, but a pure
and ethereal fi
                     •
                  r, neither is the pure fire, any thing els but Heauen:
which the more it ouercometh the principles and elements,
the more it obtaineth, the more potent, perfect, pure, and ſimple
forces and vertues, 
                     〈…〉
                   into all things, and furniſheth
euery thing with his formes and vertues.
               It appeareth therefore by Moſes, that there is no other fiery
Element, but Heauen, which hath the place of the fourth element,
or which is rather a fourth eſſence extracted out of the more ſubtil
matter and forme of the three elements,The Heauen of Philoſophers. which is no other thing,
but a pure ethereal, and moſt ſimple fier, moſt perfect, and moſt
for different, from the thrée elements, as imperfite: which fier,
is the author of all formes powers, and actions, in all the inferior
things of nature, as the firſt cauſe, and carrying it ſelfe like the
p
                     ••
                  ent, toward his ofſpring: which fier, by his winde carryeth &
conueyeth his ſéedes into the belly of the earth, wherby the generation

or fruite is nouriſhed, foſtered, groweth, and is at the laſt
thruſt foorth, out of the lappe or boſome of the elements.
               This Heauen, albeit in it ſelfe, it is no complexion, that is to
ſay, neither hote nor cold, nor moyſt, nor drie: yet by his knowledge
and predeſtination, it yéeldeth to all things, heate and colde,
moyſtneſſe, and dryneſſe: forſomuch as there are ſtarres which
haue their moſt colde and moyſt ſpirites, as the Saturnails, and
Lunaries: others, moſt hote and drie, as the Solarie, and Martialls:
others hote and moyſt, as the Io
                        •
                     ialls, who by their vertues
and complexion (wherwith euery Starre and Planet is indued)
do informe, faſhion, a impregnat all theſe inferior things,
in ſuche wiſe, that ſome indiuidualls are of this condition and
complexion, which they haue borrowed and taken from their informing
or faſhioning planet or ſtarre: other ſome of that which
they haue obtained from other Planets and Starres. For God
hath giuen to Heauen moſt ſimple and perfect ſéedes, ſuch as are
the Starres and Planets, which hauing in them Vitall faculties,
and complexions, do powre them foorth into the lappe of the inferior
Elements▪ and do animate and forme them. Neyther doth
the Heauen 
                  
                     •
                  caſſe from his working, nor the Aſtrall ſeedes therof,
becauſe their vertues are neuer exhauſted: neyther do they ſuffer
alteration or diminution of faculties, wherby they may 
                     〈◊〉
                  
from procreating or forming, albeit that ſometime they do make
more or leſſe frutefull then at other ſome. Herevpon commeth
that perpetuall Circulation, by the benefite whereof the ſéedes of
the Elements or theyr matter, are coupled with the ſéedes of the
Starres, ſetting and putting their contayned into the maternall
lappe, that it may forme and bring foorth a kindly ſprout. For
as Heauen is ſayde to woorke vppon the Earth, ſo alſo the inferior
Elements, do yéelde and beſtowe their actions and motions,
but not after one manner: for that Heauen in acting ſuffereth
nothing, ſo farre foorth as it is equalled, being of a Hemogeniall
and moſt perfect nature: and therefore is incorruptible and
Immutable vnto the predeſtinated ende of things created.
               But theſe inferior things do ſuffer in their action, becauſe
they haue theyr formall beginnings, mixed with their materialls,

ſubiect to chaunge and deſtruction: whereuppon alſo it
commeth to paſſe, that thoſe things which procéede from them,
do in continuance of time decay and periſh.
               Theſe things knowen to a true Phiſitian and Philoſopher,
hée ſéeketh to reſtore decayed health, and to preſerue the ſame by
the extraction of celeſtiall Eſſences and Formes, and the elementarie
ſeparation of the beginnings and materialls, from thoſe
thrée formall and ſpirituall beginnings, the which he
                     ••
                  ſeth alone,
ſeparated from the others, which are Heterogeniall, or of another
kinde, that he may worke wonderful effects without any impediment.
               And this is the vniuerſal Balſamick medecine, wherin all the
partes are Homogeneal, or of one kinde moſt pure, moſt ſimple,
and moſt ſpirituall, And being in ſuch ſimplicitie, and moſt thoroughly
clenſed and purged from all groſſe Feces, and incorrupt,
it is called a Quinteſſence, but more truly and properly a Quarteſſence,
and the celeſtial ſtone of the Philoſophers.
               But let no man thinke here, that when I name the Philoſophers
ſtone, (that is to ſay, that vniuerſal medicine) that I meane
the tranſmutation of metalls, as if ſuch tranſmutation, were the
chéefe medicine of mans body: but knowe rather, that in Man,
(which is a little world) there lye hidde the mynes of Imperfect
metals, from whence ſo many diſeaſes do growe, which by a good
faithful and ſkilful Phiſitian muſt be brought to Golde and Siluer,
that is to ſay, vnto perfect purification, by the vertue of ſo excellent
a medicine, if we wil haue good and proſperous health.
               The Phiſitian therefore, muſt diligently conſider two things,
that is to ſaye, that Nature may be diſquieted, both by an inward
and alſo by an outward enemie. But this more eſpecially
he muſt foreſée, that Nature be not formented with the outward
enemie, which then commeth to paſſe, when a medecine is miniſtred
and giuen, which is crude, impure, and venimous, and
therefore contrary to our nature and ſpirites. Then on the other
ſide, he muſt haue care that the 
                     •
                  omeſticall enemies which are
within mans body, be dryuen out with conuenient and fitte weapons.
For if a remedy be applyed which is vnfitte, then Nature

is aſſayled by two enemies, that is to ſay, by the externall medicine,
and by the inwarde impuritie, which remaining long in
the body, turneth into poyſon, if ſpéedy remedy be not had.
            
            
               CHAP. XII. Moſes in his Geneſis ſheweth the three beginnings
Philoſophicall which are in
euery thing created.
               
                  WE holde by Moſes doctrine, that GOD in
the beginning made of nothing a Chaos, or
Déepe, or Waters, if wée pleaſe ſo to call it.
From the which Chaos, Déepe, or waters,
animated with the Spirite of God, God as
the great workemaiſter and Creator, ſeparated
firſt of all Light from Darkeneſſe, and
this Aethereall Heauen, which wee beholde, as a fifth Eſſence,
or moſt pure Spirite, or moſt ſimple ſpirituall body. Then hee
diuided Waters, from Waters; that is to ſay, the more ſubtill,
Aiery, and Mercuriall liquor, from the more Thicke, Clam
                     •
                  y,
and Oylely, or Sulphurous liquor. After that, he extracted and
brought foorth the Sulphur, that to ſay, the more groſſe Waters,
from the drye parte, which out of the ſeparation ſtandeth like
ſalte, and as yet ſtandeth by it ſelfe apart. And yet for all this,
thoſe vniuerſall partes of the whole Chaos, are not to be ſeparated,
but that ſtil euery one of them, do retaine in themſelues, thoſe
thrée beginnings without the which they cannot bée, nor yet fulfill
their generations. This was the worke of God, that hée
might ſeparate the Pure from the Impure: that is to ſay, that
he might reduce the more pure and Ethereal Mercury, the more
pure and inextinguible Sulphur, the more pure, and more fixed
ſalte, into ſhyning and inextinguible Starres and Lights, into a
Chriſtalline and Dyamantine ſubſtance, or moſt ſimple Bodie,
which is called Heauen, the higheſt, and fourth formall Element,
and that from the ſame, the Formes as it were ſéedes, might be

powred forth into the moſt groſſe elements, to the generation of
all things. The which are called the mo
                     ••
                   groſſe elements, becauſe
fr
                     •
                  m them in the diuiſion of the Chaos, the moſt pure part
is abſtracted and conuerted and brought to a heauen, and to the
fruites thereof.
               All which elements whether it be that moſt ſimple fourth, or
whether they be thoſe, which are ſaid to be more groſſe, forſomuch
as they conſiſt of thoſe thrée Hypoſtaticall beginning, they
could neuer be ſo ſeparated one from the other at the firſt, nor can
now bée ſo ſeperated by any Chymiſt, but that alwayes ſtill that
which remaineth is compounded of them thrée. The difference
is this, that ſome are moſt pure, ſimple, and moſt ſpirituall ſubſtances
of the ſecret parts, and other ſome, are more groſſe and
leſſe ſimple, alſo a third ſort, moſt groſſe and material in the higheſt
degrée.
               Therefore it muſt be confeſſed, that the Heauen, albeit it bee
moſt ſimple, doth conſiſt of thoſe thrée beginnings, but of the
moſt pure and moſt ſpirituous, and altogether formall. Whereby
it commeth to paſſe, that the vertues and powers of Heauen,
being wholy ſpirituall, doe eaſily without impediment pearcing
into the other Elements, powre forth the inferiour Elements
the ſpiritual formes: from whence all mortall bodies doe obtaine
the increaſe both of their vertues, and alſo of their faculties.
               If we will behold the puritie of the Heauen aboue other Elements,
and the perpetuall conſtancie thereof, looke then vpon
thoſe bright and ſhining fyers, continually glittering and light,
to whom the heauen hath giuen the moſt pure and extinguible
ſubſtance of Sulphur, whereof they conſiſt. For ſuch as the heauen
is in eſſence, ſuch and the like fruites hath it brought foorth in
ſubſtance: out of whoſe vitall impreſſions and influences, they
procreat & bring forth ſome likenes of thēſelues, in the more groſſe
Elemēts: but yet according as the matter is more groſſe or more
thinne, more durable or more conſtant, or more tranſitorie.
               And the influences of ſuch fyers, are mercuriall ſpirits: but
the light and ſhyning brightnes, is Sulphur: their fixed Heauens,
or Vitriall and Chryſtallyne circles, is a ſalt body: which

circles, are 
                     ••
                  pure, ſhining and fixed, that a Diamond which
partaketh o
                     •
                   the nature of fixed ſalt, is not of more puritie, continuance
and perpetuitie than they are.
               As touching the Elements of Ayer, the beginnings thereof
are more groſſe, leſſe pure, and leſſe ſpirituall and ſimple, than the
beginnings celeſtiall, and yet much more perfect, thinne, and penetrating,
then are the waterie and terreſtriall Mercuries and
Sulphurs: and is ſuch, that next to heauen it hath the preheminence
of actiuitie and power, whoſe forces are to be ſéene in diuers
and ſundry windes which are mercuriall fruites and the
ſpirits of the ayerie Element: whoſe ſulphurs alſo are diſcerned
to be pure and bright in burning Comets, which are no perpetuall
fires or ſulphurs, which cannot bée put out for degenerating
from the nature of Celeſtiall ſtarres and Sulphurs, as
from puritie & ſimplicitie, into a more groſſe and impure forme.
               Now as concernining Earth which is ayerie, it is ſo
ſubtill and thinne, that it is very hard to be ſéene, being diffuſed
throughout the whole Region of the Ayer: which doth not
ſent it ſelfe to the eye, but in Mannas, in Dewes, and in
Froſtes, as in aierie ſalts. The verie ſame beginnings of ayer,
may alſo be ſéene in Meteors: which in it, and out of it▪ are ingendered,
that is to ſay, in lightnings, in corruſcations, and in
thunderings, & in ſuch like. For in that flerie flame which breaketh
forth is Sulphur: In the windy ſpirit, & moyſtneſſe is Mercury:
and in the thunderbolt or ſtone of the lightning, is ſalt fixed.
               The fruites alſo of this nature are Manna celeſtiall, and hony,
which Bées do gather from flowers, wherein there is no other
thing but Salt, Sulphur, and Mercurie of the ayer: which by
a ſkilfull workeman are not ſeparated from thoſe without great
admiration: yea, the ruſtick Coridon findeth this by experience to
be true, when as he can ſeperate the matter of the Bées worke,
into waxe, which is a matter ſulphurus, into hony, which is a
Mercurial eſſence, & into droſſe, repreſenting the terreſtriall ſalfe.
And thus that ſuperior globe ſeuered into an ethereall and ayery
heauen, hath his thrée beginnings, yet neuertheleſſe very different
in ſimplicitis and puritie.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XIII. Whence is ſhewed, that in this inferior Globe of the Worlde,
namely in the Elements of Water and Earth, theſe
three beginnings are plainely to be ſeene.
               
                  THoſe thrée Beginnings, doe as yet more
plainely ſhewe foorth themſelues in this inferior
Globe, by reaſon of their more groſſe
matter, which is to our eyes more ſenſible.
For out of the Element of Water, the iuyces
and metallick ſubſtances do daily break
foorth in ſight: the vapours of whoſe moyſture
or iuyce more ſpirituous, do ſet foorth Mercury▪
                   the more
drye exhalations, Sulphur: and their coagulated or congealed
matter, Salt. Of the which ſaltes Nature doth offer vnto vs
dyuers kindes of Allume, of Vitriole, ſundry differences, Saltegemme,
and ſalt Armoniac, and many others. There are alſo
manie kindes of Sulphurs, of Pitche, and of Bitumen, and of
Mercuries, or Iuyces. Moreouer the Sea doth witnes, that it
is not without ſuch Mercuriall, Aiery and Sulphurous ſpirites:
whoſe meteors in Caſtor and Pollux, and in other 
                     〈◊〉
                   kindled,
by reaſon of their ſundry ſulphurs and exhalations, do confirme
the ſame: and that the ſea is not without his ſaltes, the ſaltneſſe
thereof doth make manifeſt. The Earth, alſo doth prooue the
ſame, which being like vnto a ſpunge, doth continually draw and
ſucke vnto it the ſalte body thereof: Wherby it cometh to paſſe,
that there are ſo many kindes of metalls and Mineralls therin.
From this Marine ſale, as from the Father and firſt original,
all other ſates are deryued. And theſe beginnings are ſo ſeparated
in all other Elementes by themſelues aparte, that no one of
them is depryued of the company of another. For in the Marine
ſalte, albeit the nature of ſalte, doth excéede and ouer matche
the nature of the other beginnings, yet it is not deſtitute of a ſulphurous
and mercuriall eſſence, as by Chymicall experience may

be made plaine. For hée which is a meane Chymiſt knoweth
how to extracte out of the ſame by the force of fire, a ſharpe Mercuriall
ſpirite, which being Ethereall, and therefore moſte Potente,
doth diſſolue into liquor, the moſt firme and harde metall,
as Golde, which otherwiſe cannot be ouercome neither with the
moſt vehement fyer, nor bée conſumed with any long continuance
of time.
               Furthermore, a workeman knoweth how to extract out of
the ſame ſalt congealed ſtones, very ſweete, and of a Sulphurus
nature, which neuertheleſſe haue a mightie and admirable force,
to diſſolue the moſt hard thing that is. And yet for all this, that
which remaineth is Salt. Thus you ſee plainely that theſe thrée
beginings, Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury, are contained in the
Marine Salt.
               The ſame alſo is to be ſée
                     ••
                   Vitriol,Venus and Mars are Copper and Iron. the which among other
Salts is moſt corporent. For alwayes for the moſt part figures
and Images of Venus and Mars, are to be ſéene therein and conioyned
together.
               In this Vitriol. I ſay, doe plainely appeare, Salt, Sulphur,
and Mercurie. Whoſe Mercurie altogether ethereall, being by
art ſeparated, and made moſt pure, from the elementary paſſiue

                     〈◊〉
                  , poſſeſſeth a gréene ſharpe ſpirit, of ſo great an acting and
penetrating force, that in a very ſhort time it will diſſolue metalyne
bodyes, and moſt hard ſubſtances, whether they be mettals
or ſtones.The greene Lyon. And this is that gréene Lyon, which Rypley commendeth
ſo much.
               The Sulphur in Vitriol, is eaſily diſcerned by a certaine red
Ocre, ſwéet, which is eaſily ſeparated from the ſame: which is
an aſſwager of things, and a right actatiue, and a great mittigator
all griefes, and paines▪
               
               But the Colcotar, or red feces with remayneth in ſhe bottome,
after the ſeperation of the ethereall Mercury, and of the
ſwéete Sulphur, conteyned in it, a moſt white Salt, the extraction
whereof maketh a very good and gentle vomit, fit and profitable
for many diſeaſes.
               As theſe thrée are found in Vitriol, ſo alſo they are to be found

in Allum, and in other Salts, as we haue ſhewed before concerning
common Salt.
               They are alſo to be ſéene in common Sulphur, wherein beſide
the Sulphurus ſubſtance, and inflamable matter, there is
contained a Mercuriall ſharpiſh liquor, ſo pearcing, that it is able
to open and vnlock the moſt ſtrong and hard gates of Sol
and Lana.
                  Sol and Lana, Gold, & Siluer.
               
               But the Salt drawen from the other parts, remaineth in the
bottome, as euery meane workman knoweth. And ſuch is this
ſoweriſh ſpirit of Slphur, that although it be drawen out of Sulphur,
fit to burne, yet it is ſo vnfit to take fier, that it is eaſily let
from burning.
               It happeneth otherwiſe to common Mercurie, which is altogether
ethereall and ſpirituall: (from whence the third begineing
of all things which is moſt ſpirituall, hath borrowed the
name, albeit it is not like vnto common Mercurie, or to quickſiluer
in forme)▪ For out of the ſame, both a liquor, and a ſwéete
Sulphur, and alſo a Salt may be extracted.
               Hereby it is eaſily iudged, that theſe thrée principles of Thymiſts
are not the common Salt, Sulphur, and Mercurie: but
ſome other thing of nature, more pure and ſimble, which neuertheleſſe
hath ſome conſcience and agréement with cōmon Salt,
Sulphur, and Mercurie: from whence alſo our beginnings haue
taken their name: and not without cauſe, for that the common
are in all mixt things, and in all things moſt ſimple and ſpirituall.
For the other being mixed with the more groſſe ſubſtances
of bodies, are hindered from being ſo volatile and ſpirituall. For
that they conſiſt of many vnkindly parts, with the which theſe
common ſpirits are not ſo holden backe.
               Of thoſe thrée beginnings aforeſaid, all metalls are compounded,
albeit after diuers ſorts. And this is the cauſe, that they differ
ſo much one from an other. For in yron, the Sulphur thereof
which may be burnt, in that it paſſeth almoſt away in ſparkes &

                     ••
                  nders by meanes of the fier, doth excéed in qualitie the other
two beginnings, and doth ouerſway them: Hereof it commeth,
that will be on fier throughout. For the which cauſe it is called

by the old Philoſophers, by the name of the Planet Mars, a burning
Planet.
               So copper hath great ſtore of Sulphur, but leſſe burning then
that of yron, and it hath alſo much vitriol ſalt, yet but little quantitie
of Mercurie. But that vitriolated Salt, is that ſharpe ferment
of nature, whereby the generations of all naturall things
are propagated and increaſed: whereupon the name of Venus is
giuen to Copper: in whom there is a ſecond quaternarie among
the Planets, where are heaped vp, nouriſhed, and coagulated
ſpiritually all celeſtiall eſſences: wherefore this Planet by all the
auncient Phyloſophers is called Venus, the mother of generations,
and begotten of the males froth.
               Tinne hath in it much ethereall and aiery Mercury, but of
combuſtble Sulphur, a ſmall quantitie, and the leaſt portion of
Salt. And hereof it commeth that Philoſophers call the fame Inpiter,
becauſe that Planet is altogether aiery and ethereall: and
therefore Poets appoint him king of the aier, and the region of
lightning.
               Gold and ſiluer, which of all other metalls are moſt noble and
perfit, do alſo conſiſt of the thrée foreſaid beginnings, but yet mixed
in equalitie, and ſo perfectly with great purity vnited, that it
may ſéeme that there is one chiefe and firſt eſſence onely in them,
and not thrée, of which they conſiſt. For theyr Salt, Sulphur, and
Mercury, are ſo ſtraitly, and by the leaſt things ſo ioyned together,
that it may ſéeme they are one ſubſtance, not thrée, or conſiſting
of thrée.
               Notwithſtanding moſt pure Mercury, ſéemeth to excell and
ouerſway in ſiluer, by which it is made more moyſt then Golde,
which is the moſt temperate of all other.
               But in Golde, the ſulphur which is fixed and incombuſtible,
of a fiery nature, bringeth to paſſe that it ſtandeth inuincible againſt
all force of fier, and looſeth not the leaſt waite thereof, becauſe
like wil neuer oppreſſe his like, but contrariwiſe do cheriſh
and preſerue one the other: whereby it commeth to paſſe
that it ioyeth in the fier, and alwaies commeth out of
the ſame, more pure and noble then it went in. Therefore

the name of the Sunne is giuen to gold, becauſe in very déede
it is an ethereall fier and brightneſſe. For the Sunne is a moſt
fiery ſhining Planet, giuing to all things, by his heat and ſpirits,
life. But ſiluer for the force and propertie of Mercuriall humiditie
which it hath with the Moone, a Planet full of radicall moyſture
and pregnant, is called by the name of the Moone.
               Leade containeth much Salt, and great plentie of indigeſted
and crude Mercury, but leſſe flying Sulphur: hereupon it commeth,
that lead is the examiner of all other metalls, which it diſperceth
into ſome, as is to be ſéene by tryall, excepting the two
perfect metalls, gold and ſiluer, which it cannot conſume.
               This vertue of conſuming the bodies of imperfect metalls, it
hath from that qualitie of Crude and flying Mercury, with the
which it doth abound: whereas otherwiſe by the nature of his
Sulphur, it is able to doe the contrarie: that is to ſay, to coagulate
thoſe metallick ſpirits, and to reduce them into bodies, euen as
quickſiluer being altogether flying by nature, etheriall, and truly
Homogeny and ſpirituall, doth after a ſort congeale and fire. So
that hereby it appeareth, that it hath in it by nature, the ſpirit of
heat and of cold, and therefore of metallick life and death: which
maketh the ſentence of Hermes good, when he ſaid, that which is
aboue is all one with that which is beneath. For ſuch as is Saturne
in the ſuperior Elements, ſuch alſo is lead in the inferiour:
and ſo of the reſt.
               And out of that burning licquor, more ready to burne, then the
very Aquauitie, may be ſeperated a Mercurie, or a more ethereall
ſpirit by a Matrat with a long necke, by a gentle fier. The
which ſo ſeperated, the reſt of the matter of meane ſubſtance,
which is Sulphurus, Oylely, and apt to burne, reſideth in the
bottome of the glaſſe, with the Niterous and Sulphurus ſpirit
of Salt.
               Out of the blacke feces, which remaine in the bottome of the
retort, being reduced according to the Phyloſophicall maner into
a calx
                     •
                  , is extracted a fixed Salt, which often times diſſolued
and Coagulated with his proper fleame, will at the laſt become
Chyrſtalline.
               
                  
To this, if there be afterward powred by little and little according
to Art, his ethereal ſpirit, that from hence it may contract
and drawe the double or triple waight of the volatile, and
truly Mercurial ſalt, in ſuch wiſe that being caſt vpon a red hote
plate, it doe diſpearce into fume: thou ſhalt at the laſt, by the
meane of ſublimation, attaine to the foliat earth of the Phyloſophers,
which will haue a greater brightneſſe and perſpicuitie,
then can be ſéene in the moſt rich and orient pearle in the world.
This earth the Phyloſophers call their Mercurie▪ the which alone
hath admirable properties and faculties.
               Againe, if to this be added the oylely liquor of his proper Sulphur
alſo exalted and kept a part by it ſelfe, in a iuſt & conuenient
qualitie, and if the ſame be drawen forth with ſundry cohobations
and extillations, againe and againe, repeated and iterated,
and be reaffunded and diſtilled, vntil out of a Ternarie, there ariſe
a vnitie: then out of the groſſe, terreſtrial: and material lead,
ſhal ariſe and ſpring vp a certaine celeſtial and true diſſoluer of
nature, and a quinteſſence of admirable vertue and efficacie: the
true, liuely, and cleare ſhyning fountaine wherein (as Poets affirme,
hyding vnder a vaile their ſecrets) Vulcan waſhed Phaebus,
and which clenſeth away all impuritie, to make a moſt pure and
perfect body, repleniſhed with vital ſpirits, and full of vegetation:
and doth ſo rid himſelfe from his adamantine fetters with the
which he was bound, and hindered from the victorie aginſt the
Serpent Pytho, and doth in ſuch wiſe ſhake off all impediments,
that being frée from all duſkie cloudes of darkeneſſe, with the
which he was couered and ouerwhelmed, he ſendeth forth now
vnto vs his moſt bright ſhining light, with the which wee are
throughly refreſhed, receyuing youthful ſtrength, putting off all
imbecillitie, and like vnto that Aſon king of Creta, through the
helpe of Media, are throughly reſtored againe to young age. So
that the ſame thing which afore was altogether cold without
blood, and deuoided of life ſéeming as dead, being waſhed in this
fountaine, it ariſeth and triumpheth in glory, in might, and furniſhed
with all vertues, and accompanied with an excéeding army
of ſpirits, doth communicate vnto vs fréely his glory and

brightneſſe, and doth moſt mightily reſtore and c
                     •••
                  oborate the
ſtrength of our radicall balſome, with his onely loo
                     ••
                   and touch,
throughly wéeding and rooting out all the cauſes and ſéedes of
ſickneſſes lurking in vs, and ſo conſuming them, that without al
trouble, it preſerueth our helth, vnto the appointed end of our life.
               He which hath eares to heare let him heare attentiuely, otherwiſe
let him neuer take his worke in hand. For albeit I haue
ſhewed the way to perfect working more plainely (as I thinke)
then any other hitherto haue done, yet thou mayeſt erre except
thou be wholely addicted and intent to thy worke.
               Thus the way is prepared for true Phyloſophers, to attaine
to that great and moſt excellent minerall worke, and to the preparing
of that vniuerſal medicine out of mineralls. And this is
the demonſtration, by which in all metalls and concrete bodies,
thoſe thrée beginnings are to be ſearched out, and being by art
ſeperated, are to be ſet before our eyes. The which to make it
more plaine, I thought good to vſe the example of lead, which of
all men is reiected as moſt vile, whereas notwithſtanding the
Phyloſophers haue the ſame in great eſtéeme, becauſe they ful
wel know, what great ſecrets it containeth within. And therefore
they cal it their Sunne or leperous gold.
               From this trée of Saturne ſpringeth Antimony, as the firſt
branch of the ſtock, which the Phyloſophers cal their Magneſia,
which aboue all other metallick ſubſtances, containeth thoſe thrée
beginnings ful of open actiuitie and efficacie. Paracelſus among
all other Chymical Phyloſophers, hath wonderfully ranſacked
all the parts thereof, and examined the beginnings moſt diligently,
whoſe ſubſtance he hath exalted and commended, aboue
al other metallick ſubſtances and eſpecially the Mercury therof:
out of which, as out of the chiefeſt ſubiect, and more noble matter,
he wrought his chiefeſt and beſt works. In the praiſe wherof
theſe are Paracelſus own words: Antimony is the true balme
of gold,Lib de Aurora. which the Phyloſophers cal the examiner. And the Poets
fain
                     •
                   that Vulcan waſhed Phaebus in the ſame lauer, and purged
him from al his ſpots and imperfections, being deriued from
moſt pure and perfect Mercury and Sulphur, vnder a kinde of

Vitriol, into a metallick forme and brightneſſe. Hee compareth
the ſame alſo in another place to the matter of gold, concerning
whoſe vertues and effects he deliuereth wondere: as that it is
the higheſt and moſt perfect purger of gold, and his Mercury, of
men. His red Sulphur alſo doth plainly appeare, which hath his
property, that it wil take fier and burne like common Sulphur or
Brimſtone: the which is eſpecially to be ſéene in the night, & in a
darke place, without any ſume, which the common Sulphur is
woont to ſend forth. This Sulphur of Antimony is Solary, and
ſuch as is able to gild the ſuperficial part of ſiluer.
               As touching the Salt of Antimony, it is to be ſeperated from
the ſame, whoſe property conſiſteth in procuring vomit. For his
ſtrength to procure vomit lyeth hid in the ſalte flowers thereof:
from the which flowers, if the ſalt betaken away & ſeperated by
vertue of a certaine ſalt, as may be done, then out of the flowers
thereof, is made a moſt excellent purgation without vomiting.
               But the property of the Mercury thereof bringeth no ſmal
wonder, which in the liquation or melting of gold with other
metalls, reiecteth them al, and chooſeth the gold to it ſelfe, with
the which it is mingled and vnited into one body, in ſuch wiſe,
that it ſwalloweth vp gold, whereas all other metalls (except ſiluer)
do floate aloft, and wil not ſinke into the ſame. Conſider
therefore, (ſaith Arnold,) that thing onely which cleaueth
to Mercury and to the perfect bodies, and thou haſt the full
knowledge. And when he hath thus diſcribed the deuouring Lyon,
he addeth theſe words: Becauſe our ſtone is like to the accidentall
quickſiluer, which carrieth gold before it, and ouercommeth
it: and is the very ſame which can kill and make aliue. And
know further, that our coagulated quickſiluer, is the father of all
the minerals of that our magiſtery, & is both body & ſpirit, &c.
               
               The ſame thrée chiefe beginnings, doe offer themſelues
vnto vs in other ſemi mineralls, as in Arſenick, orpinent,
and ſuch other like: which albeit in their whole ſubſtance
they bee contrary to our nature and ſpirits, yet by nature
they haue that ſpiritual promptnes, and flying ſwiftneſſe,
that by their ſubtiltie, they eaſily conuey and mingle

and mingle themſelues with our ſpirits, whether they be inwardly
taken, or outwardly applyed, and doe worke venemous
and mortal effects, and that by reaſon of the Arſenical Mercury
poinſon ful, or arſenical Sulphur, and arſenicall Salt.
               Gems alſo and precious ſtones, haue in them the vertues
and qualities of thoſe thrée beginnings: by reaſon of whoſe fier
and brightneſſe, the pure Mercury in them doth ſhine, cleauing
firmly to his fixed Salt, and alſo to the Sulphur of the ſame nature,
whereby the whole ſubſtance of a contrary kind being ſeperated,
there ariſeth and is made a moſt pure ſtone of contrinance
like vnto gold.
               Of this ſort is the moſt firme and conſtant Diamond, to
whom that good old Saturne hath giuen the leaden colour of his
more pure Mercury, together with the fixed and conſtant ſpirits
of his more pure Sulphur, and hath ſo confirmed, coniealed
and compacted it in all ſtability, with his chriſtalline ſalt, that
of all other ſtones it is the moſt ſolyd and hardeſt, by reaſon of
the moſt firme vnion of the thrée principal beginnings and their
coherence: which by no art of ſeperation can be diſioyned and
ſundered into the ſolution of his ſpiritual beginnings. And this is
the cauſe, that the ancient Phyſitians had no vſe thereof in medicine,
becauſe it could not be diſſolued into his firſt matter.
               And it is not to be thought, that thoſe auncient Phyſitians
refrained the vſe thereof, for that they déemed it to be venemous
by nature, (as ſome falſely imagin) which being homogenial and
of a 
                     〈◊〉
                   ſimple nature, it is wholely celeſtial, and therefore moſt
pure, and for that cauſe nothing venemous: but the poyſon and
daunger commeth here hence, that being onely broken and beaten,
and in no ſort apt to preperation, taken ſo into the ſtomack,
and remaining there by reaſon of his ſoliditie and hardneſſe inconcocted,
by coutinuance of time, and by little and little, it doth
fret and teare the laps of the ſtomack, and ſo the intralls being

                     ••
                  oriated, death by a lingering conſumption enſueth.
               It belongeth to golde, with his Sulphur, to giue a red tineture,
to Carbuncles, and Rubines, neither doth the difference of
their colours come of any other cauſe, then this, that their

Mercuries and Chryſtallyne ſalts, are not defeked and clenſed
alike: the which clenſing, the more perfect or imperfect it is, the
colour appeareth accordingly, either better, or worſe.
               And albeit Siluer be outwardly white, yet within, it hath the
colour of Azure and blewe, by which ſhée giueth her tincture
to Saphyrs.
               Copper, hauing outwardly a ſhew of rednes, hath a gréene
colour within, (as the 
                     Ʋiridgreeſe that is made thereof doth teſtifie,)
by which it giueth greenneſſe vnto the Emerand.
               
               Iron, red within, as his Saffron & yeallow colour doth plainly
ſhew (and yet, nothing like the colour which gold hath within
it) giueth colour to the Iacint.
               
               Tinne, albeit it is earthie, yet being partaker of the celeſtial
nature, it giueth vnto Agates, diuers, and ſundry colours.
               From gold, and from other mettals, as alſo from precious
ſtones, their colours may be taken away, by Cementation and
Reuerberation, by their proper menſtrues, which things are
well knowen to Chymiſts and fire workmen. The which colours
and ſulphurs ſo extracted, are very fit for the affects of the braine.
The colour of gold, ſerueth for the affects of the heart. The colour
of tinne, for the lunges. The colour of Mercury, The colour
of lead, for the ſplene. The colour of Iron, for the redneſſe.
The colour of Copper, for the priuie parts.
               The heauenly menſtruéeſe, to diſpoyle mettalls of their colours
and ſulphures naturall is this: namely the deaw which falleth
in the moneth of May, and his ſugar Manna: out of the
which two, mixed together, digeſted, and diſtilled according to
Arte, there wil come forth a general diſſoluer, moſt fit to diſpoyle
ſtones and mettals of their colours. Yea, of onely Sugar, or of
hony by it ſelfe, may be made a diſſoluer of mettals.
               Now if theſe thrée beginnings, Salt, Sulphur, and Mercurie,
are to be found in the Heauen, in the Ayer, and in the Waters,
as is al ready ſhewed, who wil make any doubt, but that
by a farre greater reaſon they are to be found in the earth, and to
be made no leſſe apparant, ſéeing the earth of al other elements,
is the moſt fruitfull and plentiful.
               
                  
The Mercurial ſpirits ſh
                     •
                  we themſelues in the le
                     •
                  ues and
fruites; The Sulphurus, in the flowers, ſéedes, and kirnels:
The ſalts, in the wood, barke and rootes: and yet ſo, that eache
one of thoſe thrée partes of the trée or plant, ſeuerally by themſelues,
albeit to one is giuen the mercurial ſpirit, to another that
of Sulphur, and to the third that of Salt, yet euery one apart,
may as yet be reſolued into thoſe thrée beginnings: without the
which they cannot conſiſt, how ſimple ſo euer they be. For
whatſoeuer it bée, that hath being, within the whole compaſſe
and courſe of nature, doe conſiſt, and are profited by theſe thrée
beginnings.
               And whereas ſome are ſaid to be mercurial, ſome Sulphurus,
and ſome Salt, it is therefore, becauſe the Mercurials doe
conteine more Mercurie, the Sulphurus more Sulphur, and
the Saltiſh more Salt in them than the others. For ſome whole
trées are to be ſéene more ſulphurus and roſeny than other ſome,
as the Pine and Firre-trées, which are alwayes gréene in the
coldeſt mountaines, becauſe they abound with their Sulphurus
beginning, being the principal vital inſtrumēt of their growing.
For there are ſome other plants, as the Lawrel, and the
Trées of Oranges, Citrons and Lemons, which continue long
gréene, and yet are ſubiect to colde: becauſe their Sulphure is
not ſo eaſily diſperſed, as is the Sulphur of the firre trées, which
are roſeny, and are therefore thrice of a more fixed and conſtant
life, furniſhed againſt the iniuries of times. Furthermore, al
Spice-trées, and al fragrant and odoriferous hearts are Sulphurus.
And as there are ſundry ſortes of trées of this kinde, ſo
are there an infinite ſort of Sulphurs, of the which to entreate
here is no place.
               There are other Plants which ſhew forth Salt: which is to
be found and felt by their taſte: as Celadine, Nettell, Aron, otherwiſe
called Weake Robin, Radiſh, Muſtard-ſeed, Porret, or
Leekes, Garlick, Ramſoms, Perficaria, or Arſeſmart: which alſo
by the vertus and plenty of their ſalt, doe defend themſelues
from the wrongs of times.
               
                  Ros Solis (ſo called) aboundeth with Mercurie amongſt other

Mercurial plants. The which beginning notwithſtanding, for
ſomuch as it is flying and ſpiritual, except it be reteined by another
more corporeat, that is to ſay, by a waterie or aierie liquor, it
vaniſheth quite out of ſight. But being diſmembred & throughly
ſearched by the Art of Chymiſtrie, in his interior Anatomy,
with the ſeparation of the beginnings, it may alſo be made ſubiect
to ſenſe. For Mercury is extracted out of euery thing, firſt
of all in his diſſection or ſeparation, into a watery vapour: and
Sulphur into an oyely: thirdly, out of the remaining feces,
brought into aſhes, a Salt is extracted, by his proper water,
which being moſt white, & like to cryſtall, hath the taſte of ſharpe,
ſower, & byting ſalt, or ſuch like reliſh in the mouth: wherby it is
found to be true ſalte, which may be diſſolued in water, according
to the maner of true ſalts: differing ſo much from the other aſhes,
as life from death: for as much as the feces that remaine thereof,
are called dead earth, whereas this is repleniſhed with vitall
actions.
               To conclude, in euery kind of plant, & in all the partes thereof,
thriſe thrée beginnings are inſet and cleauing, indued with ſundry
properties and faculties, according to the varietie of Plants.
The which alſo a ſkilfull Phiſitian vſeth diuerſly, that he may fit
each one to other, according to equalitie of matching, and according
to his intended purpoſe.
               Hereby it appeareth how neceſſarie the knowledge of the internall
Anatomy of things, which ſhew eaſily by the impreſſion of
things, their properties & vertues, which we may approue & confirme
by experience. Let vs take for example, the oyle or Sulphur
of the Boxe-trée, alwayes gréene and vitriolated, by whoſe
vnpleaſant odour, the ſtupefactiue Sulphur which is in it, repreſenteth
it ſelfe vnto vs. That oyle, I ſay, of the Boxe, albeit it
wil eaſily burne, yet is a great aſſwager and mittigator of all
paines, as comming nere to the nature and propertie of narcoticall
or ſtupefactiue ſulphur vitriolated, being as auailable againſt
the falling ſickneſſe as Vitriol.
               If we conſider the properties of the beginnings of Camp
                        •
                     yre,
it wil manifeſtly appeare, (although it do burne in water) by his
vnpleaſaunt odour, that it hath a cooling propertie in it, and

narcocal or ſtupefactiue: whoſe oyle alſo, is a good mittigator of
paines and griefe: when as notwithſtanding it ſheweth foorth
contrary effects, as at the very firſt brunt, it ſéemeth to haue a
certaine fierie qualitie. By reaſon of the propertie which it hath
to aſſwage paines and aches, the Arabians iudged the ſame to
colde in the third degrée. The experience thereof is eaſily to bée
ſéene in the ache of the téeth. For if a hollow or rotten toothe, bée
but touched with the oyle thereof, it putteth away the paine.
The ſame oyle is a moſt preſent remedie in paines and griefe
of the reynes, cauſed by the ſtone. For thereby the ſtone is diſſolued
and auoyded, if it be miniſtred with competent liquor.
               Other are the properties of other Oyles: For the oyles or
Sulphurs of Annis, and of Fennel, are fit to diſpearce and driue
away windineſſe.
               The Oyles of Cloues, of Nutmegges, of Cinamon, and of
other ſpices and their Sulphurs, as alſo the Oyles of Mynts, of
Ambroſia, of Sage, and Betony, and of ſuch like, are conuenient
to corroberat, and to warme the braine and ſtomach.
               So the ole of Pepper, doth attenuat, make thinne, diſſolue
and cut tartarus matters in the body, and humours that are
niter Sulphurus and Cholerick. And howſoeuer many doe
déeme the ſame to be hote, yet it is farre more conuenient to bée
giuen in cholericke feuers, and to put away other griefes, as tertians,
and ſuch like, than any other altering or cooling ſirrupe.
               In like ſort hote and burning oyles, may be extracted out the
ſéedes of Poppey, Goordes, Melous, Cucumbers, and ſuch like
cold things, whoſe operations notwithſtanding doe not bring
heate, but rather reſt and comfortable refreſhing.
               And the mercurial ſpirits of vegetables, are oftentimes conioyned
with ſulphurus ſpirits: ſo that out of Teribinthine, which
is almoſt wholy ſulphurus, as alſo out of Pitch and Roſen a
mercuriall ſpirit, or ſharpe liquor, may bée by arte extracted,
hauing the force of Vinegar, being well diſtilled, and likewiſe
power of diſſoluing the moſt ſolid and hard bodies.
               Moreouer, in pitch barrels, that mercurial ſower liquor is
to be found, being ſeparated from the Pitch, which hath the ſame

facultie of diſſoluing. Alſo the ſame ſower Mercurial liquor by
a gentle fier at the firſt, may bee attracted out of the ſhauings
or chippes of the wood, and barke of gréene trées, eſpecially out of
ſuch as are vitriolated, as is the Iuniper, the Boxe, the Oake,
Guaiacan Trée, and ſuch like: which liquor is of force to diſſolue
Pearles.
               Out of the which Mercural ſharpe liquors, may alſo be made
ſundry ſeueral remedies, apt, both to ferment, digeſt, and attenuate
humours, and alſo to mooue ſweate, and to prouoke vrine,
to breake and driue forth the ſtone, and very good to cure other affects,
eſpecially ſuch as are Mercurial.
               Now leauing to ſpeake of Mercuries and Sulphurs, ſomewhat
ſhal be ſayd of Salts: It hath béene already declared, that
generally they ſerue for the general purgation and euacuation of
bodyes: whether they mooue ſegges, Vrines, or prouoke vomit
or ſweates: or whether they doe clenſe, cut, open, or any other
way helpe obſtructions.
               Yet notwithſtanding, as betwéene Sulphurs and Sulphurs,
and betwéene Mercuries and Mercuries, there is great difference:
ſo is there great varietie of Salts, and much difference
of their vertues and operations. As for example, the ſalt of the
coddes of Beanes, amongſt others is excéeding cauſticke and
burning: yet being giuen in drie quantitie in broath, it is very
diaphoretical, or diſſoluing, in ſuch wiſe, that nothing can worke
more effectual without hurt or offence of the bowels.
               The Salt of the Aſh-trée, doth moſt mightily open obſtructions,
moſt chiefely ſitting the diſeaſes of the ſpléene.
               The Saltes of Artemiſia, (otherwiſe called the mother of
Hearbes, and Mugwoort) and of Sauin, are moſt fit to procure
the menſtrues of women.
               The Salt of Gammock, otherwiſe called Reſt-harrow, Petty
whynne, or ground Furze: the ſalt of Saxifage, Gromel, otherwiſe
called Pearle plant, of Radiſh, are very proper remedies
to breake the ſtone, and to clenſe the kydneys and bladder, from
ſand.
               Alſo the Salts Double leafe, otherwiſe called Gooſeneſt, of

clot Burre, and of Cardus Benedictus, which are diaphoricall, or
diſſoluing.
               The Salts of Mynt, and Woorme-wood, are good to purge
the lappets and tu
                     ••
                  cles of the ſtomach, and to ſtrengthen and
comfort the ſame. So the Salt of Guaiacine, is by a ſpeciall propertie
ſolutiue: as the mercurie thereof by his tartneſſe doth teſtifie:
and the oyle or Sulphur thereof hath a purging force.
               Out of the which thrée beginnings, if the firſt two ſpirituall
and more ſimple, that is to ſay Mercury and Sulphur, be extracted
and according to arte: and the fixed, which is ſalt, be alſo extracted
and ſeperated, and be after that brought into one bodie,
(which the Arabians call Elixir) it will be ioyntly together a medicine
prouoking ſweate, altering, concocting and purging.
Which tryple motion and operation commeth from one and the
ſame eſſence of thrée vnited in one, giuing moſt aſſured helpe, in
ſtéed of quicke-ſiluer, againſt the veneril ſickneſſe, or French diſeaſe.
               The ſalt of Tartar, is of the ſame kinde that they be, which
ſharply do vite the tongue, being alſo oily and ſulphurus: yea, it
is more ſharpe than any other: neuertheles if it be mingled with
the ſpirit or ſharpe oile of vitriole, it can ſo moderate and correct
his ſharpeneſſe and byting ſpirit, that of them both there may be
made Ielly, and thereof a ſwéete & moſt pleaſing delicate ſirup,
which auayleth much againſt the gnawing and heate of the ſtomach,
and to eaſe al paines of the collicke.
               All ſuch Mercuries, Sulphur, and Saltes of Vegetables, doe
grow and ariſe from the mercurial and ſulphurus ſpirits of the
earth, and from metallick ſubſtances, but they are farre better,
ſwéeter, and of more noble condition than their parents, from
whence they take their original.
               There wil be no ende of writing, if particularly ſhould bée
proſecuted, the difference of all beginnings, and their properties
and faculties, which the ſea and the earth doth procreate. That
which is already declared may ſuffice to ſtirre vp the mo
                     •
                  e noble
wits to ſearch out the Myſteries of nature, and to follow the ſtudy
of ſuch excellent Philoſophy.
               
                  
Thus it is made manifeſt, that theſe thrée biginnings are in
Heauen, in the Elements, as in Ayre, Water, and in Earth, and
in bodies elementated, as wel of Minerals, as of Vegetables.
And now it reſteth that it be ſhewed, how the ſame be in Animals.
            
            
               CHAP. XIIII. Wherein is ſhewed, that thoſe three firſt beginnings,
are to be found in all liuing Creatures.
               
                  FIrſt, we wil beginne with Fowles, whoſe
firſt beginning is at the Egge. For in
Egges there are more plaine teſtimonies
of the nature of Birdes, than in any other
thing. The white declareth the ethereal
Mercurie, wherein is the ſéed and the etherial
ſpirit, the author of generation, hauing
in the prolifying power, whereof chiefly the
Bird is begotten. For this cauſe it is marueilous, that ſo many
and ſo great diſſoluing and attenuating vertues and faculties,
doe lye hid in the white of an Egge, as in the ethereal Mercurie.
               The yeolke of the Egge, (the nouriſhment of the Bird) is the
true Sulphur. But the thinne ſkinne and the ſhell, doe not onely
conteyne a certaine portion of Salt, but alſo their whole ſubſtance
is ſalt: and the ſame the moſt fixed and conſtant of al other
ſalts of nature, ſo as the ſame being brought vnto blackneſſe,
and freed from his combuſtible ſulphur, but calcination, it will
indure and abide all force of fyer, which is a propertie belonging
to the moſt fixed ſalts, and a token of their aſſured and moſt
conſtant fixion. This ſalt daily prepared, is very fit to diſſolue
and breake the Stone, and to auoyd it.
               As theſe thrée principles are in the Egge, ſo they paſſe into the
bird. For Mercury is in the blood and fleſh: Sulphur in the fat
and ſalt, is in the ligaments, ſinewes, bones, & more in ſolid parts.
               And the ſame beginnings, are more ſubtil and aierie in birds,
than in fiſhes, and terreſtrials. As for example, the Sulphur

or oily ſubſtance of birds, is alwayes of more thinne parts, th
                     ••
                  
that of fiſhes or of beaſtes.
               The ſame may be ſayd of Fiſhes, which albeit they be procreated
and nouriſhed in the cold water, yet doe they not want
their hote and burning fatneſſe, apt to burne. And that they haue
in them Mercury and Salt, no man well aduiſed, will denie.
               All terreſtriall liuing creatures doe conſiſt in like ſort of theſe
thrée beginnings: but in a more noble degrée of perfection, than
in vegetable things, they doe appeare in them. For the vegetable
things which the beaſtes doe féede vpon, being more crude,
are con
                     ••
                  cted in them, and are turned into their ſubſtance, wherby
they are made more perfect, and of greater efficacie.
               In Vegetables, there were onely thoſe Vegetatiues: which in
beaſtes beſide the vegetation which they retaine, they become
alſo ſenſatiue: and therefore of more noble and better nature.
               The Sulphur appeareth in them, by their greaſe, tallow, and
by their vnctuous, oily, marrow, and fatneſſe, apt to burne.
Their Salts are repreſented by their bones and more ſolid and
hard parts: euen as their Mercuries doe appeare in their blood,
and in their other humors, and vaporous ſubſtances. All which
thoſe ſingular partes, are not therefore called Mercurie, Sulphurs,
and Salts, becauſe they conſiſt of animal Mercurie, of
animal Sulphur, and of Animal Salt, without the coniunction
of the beginnings. But in Mercurals, Mercurie: in Sulphurus,
Sulphur: in the Saltiſh, ſalt doth rule and dominéere. Out
of the which thrée beginnings of beaſts, oyles, diuers liquours,
and ſalts, apt for mans vſe, both to nouriſh, and alſo to heale and
cure, may by Chymicall art be extracted.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XV. Concerning Man, and the liuely Anathomie of all
his parts and humours, with the vertues
and properties of his three beginnings.
               
                  NOw it remaineth that we ſéeke out and
ſearch in man, thoſe things, in whom they
ſhall be found to be ſo much the more ſubtill
and perfect, by how much he excelleth all
other creatures in ſubtiltie and excellency.
For in him as in a little world are contained
theſe thrée beginnings, as diuers and manifold,
as in the great world, but more ſpirituous, and farre better.
For Phol
                     •
                  ſophers cal man, the compendiment or abridgement
of the greater world. And Gregory Nazianzene in the beginning
of his booke, concerning the making of man: ſaith that God therfore
made man after all other things, that he might expreſſe in
man, as in a ſmall table, all that he had made before at large.
               For as the vniuerſal frame of this world is diuided into theſe
thrée parts, namely intellectual, and elementarie, the meane betwéene
which is the celeſtial, which doth couple the other two,
not onely moſt diuers, but alſo cleane contrary, that is to ſay,
that ſupreme intellectual wholy formal and ſpiritual, and the elementary,
material and corporeat: ſo in man the like triple world
is to be conſidered, as it is diſtributed into thrée parts, notwithſtanding
moſt ſtraightly knit together and vnited: that is to ſay,
the Head, the Breſt, and the Belly beneath. The which lower
belly comprehēdeth thoſe parts which are appointed for generations
and nouriſhment, which is correſpondent to the lower elementarie
world. The middle part, which is the breſt, where
the heart is ſeated, the fountaine of all motions of life, and of
heat, reſembleth that celeſtial middle world, which is the beginning
of life, of heat, and of all motions: in the which the Sunne

hath the preheminence, as the heart in the breſt. But the higheſt
and ſupreme parte which is the head, or the braine, containeth
the original of vnderſtanding, of knowledge, and is the ſeate of
reaſon, like vnto the ſuprem intellectual world, which is the Angelical
world. For by this part man is made partaker of the celeſtial
nature of vnderſtanding, of the féeling and vegetating
ſoule, and of all the celeſtial functions, formal and incorruptible:
when as otherwiſe his elementary world, is altogether croſſe,
material, and terreſtrial.
               And as man, as touching his ſubſtancial forme, poſſeſſeth all
the faculties of the ſoule, and their degrées, that is to ſay, the natural
which is vegelatiue: the animal, which is ſenſatiue and vital:
and the Rational, which God inſpired into man, when hée
had made him: euery of the which thrée contained vnder them,
thrée other inferiours, whereof to ſpeake in this place is néedleſſe:
ſo as concerning the material body of man, there are in him thrée
radical and balſanick eſſences, out of the which, both the containing
parts of the body, as the fleſhy and more ſolid, and alſo
the contained parts, that is to ſay, the ſpiritual and fluible parts,
are made, compacted, nouriſhed, and doe draw their life.
               Salt in them, is the radical beginning of all the ſolyd parts: as
being alſo in the animal ſéede, it compacteth and congealeth the
ſolid parts, ſo as it is accounted the foundation of the whole
frame.
               But the radical beginning of ſwéete Sulphur in the animal,
which is the natural, moiſt, original, oylelike, ſheweth it ſelfe, in
the fat, greaſe, and marrow, and ſuch other parts, as wel hidden
as manifeſt.
               The radical Mercury, wholy ſpiritual and ethereal, which is
that inſet and natural ſpirit of euery part and member, the next
inſtrument of the ſoule, doth no leſſe declare it ſelfe, in maintayning
and concerning the animal life, as being the very ſame,
which from the ſoule is the life powred into the body, which the
Sulphurus part nouriſheth and ſuſtaineth.
               Theſe thrée radical eſſences ſhut vp in the ſéed of the animal,
which we haue ſet forth in the framing of man, both according

to forme and matter, doe procreate in his members thrée kindes
of ſpirits and faculties. The firſt faculty is that which is called
natural or vegetal, which being chiefely ſeated in the liuer, taketh
conſeruation and nouriſhment from Salt, that firſt radical beginning
and baſe of the others. The vital faculty ſeated in the
heart is cheriſhed and ſuſtained by a Sulphurus liquor, the
which liquor is the natural moyſture and fountaine of heate and
of life. The animal faculty, wholy Mercurial, ethereal and ſpiritual,
and the principal inſtrument of the functions of the ſoule, is
placed in the braine: which is defended and conſerued by Mercury
the third radical beginning, which is wholy ethereal and
ſpiritual.
               Hereby it is plaine, that theſe radical ſpirits, or ſubſtancial
and formal beginnings of things, doe ſo mutually embrace one
the other, and which is more, the one wil beget the other.
               But the terreſtrial and ſolid Salt which is diſcerned to be in
the bones, and in other hard parts, doth compact and knit together
with his gluing force, the more ſoft parts with the hard: euen
as a windy ſpirit, or windy ayer ſhut vp in euery body, doth
make a liuing body more light and nimble, then a dead carkaſſe.
The which qualities and faculties are wholy elementary, as
procéeding rather from matter then forme.
               And thus briefely is ſhewed the thrée beginnings of man and
their faculties and powers.
               The body thus compacted and made of theſe thrée beginnings,
hath néede of his daily foode and nouriſhment, whereby it
may be preſerued. Which nouriſhment cannot be ſupplyed
from any other, then from thoſe things, which are of the ſame
nature, whereof it conſiſteth. For we are nouriſhed with thoſe
things whereof it conſiſt. Neuertheleſſe for ſo much as the bodie
is weak & tender by his firſt original, it is not to be fed with the
more hard food, but with meat which wil eaſily be concocted and
turne to nouriſhment, containing theſe thrée beginnings.
               Such milke which is giuen to Infants to ſuck, without art or
labour, doth plainly enough ſhew his thrée beginnings. For the
butter ſheweth ye ſulphurus ſubſtāce; ye whay ſheweth mercurial:

and the chéeſe his ſaltiſh beginning. This milke being of one
and the ſame eſſence, contayning theſe three ſubſtances, is eaſily
concocted in the ſtomack of the Infant, and is firſt turned into a
white iuice, and then into blood. The which blood, poſſeſſeth that
which is more formal and radical in theſe beginnings, ſeparating
and abiecting the reſt into feces and excrement. Alſo the
ſame blood being carried into the heart, by the veyne called Vena
Cana, which is as it were the Pellican of nature, or the veſſel
circulatory, is yet more ſubtilly concocted, and obtaineth the forces
as it were of quinteſſence, or of a Sulphurus burning Aquavita,
which is the original, which is the original of natural & vnnatural
heat. The ſame Aquanita being carried from hence by
the arteries into the Balneum Maris of the braine, is there exalted
againe, in a wonderful maner by circulations: and is there
changed into a ſpirit truly ethereal and heauenly, from whence
the animal ſpirit procéedeth, the chiefe inſtrument of the ſoule,
for that it commeth more néere to that ſame ſpiritual nature, then
doe the other two beginnings. For as from wine, thoſe thrée beginnings
are extracted by a ſkilful workeman (the which alſo
may be done out of milke, with leſſe labour) ſo in blood (which
we rightly compare to wine) are thoſe thrée beginnings, which
by nature her ſelfe, executing the office of a true Alchymiſt, hath
prudently and ſeuerally diſtributed and diſpearced into all the
parts of the bodie, in ſuch meaſure as is fitting to euery member:
giuing to the bones, ſinewes and ligaments, more plenty of
the ſalt ſubſtance, then of the others: to the fat, greaſe, and marrow,
the ſubſtance Sulphurus: and to the fleſh and humours
which come out of blood, and to the nouriſhing and natural ſpirits,
whether fixed, flowing, or wandring, a greater plenty of the
Mercurial ſpirit.
               That firſt age of infancie ouerpaſſed, and greater ſtrength being
increaſed to concoct and digeſt meat, then the ſtomack offereth
it ſelfe to more ſolyd and firme ſuſtenance, as to bread, wine,
and ſuch like, comming as wel out of the ſtore of vegetables, as
of animals, fed and ſuſtained by the ſame vegetables, which are
paſſed into an animal nature, that is to ſay ſenſatiue, euen as a

mineral ſubſtance is brought into a vegetatiue.
               It is afore ſhewed, that the vegetables and animals appointed
for mans ſubſtance, doe change and come into his ſubſtance
and nature with their beginnings whereof they conſiſted: ſo as
they being deuoured and concocted, and turned into that white
iuice called Chylus, and ſpred and diſtributed into the liuer, hart,
and braine, by diuers degrées of concoctions & circulations, that
at the length they are changed into ſpirits, natural, vitall, animal,
mercurial, ſulphurus, and ſaltiſh ethereal, and ſpirituous: by
reaſon whereof man is preſerued, and continueth in his ſtate,
vnto his predeſtinated time: hereof alſo may be gathered and vnderſtood,
the original and generation of the thrée humours, which
come both from the mixture of theſe beginnings, and alſo of the
Elements. Which are no leſſe different and varying one from
the other, whether it be in perfection, or in imperfection, then are
thoſe thrée beginnings different in the degrees of perfection.
The firſt of the profitable humours, whereof we are purpoſed to
ſpeake, is that Chylus or white Iuice, which is effected and perfected
in the ſtomack, and in the vaines next adioyning, eſpecially
in the meſaraic vaines by the firſt concoction: the ſame Chylus
conſiſting of thoſe three beginnings, but as yet very impure,
whereof the firſt beginnings of nouriſhment are: and the ſame
is the firſt digeſtion and ſeperation of the pure from the impure,
of thoſe thrée formal beginnings, and of the thrée material elements.
               The ſecond of the profitable humours, is blood, aryſing out of
the Chylus, (which is a good iuice) being of the firſt degrée of the
concocting heat of the liuer, and of the vaines: whereof commeth
a ſecond concoction, and ſeperation of the pure from the impure,
notwithſtanding of the formal and matertal eſſence, which is far
more ſubtil and noble then the firſt concoction and ſeperation.
               The third of the humours, is that which after ſundry reterations
of the circulations, made by the much vital heate of the
heart; doth very farre excéede in perfection of concoction: the other
two, which may be called the elimentary or nouriſhing humour

of life, and radical Sulphur: the which is diſperced by the
arteries throughout the whole body, and is turned into the
whole body, and is turned into the whole ſubſtance thereof, out
of the moſt perfect concoction of all the other; which is the third,
and is called the aſſimilation or reſemblance, of the nouriſhment
or nouriſhed.
               It is certaine that this humour, is moſt eſpecially partaker of
the puritie of the thrée beginnings, and doth reſemble the rectified
animal Aquauita, which is ſeperated from al paſſiue element
of the animal wine, that is to ſay, of the blood. For the blood,
(which we haue already ſaid to be the ſecond profitable humour,
and by vs compared to pure and refined wine) is freed from the
greater part of his terreſtrial tartar, whoſe thrée beginnings alſo
doe exceed the Chylus in puritie. Out of which thrée beginnings
by a third concoction and digeſtion, the Sulphurus animal Aquauita,
the aiery and moſt ſubtil ſpirit, together with the Salt,
depured and made thinne, with diuers circulations alſo, and natural
concoctions, are extracted. The which being ſo extracted,
that which reſteth in the blood (as alſo in wine) is water without
ſauour or taſt, and a Sulphurus tartarlike, and impure feces,
which procéed from out of the material elements. In blood,
ſuch are theſe; cold, moyſt, & mercurial fleame: yealow, hote, dry,
and Sulphurus choller: and melancholy or black choler, not cold,
but hote, dry and ſaltiſh, which are the ecremental parts of thoſe
more pure ſubſtances. And yet the ſame lye not altogether vnprofitable,
for that they retayning ſomthing out of the actiue qualities,
both of the thrée beginnings, and alſo of the elements, doe
ſerue for ſomewhat, ſo far forth as they are material. For choller
in that it is introſulphurus, moſt hote and bitter, eſpecially that
which is of the gaule ouerflowing in the capacity or place of the
bowels, prouoketh the facultie expulſiue to caſt out. But the
fleame which is ſower & mercurial, is profitable to ſtirre vp fermentation
and appetite: Whereunto alſo melancholy is not vnfit,
which is as it were the dregges of the humour of blood, hauing
a certaine analogie and ſimilitude with vineger made out of

wine. For it ſerueth for the firſt concoction of meates, through
the vertue of a certaine internal and vitriolated fier lying hid
in ſuch a ſharpe humour, which being ſtirred vp and ſet on edge
with the heate of the ſtomack, doth readily and quickly confect
and deſtroy the meates, and doth with ſo great force conſume
and deuour ſometime, when it doth ſuperabound, that many
times it bringeth a doglike appetite.
               And thoſe excrements which are altogether ſuperfluous, and
a burden to nature, will confirme the truth hereof: The which
excrements are ſuch as are ſeperated, partly from theſe thrée beginnings,
and partly from the elements, namely the mercuriall
vapours, the Sulphurus breathings, and the ſaltiſh exhalations,
which paſſe through the ſkinne by ſweates, euen as Mercury
and Sulphur doe vaniſh away by an infenſible tranſpiration.
If ſuch ſeperation of excrements be made by little and litle, without
any violence, they doe prolong a happy age euen to extreame
decrepity. But if on a ſodaine, and with a more violent force, of
ſome more vehement motion, or ſickneſſe, as of inflamation or
of a burning feauer, they be thruſt out, then they ſhorten age,
and doe haſten old age, or elſe doe caſt headlong into vntimely
death by ſoundings and faintings. Moreouer, if ſuch kinde of
excrements be retained in the body, and are ſtayed by ſome impediment
from their outgoing, by reaſon of ſome external cauſe,
as the coldneſſe of the weather, which doth harden and thicken
the ſkinne, or by reaſon of cooling dyet, bri
                     •
                  ging obſtructions,
or other infirmities of the body which are impediments,
they become the ſéedes and rootes of ſundry and infinite effects.
               The ſame is to be ſaid of the moſt vile and filthy excrements,
and of the groſſe dregs of the elementary matter, together vnprofitable,
terreſtrial and filthy.
               For out of watery, crude, and thinne excrements: out of excrements
aiery, and windy: finally out of the more groſſe and
earthie, or moſt ſtinking excrements, how corrupt ſoeuer they

be, yet there are bewrayed in either of them certaine prints of
their defects, which the more pure ſubſtance of the three beginnings
procreated, from the which the impure at the length are
ſeparated.
               If any man wil make trial of the due Anatomie of theſe things
as (amongſt others) of vrine, which in ſickeneſſes is diligently
viewed and obſerued, he ſhall finde therein a great quantitie of
Mercurial liquor, ſharpe, ſubtil and pearcing, which wil diſſolue
the moſt ſolid and hard bodies: as alſo he ſhal finde great plenty
of a ſulphurus eſſence conceiuing flames: that I may ſay nothing
of the body of Salt, which is euidently enough to be ſéene in that
great plentie of Salt, which is extracted from the ſame. The
which Salt hath ſo great ſharpneſſe, biting, and coroding force
and vehemencie, that it is more forcible and ſtrong than all other
ſalts of nature.
               Theſe things are moſt true, and euident to be ſéene in the
Writings of Chryſtophorus Pariſienſis, a moſt famous Philoſopher,
who hath taken great paines in ſetting foorth the ſeuerall
parts of Vrines.
               They which ſhal ſearch diligently in the building and frame of
mans body, for another thing than the elements & their qualities,
that is to ſay, hote and colde, moyſt, and drie: namely, for a mercurial
liquor, ſulphur, and ſalt, indued with al kinde of vertures,
faculties, and properties, the thrée beginnings, out of the which,
the colours, taſtes, and odours, and ſuch other things of infinite
varietie doe ſpring, ſhal eaſily vnderſtand, that euery one of the
beginnings by his temperature or the excurreth out of their
conſort, doe procreat ſickneſſes of diuers ſorts in the bodie: as if
ſulphur doe too much excéed, then it bringeth on inflamations and
feuers of diuers ſorts, beſide other ſtupefactiue and drouſie affects,
which the ſtupefactiue ſulphur ſtirreth vp, out of the ſtupefactiue
and drunken ſpirits which it containeth within the ſame,
and being exceſſiue, ſpreadeth it ſelfe throughout the whole body.
               The which is eaſily to be ſeen in ſuch as drinke too much wine,
and in eating of bread that hath much darnel in it: as alſo in the

taking of Camphyre, the iuices of Poppey, of Henbane, and of
ſuch like opiates, which bring ſléepe, by their ſoporiferus Sulphurs,
and not by their cold quality. Alſo they ſhal finde by their
ſower and ſharpe vapours of Mercury, that falling ſickneſſes,
Apoplexies, Palſi
                     •
                  s, & al kindes of Catarres come from thence.
The which effects, if they be accompanied with any poyſon, or
maligne & contagious ſpirits, they cannot but muſt néedes bring
on, peſtilential; venemous, and contagious diſeaſes.
               If they looke diligently into Salts, they ſhal find, that from
them doe ariſe inward gnawings, Impoſtums, vlcers, diſenterie
fluxes, the Pemoxoides, and ſuch like, ſo often as they runne
out of their ſeates, and are ſeperated from the other beginnings,
or doe excéed the meaſure of nature, from whence alſo doe come
great annoyances to the body, as by their reſolutiō, the burnings
of vrine, ſtranguries, and ſuch like. For according to the variety
of Salts, diuers kindes of vlcers, impoſtumes, and other diſeaſes,
as diuers kindes of Collickes, doe ariſe by their ſharpe and
ſower ſpirit.
               Alſo by the coagulation and congealing of theſe Salts, are
ingendered ſwellings, ſtones, and knots of the ſinewes, and an
infinit ſort of abſtructions, whereof many ſickneſſes doe ariſe.
The which coagulated Salts or tartar, forſomuch as they neuer
want their Mercury and Sulphur, rude indigeſted, and impure,
if they be out of meaſure, and doe reach to the vppermoſt degrée
of their malignitie, they wil commixe according to their ſundry
natures and properties, diuers effects, the which notwithſtanding
wil ſéeke to come to the full ſickneſſe of the qualities and
forces of euery of the beginnings, which are alſo wrapped and
infolded the one within the other.
               And herein wee depart not from the opinion of Hypocrates,
which he hath ſhewed in his booke concerning the auncient medicine.
For he reiecting their opinion, which tye the beginnings
and cauſes of ſickneſſes to the elementarie qualities, layeth other
foundations, namely, Swéet, Sower, Bitter, and Salt, the which
we reduce to thoſe thrée beginnings of all things, arrogating to
euery of them their ſingular faculties and properties. For what

power or vertue ſoeuer is in the nature of Medicines and of ſickneſſes,
and doth moue and put it ſelfe in action, the ſame is to bée
reuoked to thoſe thrée beginnings.
               Yet notwithſtanding I deny not, but that ſome kindes of ſickneſſes
may ariſe from the elementary qualities, abounding in
our body, which do rather come of the excrements and feculent
humours, either retayned or ſuperabounding, and doe certainely
rather ariſe out of ſuch Elements, than out of the beginnings.
For out of the abundance of ayerie and ſpirituous windes ſimply,
out of thinne waters, and terreſtrial feces or dregges, we do
ſée diuers kindes of effects dayly to come: yet notwithſtanding
ſuch ſickneſſes haue no long continuance, being ſuch as may bée
eaſily cured euen by Elementary remedies, being either hote
or cold, moyſt or drie. As for example, ayerie windes ſhut vp
in the bowels, and bringing forth the paines of the Collicke, are
with lyſters diſperſed and driuen away. Surperfluous humidities
and thinne water is conſumned with drying medicines.
               Inflamations comming of a terreſtrial and ſimply groſſe
matter introſulphurus, are extinguiſhed by a ſimple cooling
helpe.
               And to conclude, we wil ſay with Fernelius, that ſome ſickneſſes
are méerely ſecret and hidden, which the ſame Fernelius
(as doth alſo Paracelſus) affirme to be ſupernatural: which ſickneſſe
come from the influences of Stars; wherin alſo is obſerued
ſomewhat which is diuine, or at leaſt more ſingular and peculiar,
than in common ſickneſſes. Such are the aſtral and aiery effects
which happen to ſome men more then to other, by a certain
ſingular influences of the Starres, or conſtitution of the heauen,
or by the concourſe of the euil Planets: who are therefore diuerſly
affected, by the ſundry rootes, natures and properties of
their Aſcendentes, producing by their aſpects and radiations,
conuenient fruites in fit times.
               The ſecret and hidden cauſes of theſe kinde of diſeaſes, being
ſuch as we cannot eaſily reach vnto, like medicines of the ſame
nature, which are indued with a hidden vertue, are to be vſed.
And as there be Celeſtial, ſpiritual, and etherial effects: ſo alſo

they require ſpiritual and etherial remedies: which may elſewhere
be taken, then from thoſe thrée beginnings brought into a
ſpirituall nature. But wée haue ſtood too long vpon this point.
            
            
               CHAP. XVI. Wherein is ſhewed, that the whole force of purging in
Medicines, in the Antimonial, Mercurial,
and Arſenical Spirits according
to euery of their ſeuerall
natures.
               
                  AMong Minerals, thrée kindes of ſpirits doe
offer themſelues to be viewed and conſidedered,
from their firſt original: namely, ſpirits,
Mercurial, Arſenical, and Antimonial,
which by their owne nature are truely ſimple,
formal, fierie, and of wonderfull qualitie
and efficacie, and of ready working.
Which are to be diſtinguiſhed as differing among them, and alſo
as riſing from the thrée beginnings different. For the Mercurials
as the moſt ſubtil, vaporus, aierie, and waterie, take their
original from Mercurie: the Arſenicals, as thoſe which are
more proſperous, or breathing, more fierie, hote, and meanely
volatile, doe take their original of ſulphur: the Antimonials, of al
others the moſt groſſe corporeat, and terreſtrial, doe take their
original from Salt. The Mercurials doe borrow their Celeſtia
                     •
                  
ſpirits, from the Sunne, from the Moone, and from Mercurie,
and are by them impregnated & animated. The Arſenicals doe
receiue the ſpirits of Mars & 
                     Ʋenus: euen as the Antimonials do
contayne the ſpiritual properties & vertues of Iupiter and Saturne.
By the which vertues of the Celeſtial, euery of the beginnings,
being impregnated by the things moſt fitting for them & by
thē increaſed, doe obtaine greater forces in euery of their kindes,
and a more corrected and temperate nature.
               For the Mercurials, as indued with more gentle and
wholeſome ſpirits, doe get a more gentle nature, medicinable

and nouriſhing. The Antimonials, from the intermedials, that
is to ſay, from things partly good, and partly malignant, receiue
a worſe nature, that is to ſay an intermedial. But the Arſenicals,
as ſtirred vp with the worſt and moſt pernitious ſpirits, bring a
mortall and deſtroying nature, which oftentimes bringeth great
detriment. Theſe laſt, being ſo fyerie, vehement, and violent,
doe ſerue to forme and to boyle metallick and hard ſubſtances,
and are as fyer to giue life vnto them being halfe dead, but are
in no caſe fitting to the more gentle and ſoft bodyes, ſuch as are
vegetables and Animals.
               Alſo the ſpirits themſelues, do put on bodies agréeing to their
natures. Arſenicals, & Sulphurus, do put on the body of auripigment,
& Arſenic: Antimonials, the body of Antimony and of
Magneſia, or Loade-ſtone: becauſe among other metallicks,
theſe are moſt corpulent and of groſſeſt ſubſtance, of the roote of
Saturne and Vitriole, and which for the ſame cauſe are the beings
and beginnings of other mettals. By the impediment of
which bodies, the force and violent actiuitie of the foreſaid ſpirits,
is checked and reſtrained. Neither doe they ſhewe ſuch violent
ſtrength, when they are brought to a ſimplicitie and ſpirituous
thinneſſe. But among corporal ſpirites, the Mercurials doe excéede
the Antimonials in benignitie and ſwéetneſſe: and the Arſenicals
which are the laſt, doe ouercome the other two in violence
and malice. For theſe are wholy fierie for the moſt part, as is
already ſaid, and are therefore moſt pernicious.
               But the Mercurials, being of al other moſt ſimple and thinne,
are therefore more ready to worke. Alſo Mercurie it ſelfe
conſiſteth wholely of homogenial or kindly partes, and the ſame
ſpiritual: and therefore it excéedeth others in readineſſe of working.
And hereupon it is made more fit than others, for an vniuerſall
purger and clenſer, for that out of his whole ſubſtance
without any ſeperation of the partes, excellent and the beſt purgations,
of all ſortes, without any preparation at all, may bée extracted.
               Prouided alwayes that you correct a certaine hurtfull cruditie,
which it hath in it, and that you alay his too much celeritie and

promptneſſe in working. This you may doe his concoction and
fixation.
               Alſo the ſpirits, which by a certaine meane are fixed and volatile
haue place, and doe ſhew forth themſelues in Auripigment,
and in Arſenic: out of whoſe whole ſubſtance, without any exquiſite
ſeperation, are extracted certaine ſolutiue ſpirits, ſo excéeding
ſulphurus, fierie, violent, and deadly, that deſeruedly they
are reckoned among the moſt mortal poyſons: whoſe aſſalts and
vilolence▪ the animal nature, as more delicate and weake, cannot
indure, but that by and by it decayeth: whoſe vehemencie,
and pernicious qualitie, can by no art be corrected or made fit for
and vſe.
               But the Antimoniall ſpirites, as more corpulent, and groſſe
than others, doe fixe their ſeate in Antimonie, becauſe it is the
roote and original of all other mettals, which are more corpulent
than other things.
               And yet for al that they doe not remaine alone, but that being
aſſociated and linked to the companie of others, as to the ſocietie
of Mercurials, and Arſenicals of the ſeuen Mettals, they bring
forth out of themſelues, thoſe ſeueral kinds. Namely, Lead, and
Tinne, when as the antimonial ſpirits doe excéed in vertue and
plentie: Iron, and Copper, when the arſenicals doe ſuperabound
and ouercome: Gold, Siluer, and Mercurie, when the Mercurials
haue the victorie ouer others: the which Mercurials, are
more ſpiritual and ſimple than any others, and moſt eſſential:
the which being brought to perfect concoction and fixation,
doe procreate Siliuer and Golde, and doe make them pure
and cleane from all antimonial and arſenical Sulphur. For
Gold and ſiluer are nothing elſe but fixed Mercurie brought to
perfect concoction. And theſe Mettals of gold and ſiluer, when
they are wholy fixed and corporeat, hauing put off that ſimplicitie
and thinnes of ſpirites, are deſtitut
                     •
                   of al power of acting or
working, neither can they worke and performe any thing at all,
except they be brought againe to their firſt ſpiritualitie, that is to
ſay, into their firſt matter.
               As for the other foure mettals, they hauing as yet not attayned

that degrée of perfection, that is to ſay, of puritie, digeſtion,
concoction, and fixation, albeit they ſéeme to the ſent moſt hard
and ſolid, yet haue they not gotten as yet perfect fixation, being
ful of much impure Sulphur, and ſuch other like kinde of
heterogenial and vnkindly ſubſtances, that is to ſay, of arſenicall
and antimonials ſpirits: and doe poſſeſſe a very ſmal portion
of the Mercurial ſpirits, and the ſame as yet full of impuritie.
               Whereby it commeth to paſſe, that ſome of them cannot indure
the tryal of fire, but by the force thereof doe turne to aſhes
and glaſſe, and can neuer more be reduced by any Art into a metallicke
nature: other ſome, as more volatile and flying than others,
do vaniſh away into fume or ſmoake.
               The which is wel knowne to al, not onely Philoſophers,
which haue ſéene the nature of mettals in the ſearching out and
exerciſe of theſe workes, but alſo to euery Goldſmith and Myntman,
which know how to diſpearſe and ſend away ſuch mettals
into ſmoake, with their Cupels: which Philoſophers can bring
to paſſe by diuers other meanes and inſtruments.
               And out of theſe kindes of Metals, full of flying ſpirites, are
extracted purges of admirable operations: and the ſame according
to the nature of the ſpirits abounding or predominating in
euery of them. Of the flowers or ſpirits of Tinne, and Lead,
extracted by ſublimation, are made purgations, which worke
wonderfully by dei
                     •
                  ctions, by vomit, by ſweates, and by Vrines:
which may be reckoned among the meane ſort, and ſuch
as are leſſe hurtful, albeit they be deriued from the metallicke
nature. Out of Iron and braſſe, may be extracted very good
purgatiue medicines, wel knowne to them of old time.
               Now to paſſe from metals to ſemi-minerals and ſo metallick
iuices, infinite purgations alſo are extracted out of them, according
to the force of their ſpirits. As out of Vitriol, Niter, Salgem,
Sal Armoniac, & out of many other ſuch like things, may
be extracted both meane and violent Solutiues.
               And to make it plaine, that al the power and effect of working
which is in Mercurie, Arſenic and Antimonie, theſe thrée
metallick ſpirits, & alſo what vertue partly thoſe foure imperfect

metals, and al kindes of Salts, Iuices, and metallicke ſubſtances
haue, doe altogether come eſpecially from theſe kinde of ſpirits:
it is hereby manifeſt, that fixed Mercurie, which by no maner
of meanes wil moue or flye from our heart, and which is ſociable
and communicable with our ſpirits, hath no force to purge
either by deiecting through the belly, or by prouoking to vomit:
but is rather fit to procure ſweat and vrine.
               But when it ſhal bée volatile and flying, by reaſon of his
wonderful ſpiritualtie and ſubtiltie, it is made a great mundificatiue
of the bodie, pearcing into all the partes and members
thereof.
               So in like maner the glaſſe of Antimonie, in that it hath fuming
and flying ſpirites, not fixed, which doth both ſhew foorth
themſelues at the time of the fuſion or melting, as alſo by a certaine
whyte exhalation thereof, when béeing moulten it is put
vpon the Marble Stone, hath alſo a vehement force of working.
               Whoſe fuſion or melting, if it be ſo long and oftentimes
reiterated, vntil no more whiteneſſe wil come from the ſame,
then it is made vtterly voyd of al working force.
               It wil alſo looſe all power of working or purging, if this
glaſſe be made moſt thinne in Alchool, and ſet in the heate of the
Sunne, by the heat whereof, the more thinne ſpirits doe vaniſh
away, and are conſumed. And ſo then in ſtéed of a loſing mediciénce,
it is made a moſt excellent Anodine, or procurer of
ſléepe or reſt.
               Therefore to ſhew by inuincible Arguments, that al purging
facultie conſiſteth in thoſe flying ſpirits, and is wholely
to bée attributed vnto them, it is moſt certaine, that glaſſe may
be made of Antimonie and of Leade, and other preparation, as
well out of them, as out of metallick matters, whether it bée
by ſubliming flowers out of them, or whether it bée by
extracting of Saffron out of them, by the meanes of calcination,
the which being beaten into fine pouder, and in the quantitie
of tenne or twelue Graines infuſed in water, or in
wine by the ſpace of certaine houres, and after that the

water eaſily powred from the reſidence or pouder which is
in the bottome, and the ſame liquor ſo giuen, there wil follow
thereof a wonderful purgation, albeit nothing of the quantitie
of the pouder bée in waight diminiſhed, becauſe the ſpirits onely
(which giue no waight to the body) are left to the infuſion,
whereof commeth that great force of working.
               The which powder may often bée put into water or wine
to leaue therein his purging ſtrength and ſpirit: and it may ſo
bée done a hundred times, vntill the ſpirites be cleane euacuated:
and yet for all this, the pouder béeing dryed, there remayneth
ſtill the full waight without diminiſhing. But that powder
looſeth his force quite and cleane of working, if the ſpirits be
wholely exhauſted.
               I my ſelfe haue ſéene a Ring made of the glaſſe of Leade,
which being infuſed, was to ſome a perpetuall ſolutiue Medicine,
ſo often as they would purge the body.
               So to others, the Regulus of Antimonie, made into a pill of
the ordinarie and common bigneſſe, ſwallowed downe into the
ſtomach, afterward paſſing through the belly by ſiege, takē and
being waſhed and wel cleanſed, ſwallowed into the ſtomach againe:
and ſo the ſame waſhed and ſwallowed in like ſort a
hundred times, ſo often as the body hath néede to be purged, it
will performe the partes of a ſolutiue Medicine, and yet loſe nothing
of his weight.
               Hereby it doth euidently appeare, that the force of working
lyeth hidden in certaine ſpirits, which haue the ſame propertie,
euen as in other things there is a force and power of altering
or of nouriſhing, and of paſſing into our ſubſtaunce. Hereof
a more aſſured proofe and tryal may bée made, by the induſtrie
of a learned and ſkilfull workeman, who quickly and in a moment
can take away from them al force of purging, by vſing a
certaine fyer of nature, either taking away or fixing, the
excéeding ſharpe and penetrating ſpirits of Mercurie and
Antimonie, and to make remedies of them, which can reſtore
found and perfect health, by gentle and eaſie ſweates, with inſenſible
tranſpiration, to the cōſuming of the ſuperfluous humors

of our bodie, as alſo to the clenſing away of all impurities rather
then by any violent and manifeſt euacuation, to the troubling
of the body.
               And as the vegetatiue being of a middle nature, betwéen the
animal and the minerall, by this nature of partaking with both,
is turned into ſenſitiue, (euen as we ſee of bread and wine, blood
to be made: of blood, ſperme or ſéede, and of ſéed a man to be
borne:) ſo the minerall (by that generall conſent of all things among
themſelues) paſſeth into vegetatiue, the vegetables ſucking
vnto them by the rootes of the minerals, eſſentiall and metallick
ſpirits with the which the whole earth is filled, as is to be
ſéene by ſo many yron mines, and by ſuch plenty of ſundry
ſtones, with the which it aboundeth and which it bringeth forth,
which are nothing elſe but of a metallick ſubſtance.
               And albeit ſimple vegetants, with metallick ſubſtances, doe
draw thoſe mercurialls, antimonials, and arſenicals of a purging
nature, (whereof they are called purging medicines, becauſe
they abound with a certaine ga
                     •
                  like bitterneſſe, by reaſon of
the entering of the ſpirits of Sal
                        •
                     iter terreſtrial and metallick by
rootes into the anatonie of vegetables:) yet are they not altogether
ſo violent, and of ſo dangerous a ſpirit, as they were in their
firſt mine & original, as being thin of nature wholy crude, and
indigeſted. For they put of the poyſon in the vegetable, by their
manifold concoction and digeſtion, and are made more pure, in
ſo much that they haue no other inconuenience in them, but the
force and effect of purging, except paraduenture, they be giuen
out of meaſure, & in a greater quantity then is fitting. But ſome
are more purgatiue then others, namely thoſe in whom there is
greater plenty of the Mercurial ſpirits, the which notwithſtanding
are nothing offenſiue to our nature. Neuertheleſſe if any
vegetable haue in it an arſenicall ſpirit, albeit not altogether ſo
pernicious, as is that which is in Arſenic it ſelfe, for that it is
made more gentle by concoction, yet it is not without the violence
and annoyāce of the arſenical poyſon: ſuch are the hearbs,
Bane wort, Aconitum, and Enphorbium.
               If any vegetable bee endued with an Antimonial ſpirit or

whereſoeuer the antimonial is ioyned with another ſpirit, it
bringeth violent vomits and ſieges: ſuch are the kinds of Helebores
and Spurges, and ſuch like: neither is the vegetable without
commotion and perturbation, in regard of the violent ſpirit
which it hath in it ſelfe.
               And hereof it commeth that ſuch ſimples of vehement euacuation,
doe more abound in mountaines, in rockes, and in ſtony
places, where the natiue ſeate of metallick ſpirits is, then in the
fat and fertile ſoyle. For the correction whereof, and to make
them more gentle, and to put off that wild nature of theirs, they
are to be tranſplanted into home gardens. For thereby they borrow
another nature and more gentle nouriſhment, with the
which they are tempered, whereby they waxe ſwéete and familiar,
whereas otherwiſe in the mountaines, they are without,
and deſtitute of that gentle nouriſhment, and ſufficient heate of
the Sunne, and of the temperature of the heauens, to concoct and
to temper their erudities. For thoſe things which are auſtere
and wild, are woont to be made gentle by digeſtions and concoctions:
and things venemous become whole, ſo that arte imitating
nature, digeſting and concocting moſt excellent remedies,
are made of deadly poyſons and ſimples. But this cannot bee
done, without the knowledge of the internal anatomie of things,
and without the aſſured ſcience of their beginnings.
            
            
               CHAP. XVII. Concerning potable gold.
               
                  GOld being prepared by the ſpirit of the Philoſophers
lead, is eaſily diſſolued into liquor,
and deſerueth then to bee called Potable
gold▪ this muſt néedes be more conuenient
for medicine in the ſtomack of man, then
leafe gold. For how can leafe gold benefit
the ſtomack, or in any ſort be profitable for
the ſicke, when the ſecret kernell is ſo faſt incloſed in the ſhell,

which is ſo indigeſtible, that it will not be diſſolued in the body
of the Oſtrich. The body of any thing profiteth little or nothing
without the ſpirit.
               It cannot be denied, but that all actions come from the ſpirit,
for a body deuoyd of ſpirits, is empty, rotten, and dead. If the ſpirits
be they which are agents, the body is deſired in vaine.
               And contrariwiſe, when the body is an impediment to the
ſpirit, that it cannot vtter his force and ſtrength (as appeareth
by the working of nature it ſelfe, which without the deſtroying
and obiecting of the body, cannot change the ſpirit, that is to ſay,
the nouriſhment of meate into fleſh) then of neceſſitie, the ſpirit
muſt be deliuered from all his impediments, that it may ſhewe
it ſelfe powerfull, and not bee hindered from his working.
               This appeareth plaine by daily experience. For what good
doth that thing in the body, which is neither profitable for the
nouriſhment, nor yet for the health thereof?
               Nay, what annoyance doth it not bring to our faculties,
which lyeth in the ſtomack vndigeſted, much better then wée
ſhall prouide for our body, if in time of ſickneſſe we take that to
nouriſh and ſuſtaine vs, which is well concocted and digeſted by
art, and purged from all groſſe ſuperfluitie. For ſo nature is no
maner of way hindred from diſtributing the ſame to all the
parts, neither hath it any burden in concocting the ſame, albeit as
yet it is requiſite for nature to haue a more ſubtill worke, that it
may turne to the profit of the body. For how much more auaileable
to helpe the ſicke which are weake of nature is the ſpirituous
ſubſtance of a medicine, if it be giuen, tryed and ſeperated
from groſſe impurity, then to be adminiſtered with ſuch impuritie,
which oftentimes cloyeth and ouerlayeth the ſtrength of the
body. He is more blinde then any 
                     ••
                  oule which ſeeth not this.
For the ſpirit whether it be of meat or of medicine, is giuen in
ſuch ſmall quantitie, that it bringeth no detriment, but ſpéedy
profit in a moment.
               But yet theſe ſpirits cannot be giuen, nor prepared without
bodies, for the which cauſe we preſcribe broathes & Iellies, to be
the chariots of the ſpirits: and we clenſe the bodies, that they
being made pure, the ſpirit may more firmely cleane vnto them.
               
                  
And that they are not diſpoyled of their firſt naturall humour,
it hereby appeareth, becauſe that naturall humour is the body
of his ſpirit. But when by our art, the ſpirits are extracted, wée
muſt haue diligent care, that none of thē flye away into the aier
and ſo be loſt. For this cauſe we muſt looke that our veſſels be
ſure, and nothing breake out, by violence of the fier: the which
ſpirits, if we can retaine, much leſſe can their bodies eſcape.
               Spirits then are in bodies, and bodies paſſe into ſpirits, in
ſuch wiſe that they are corporeat ſpirits, and ſpiritual bodies, ſo
as we can giue both body and ſpirit together.
               Furthermore, that the moſt dry calpes, doe ſtill retaine their
humour and moyſture in them, in ſo much that they may be
turned into liquor, daily experience ſhoweth. For glaſſe brought
into aſhes, and gold brought into a caix, may be reſtored to the
formes of glaſſe and gold againe, through the force of fire.
               But here it may be obiected (as it is by ſome) that gold hath
no force in it to prolong life, or to corroborate the ſame, becauſe
it is prolonged by onely heate remaining in moyſture and is alſo
conſerued by the reparation of natural moyſture. But theſe
faculties or eſſences (ſay ſome) are not in gold, but rather in thoſe
things which haue liued, as in plants and liuing things, from
whom that force to prolong and preſerue life, is to be taken, rather
then from gold. And hereupon it is inferred, that there is
no life in metalls and minerals, but that they are plainly dead.
               I preſume no man will denie, that gold is the fruite of his element,
or ſome thing elementated: if a thing elementated, then
doth it conſiſt of elements: therefore alſo of forme. For elements
doe not want their beginnings, which are formall beginnings,
giuing being, or that which it is, to a thing. For ſo much as therefore
gold is a body elemētated, it conſiſteth of matter and forme,
by the mixture whereof there ariſeth a certaine temperature, or
ſome thing of likeneſſe, which is the life of things. Therefore
gold and other metalls haue life.
               Furthermore, whatſoeuer the eye can ſée and behold, that
hath matter and Forme. For forme is the external, ariſing from
the internal, which offereth it ſelfe to the ſence of the eye: if it

haue forme and matter, then hath it alſo life. Death is ſaid ſo be
the deſtruction of things, which ſéemeth to bring the ſubiect to
nothing. But for ſo much as metalls are the obiects of the ſences,
it ſhal be thought amiſſe that they are brought to deſtruction.
They liue therfore becauſe they ſubſiſt. And the things which
ſubſiſt cannot be ſaid to be brought to nothing therfore not dead.
               By theſe reaſons it doth plainly appeare, that there is life in
metalls, becauſe they ſubſiſt, and becauſe they conſiſt of Matter
and Forme, whoſe mixture and co
                     •
                  iunction is nothing, but by
the bond of a certaine kind of life, which is drawen from the elements
and beginnings, in the which conſiſteth the life of things.
Furthermore, that cannot be ſaid to be without life, which is indued
with power of acting. For actions (as we haue ſaid) proceede
from ſpirits. In the ſpirits is life, or elſe they themſelues
are life. And wonderful actions doe proceed and come from gold,
when it is ſpiritual and ſeperated from the waight of his body:
finally, who is he that dare denie life to be in metalls which are
indued with ſo many taſtes, with ſo many odours, with ſo many
colours, and with other vertues. Therfore gold is vitall. For ſo
Marcilius Ficinus a moſt witty Phyloſopher, and a famous
Phyſitian, writeth of gold, ſaying:
               
                  We know that all liuing things, as well plants as animals,
doe liue and are generated by a certaine ſpirit like vnto this,
and is alwaies moued, as if it were liuing, and doth moſt ſpeedily
generate among the elements, becauſe it is moſt ſpirituall.
But thou wilt ſay vnto me, if the elements and liuing
things doe generate and beget, why doe not ſtones and mettalls
beget, which are meane things, betwéene the elements &
liuing things? I anſwere, becauſe the ſpirit which is in them is
reſtrained and hindered by a more groſſe matter, the which if
at any time it be rightly ſeperated, & being ſeperated, if it be
conſerued as the ſeminary of one thing, it is able to beget vnto
it ſelfe the like: if ſo be, there be put to it a certaine matter
of the ſame kind: the which ſpirit diligent Phyſitians, or naturaliſts
ſeperating from gold, at the fier, by a certaine ſublimation,
they wil put the ſame to any kind of metall, and make
it quick.
               
               
                  
Thus it is plaine by the authority of this learned author, that
there is a vitall ſpirit in gold, and a vertue to procreate the like
to it ſelfe: as alſo it is confirmed by the teſtimony of Virgil in the
ſixt of his Aeneidos: where the Poet ſaith, that gold doth
mount and ariſe by his vertue into a trée, whoſe golden boughes
doe ſpread far and wide.
               If the mineral corall trée by his life natural, doe growe and
increaſe, why is it not as like that gold and other metals do grow
by the ſame life? Séeing metals doe draw their beginnings from
minerals minerals, from waters, and waters from the ſea. Now
if fiſhes ſhels, pearles, and corall, receiue life from their element,
which is the ſea, why may it not giue vital ſpirits vnto gold?
There are ſundry ſorts of life: yea, things which haue neither
motion nor ſenſe, haue life. Our daily foode, doth teach vs this,
from the vertue wherof, we drawe ſuſtenance and preſerue life,
albeit the fleſh of beaſtes and fowles whereof we féede, be firſt
depriued of life and motion. So that there is nothing vtterly deuoid
of life (as we ſaid before) but that which is vtterly brought
to nothing. For out of the very rottenneſſe of wood, which doth
ſhewe and threaten the final deſtruction thereof, wormes of diuers
ſorts, are bred and ingendered. What néede many wordes,
when as Phyloſophy teacheth vs, that out of the corruption of
one thing, commeth the generation of another. And why then
may not the generation of a vital metall be brought forth out of
the corruption of a metallick body, and which is brought into
his firſt matter: when as life in the body, is the laſt that dyeth, if
it may dye? It is plaine then, that there is life in metals.
               But now let vs ſee, whether this life which is in metals may
be made fit to preſerue our life, in ſuch ſort that it may not be extinguiſhed
by diſeaſes. The which I wil briefly handle and declare.
Thoſe things which continue longeſt in their being, haue
a more conſtant and permanent life, then haue thoſe things
which dye in a moment. This is in plants, the other in metals:
for plants and hearbes, doe wyther and vaniſh away in a moment:
but metalls wil continue a thouſand yeares and more.
Now how can hearbs promiſe long life, & helpe of continuance,
which they themſelues doe want? Contrariwiſe, for ſo much as

metalls doe ſo long preſerue themſelues by their long life, why
ſhuld they not performe the ſame, being taken into mens bodies?
               The Phyloſophers ſay, that gold, of all other metalls is moſt
temperat, by the temperatures wherof, the balſam which is in vs
waxing ſicke, that is to ſay degenerating from his temperature
by the force of ſickneſſes, is reſtored & holpen, in ſuch wiſe, that the
vertue of his medicine doth recall him to his temper, and doth ſo
increaſe him with ſtrength, that he eaſily ouercōmeth ſickneſſe.
Gold is conſecrated to the Sunne for his colour and brightneſſe,
and to Iupiter for his temperature, & therefore it can wonderfully
temper the natural heate with moyſture, preſerue the humours
from corruption, and bring the Solary and Iouial vertue to the
ſpirits and members.
               The beſt way to make potable gold, is without mixture of any
other thing. The next vnto potable gold, is that which is beaten
into thin leaues, which for want of the other, may be vſed in
medicine cordial, to comfort the heart. The tincture of gold being
extracted, doth clenſe and reſtore the blood. So that hereby the
homogenial and kindly parts are gathered together, and the
Heterogenial or vnkindly are ſeperated. For ther is nothing vnder
heauen to be found more homogenial, or ſimular, of more
thinne ſubſtance, of more temperate nature, & leſſe ſubiect to corruption,
or putrifaction, then the very pure ſubſtance of metalls,
or quick-ſiluer. What therefore can be more fit for our Balſam
then that ſpirituall medicine, purged from all impuritie, and
brought to exquiſite ſubtiltie. Doth not a ſpirituall nature reioyce
and imbrace a ſpirituall nature? Why is not gold impayred
in the fier, but doth rather ioy therein, and is made more
pure? Is it not becauſe it is fier? For fier is not thruſt out
with fier, but they imbrace one the other as being of one kind.
So in like manner, for ſo much as our Balſam of life is moſt
pure, and reſembleth the nature of fier, why ſhould it not receiue
his like, and be ſtrengthened thereby? For Geber ſaith, that
gold is a medicine, which maketh the heart merry, & preſerut
                     •
                  h
the body in youth: the which medicine is no other thing, but a natural
heat, multiplyed in ye fixed ſubſtance of Mercury: the vertue
of which heat is to gather together (as it is ſaid afore) y• kindly, & to

diſceuer and put away all things that are vnkindly, conſeruing
the ſpirits and humours in a man ſooner then in the nature
of metalls, becauſe a man by his proper natural heat doth ſeperate
the vnkindly ſuperfluities, which metalls by their vnnatural
heat cannot ſeperate.
               But let the reader vnderſtand, that our meaning is not to preſcribe
this Aurum potabile, for continual foode, but for medicine
onely in time of néede. For it will ſuffice, if it be taken once or
twiſe in the yeare, to prolong our dayes to Neſtorian yeares,
without the yrkeſomneſſe of ſickneſſe.
               The Phyloſophers haue not onely called this medicine Aurum
potabile, but alſo the water of life, the Tincture, the pretious
ſtone, the medicine which worketh wonderfully vpon thrée
ſorts of things, namely vpon the animal, vegetable, and minerall:
for the which cauſe it is called the Animal, Vegetable, and
Mineral Stone: and the Arabian Aſtrologians call it the great
Elixir.
               Wonderful is the vertue of this medicine: for herewith the
body of man being ſick, is reſtored to health, imperfect metals
are turned into gold or ſiluer, and vegetables, albeit they are
dry and withered, being moyſtened with this liquor, doe waxe
freſh and greene againe. This Medicine being a quinteſſence is
almoſt incorruptible and immortal, temperate, purified by the
elements themſelues, and ſeperated from the dregs and groſſe
matter of the fower elements, which are the moſt chiefe cauſe of
corruption, as the Phyloſophers affirme: which therefore maketh
a temperate and ſound body, becauſe it is, as it were the ſpirit
of life, by whoſe force and helpe, nature doth digeſt all that is
indigeſted, or expulſe the ſuperfluous and offending humours: it
ſuppreſſeth their qualities, it quickeneth the ſpirit, it maketh the
ſoft hard, and the hard ſoft: the thick, thinne, and the thinne thick:
the leane fat, and the fat leane: it maketh the cold, hote, and the
hote cold: it moyſteneth the dry, and drieth the moyſt: to conclude,
it confirmeth and ſtrengtheneth the natural heate & moyſture.
And as all Phyloſopers doe write with one conſent, it is an vniuerſal
medicinable body, whereunto all the particularities of medicines,
are reduced and infuſed.
               
                  
For this cauſe, it is as it were a fineth nature, or eſſence▪ a
moſt thinne ſoule, moſt purgatiue, much reſiſting for a very long
time, putrifaction or corruption, freed from al mortal concretion,
a celeſtial and ſimple ſubſtance of the Elements, brought to
to this ſpiritual nature, by Chymical ſublimation.
               
               And yet for al this, we affirme not that this medicine is altogether
incorruptible, for as much as it is made and conſiſteth
of natural things. Neuertheleſſe, it is brought to that ſubtiltie,
thinneſſe and ſimplicitie ſpiritual, that it ſéemeth to containe nothing
in it that is Heterogenial, or vnkindely, whereby it may
be corrupted: whereby alſo it commeth to paſſe, that being giuen
to the ſicke, it preſerueth them a long time in health.
               And for this cauſe the Philoſophers haue had this in ſo great
eſtéeme, and haue wholy addicted themſelues to ſeeke and ſearch
out the ſame, not to make themſelues rich, by turning imperfect
metals into gold and ſiluer, when as many of them willingly
embraced pouertie, but rather to heale the diſeaſes and ſickneſſes
of men, and to defende and preſerue their liues in long health
without griefe, vnto the time which God hath appointed,
               But leauing this great myſterie, which very fewe attaine vnto,
I wil in charitie and good wil deliuer here vnto thee, an eaſie
preſcription how to make certaine waters, of great vertue, which
I found written in the Latine tongue, in an auncient coppy:
ſeruing to kéepe the body in health, and to deliuer it from many
infirmities, which I thought good here to inſert, as very pertinent
ſo this Treatiſe, which concerneth (as you haue heard)
the vertue of Minerals.
               Take of Aqua vitae, diſtilled with red Wine, lib. 4. Of burnt
Salt, lib. 2. Of dead Sulphur, lib. 2. Of white Tartar. z. 2. Of
the coales of Flaxe which groweth in Abella, a Towne of Campania
in Italie; z. 3. Of Salt Peter, z. 4. Beate al theſe into
fine pouder, & ſeare them: and being mingled together, powre
on them the aforeſaid Aqua vitae, and ſo put the whole maſſe to
diſtillation.
               
                  
                  The Ʋertues of the Diſtillation.
                  THe firſt Diſtilation, hath vertue of a Balſam to conſerue both
fleſh and Fiſh, from putrifaction. It clenſeth the face from
all freckles and ſpots, clearing the ſkinne, and making if fairer.
It cleanſeth the body from Itch and Scabbes, and dryeth vp the
teares, and watrineſſe of the eyes.
                  The ſecond diſtillation expelleth impoſtumations, and ſuperfluities
of the body, faſteneth the téeth which are looſe, and taketh
away the windineſſe of the Liuer.
                  The third taketh away a ſtinking breath, and purgeth tough
flegme out of the Stomach, and whatſoeuer is not wel digeſted.
                  The fourth expelleth blood which is congealed in the body.
                  The fifth healeth and taketh away from man the faling ſickneſſe.
                  The ſixt diſtillation helpeth al paines about the throate.
                  The ſeuenth cureth the paine of the Goute.
                  The eight is an excellent Balſam, which ſée thou kéepe well.
                  The ninth diſtillation comforteth and preſerueth the Liuer,
if a little gold be diſſolued therein.
                  After euery of the former diſtillations, the feces muſt be beaten,
and ſearced as in the beginning.
               
               
                  Another Water, by which a Phiſitian may
worke wonders.
                  TAke the fylings of Siluer, of Braſſe, of Iron, of Leade, of
Steele, of Gold, the ſumme or froth of Golde, and of Siluer,
and of Storax: ſo much of all theſe as the abilitie of the
man can wel affoorde: put theſe the firſt day in the vrine of ſeuen
yeares of age: the ſecond day, in white Wine, made hote:
the third day, into the Iuice of Fennel: the fourth day, into the
white of an Egge: the fifth day, into womans milke which giueth
a boy ſucke: the ſixth day, into red wine: the ſeuenth day,
in ſeuen whites of Egges. Then put all this into a cupel, and

diſtil it with a ſoft and gentle fyer. That which is diſtilled kéepe
in a Siluer or golden veſſel. There cannot bée ſpoken enough
in the praiſe of this water. It cureth all ſortes of Leproſie, and
wonderfully clenſeth the body. It maketh youth to continue
long. Vſe it to thy comfort, and to the good of thy neighbour.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XVIII. Shewing by what remedies ſickneſſes
are to be cured.
               
                  IT is alleaged out of the authoritie of Hypocrates
and Galen, that contraries are
cured by contraries. But hée which affirmeth
that contraries are cured by contraries,
hée ſhall neuer eaſily finde out a remedie
for ſickneſſe: neither was this Hypocrates
meaning, as ſhall bée ſhewed
anon. It is out of queſtion that ſickneſſes
doe ariſe from the diſagrement of the beginnings: and ſo often
as thoſe beginnings doe decline from their temper, (which is
then called a diſtemperature) and the one being ſeperated from
the conſort of the other, taking vp his ſtanding by himſelfe, procureth
ſickneſſe. For when it is not in mixture with the other,
(which being ioyned together, do maintaine concord) they then
make warre vpon the body, without any ſtoppe or let. I ſpeake
not here of ſimple and bare qualities, but of the very eſſences
wherein are thoſe powers and faculties whereof Hypocrates
ſpeaketh, which preſerue the health of their Balſam, or to reſtore
it when it is loſt.
               Seing therefore the ſéedes and properties both of health and
of ſickneſſes, lye hid in the eſſences, it followeth that they are to be
cheriſhed wt eſſences, and not with qualities. The which eſſences
forſomuch as they are méere acting ſpirits, they are to be repelled

with ſpirits, not with bodyes, which are not like them, or which
are contrary to them.
               But it is obiected, that al things conſiſt of Elements, therefore
our bodies alſo. If then the Element of ayer do ſuffer and
be out of courſe in vs, ſhal the ſame be holpen with the Element
of earth? Why then haue Phiſitians ſo fewe remedies againſt
the peſtilence? Is it becauſe there are none at al? (I confeſſe
when God wil puniſh hée taketh away the vertue from remedies
and medicines.) That is not the cauſe, I meane the want
of remedies, but becauſe ignorant Phiſitians, know not the
cauſes of the peſtilence, and therefore d
                     •
                  e not rightly prouide
to preuent the ſame. For ſéeing they oppoſe againſt the peſtilence
comming of the corruption of the Ayer, a medicine taken
from earth, water or ayer, or from the earth hauing a watery
original, what maruayle is it, if there follow no effect thereof,
when as they doe not driue away thoſe things which are to bée
mixed together, but thoſe things which doe eaſily agrée and are
gathered together. For how can the heauen and the earth bée
mingled together, to helpe the diſtemperature of the Heauen,
betwéene the which there is ſo great diſtance, as there is betwéen
diuiſible and indiuiſible, as Plato ſpake. Therefore celeſtiall
things are to be mingled with celeſtial things, waterie with
waterie and earthie with earthie, and not contrariwiſe, otherwiſe
there can be no agréement.
               Conſider wel, that Heauen, Aier, Water, and Earth, are in
vs, but yet a certaine thing alſo farre more excellent, namely, a
certaine ſupernatual body, which conſerueth all other things in
their temperature, whoſe ſtrength retaineth all other things in
their office: whereas imbecilitie and defect ſuffereth them to be
out of courſe. What then is to bée done in this conflict but to
cheriſh and vphold in his vigor and ſtrength, that ſupernatural
bodie, that is to ſay, the Balſam of nature, that al other things
ſubiect thereunto, and to whom it giueth life, may by the meane
thereof be continued in their eſtate, firme and ſound? But with
what things ſhall the imbecilitie and defect thereof be reſtored,
but with things of the ſame likeneſſe?
               
                  
Doth Oyle increaſe by putting water therein? Doth not one
enemie put another to flight, euen as one friend helpeth another?
               Al ſickneſſes come hereof in our bodie, in what ſoeuer they be
ſeated, becauſe the Balſam of nature and life, doe there decay
and decreaſe. What elſe then is to be done, but to helpe our
weake friend?Lib. de ſ
                        ••••
                     
                     bus.
               
               
                  Hypocrates ſayth, that hunger is a ſickneſſe. For whatſoeuer
doth put a man to paine, deſerueth the name of ſickneſſe:
whatſoeuer then aſſwageth hunger, is a remedie for this ſickneſſe,
ſuch is al maner of food, wherewith that ſickneſſe is cured.
               Therefore according to the opinion of Hypocrates, foode is a
remedie. But wherefore are meates and drinkes ſa
                     •
                  de to bee
medicinal remedies, but becauſe they haue natural properties,
agréeing with the Balſam of nature, not contrarie, wherby the
weakened forces and ſtrength are corroborated and the defect
thereof reſtored. After the ſame manner drinke alayeth thirſt.
Why and how commeth this to paſſe but onely hereof, becauſe
as nouriſhment is all one with that which is nouriſhed, ſo thirſt
is al one with the humour wanting, or with drinke?
               Hereby wée ſée how wrong their iudgement is, which apply
contraries to contraries, to ſtrengthen nature, that it may
frée it ſelfe from ſickneſſe. Which nature if ſhée ſhould ſéeke
helpe for an enemie, ſhe muſt néedes fall into a greater perrill,
than if ſhe were to try the combate onely with ſickneſſe. And
yet for all this wée reiect not the ſaying of Hypocrates, that contraryes,
muſt haue contrarie remedies: that is to ſay, by the
taking away of the diſeaſefull impurities, and by the repairing
of the ſtrength and natural Balſam, not by calefaction, or refrigeation,
by humeſtation, or exſiccation: not by abſterſion, inciſion,
attenuation, & by ſuch other like, too common & familiar ſo Galen.
               
               But we are of Hypocrates minde,Hip. lib. de Antiq maedicina. that hunger is cured by
meate, thirſt with drinke, repletion with euacuation, emptines
with refection, labour with reſt, and reſt with labour. The which
of ſome are not vnderſtood, as they are expounded of Galen, who
applyeth thoſe contrarieties to thoſe bare qualities whereof Hypocrates
ſpeaketh, ſéeing a medicine is nothing elſe, then an appoſition

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
of thoſe things which are deſired, & an ablation of thoſe
things which doe too much abound, according to the ſound opinion
of Galen here.
               But Hypocrates aymeth at a further matter, in that he would
haue the diſeaſe qualified & driuen away, by giuing ſtrength to
nature againſt the enemy: which nature being the onely Phyſitian
and curer of diſeaſes, is to be holpen with ſuch things as
are like to the diſeaſes, that ſo ſickneſſes and the paſſions o
                     •
                   ſickneſſes
may be mittigated: euen as hunger and thyrſt, are recreated
& aſſwaged by thoſe remedies, which they gréedily deſire.
But hoſtile things, that are enemy & contrary, are not deſired,
but ſuch things as are a friend and familiar. For who wil giue
to his hungery ſon when he aſketh bread, a Scorpion▪
                   Therefore
like and fitting liquors, and nouriſhments are to be giuen, which
may procure to nature deſired reſt. For remedies which come
out of the ſame fountaine, and out of the ſame familie, which are
agréeing and fitting in likeneſſe are to be miniſtred. For the
thyrſting ſpirits of feuers▪ are to be recreated with ſyrups, with
ſugars, with pertiſan alone, or with wine, becauſe they are not
of the ſame family and affinitie with them, therefore neither familiar
friends nor kinſmen: but with thoſe tart liquors, which
are begotten of the ſame linage, which are ſpiritual not corporal,
as are thoſe former, of the which, it certaine drops be offered to
him which is a thirſt, they wil by and by ſlake his thirſt, and preſently
bring ſuch thirſty ſpirits to their reſt. After the ſame maner,
watchings, paines, burning heares, and ſuch like are cured.
For when the ſpirits are thirſty, that is to ſay, when they deſire
any thing like to themſelues which is wanting, they wil neuer
be appeaſed nor at reſt, vntill they haue obtained that which they
deſire, and haue ſupplyed their want. Wherefore they are rightly
called, by Hypocrates, contraries: and by Hermeticall Phyſitians,
remedies of like ſort. For they are Similies, which are
drawen from the 
                     •
                  ame anatomie of nature, contayning like properties,
tinctures, and rootes. And on the other ſide, they are contraries,
becauſe they ſupply the defects, and doe ſatiſfie the deſires
with friendly fulneſſe, appeaſing the ſpirits, and their fitting

impurities, ſéeking to conſume them, or to take them away.
Therefore theſe phraſes of ſpéech in natures anatomie, albeit
they ſéeme different, and repugnant one to the other, yet in good
conſent and agréement they are receiued and admitted. That is
to ſay, that contraries haue contrary remedies, & like to their like.
               But to returne to our beginning, that is to ſay to the elements,
or to thoſe thrée hypoſtatical & formal principles of bodies, namely
Salt▪ Sulphur, and Mercurie, which is a liquor: for ſo much as
vpon them all grieuous diſeaſes for the moſt part doe depend, inſo
much that a cōmon peſtilence flying in the outward aire cannot
inuade a man, but it muſt make a breach and aſſaile one of
theſe. Therefore thou ſhalt not doe more fooliſhly, if to helpe him
which is grieued with a mercurial ſickneſſe, thou vſe a remedie
taken out of Sulphur, then if thou ſhouldeſt mingle oyle with
water, which two wil neuer be mixed or vnited. And in like ſort,
thou ſhalt labour in vaine, if thou goe about to helpe Sulphurus
ſickneſſes with a Mercurial medicine: or to put away ſalt ſickneſſes
with the help of others. For theſe wil neuer agrée together:
and being ſo vnlike one to the other, they wil neuer be ioyned
in one, to heale and cure the bodie, except they be knit in a
friendly peace and vnion, by that ſupernatural & ethereal body,
that is to ſay, by the Balſam which is common to al things. Hée
therefore which is ſick of Mercurie, muſt be holpen with mercurial
remedies: as the Epilepſie, and the Apolexi, are to be holpen
with vitriolated remedies taken from water. And hée which
wil help ſulphurus ſickneſſe, muſt vſe ſulphurus remedies, and
ſickneſſes proceeding of Salt, with medecines taken from Salt.
So thou ſhalt be taught by reaſon and experience, that things of
like ſort wil agrée & be cured with their like. We might yet make
theſe things more plaine, & lay the ſame more open by many reaſons
and examples: but why ſhould we eaſe you of that labour
which we haue vndergon our ſelues by dili
                     •
                  ēt reading, ſearching
and experimenting the things of nature, with great expences, before
we attained our deſire. Accept my good wil in this, which,
I fréely offer for ſome eaſe of thy paines, and for thy profit.
And if it fit not thy humour & taſte (for al men haue not
one reliſh) leaue it for thoſe which ſhall
better allow it.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            
            THE SECOND
part of this Treatiſe,
wherein is contained in ſome meaſure,
the practiſe of the Hermeticall
Phyſicke.
            
               CHAP. I.
               
                  SAlt (whereof hath bene ſpoken before at
large) is a thing of ſuch qualitie,All things naturally loue Salt. and ſo excellent
in it ſelfe, that all creatures by a certaine
natural inſtinct, doe deſire the ſame as
a Balſam, by which they are preſerued, conſerued,
& doe grow and increaſe. They loue
it, and like it ſo wel (I ſay) that they long after
it, and doe drawe it vnto them by their breath, and doe licke
it with their tongue out of walles, and old rubbiſh. Byrdes, as
Doues and ſuch like, doe ſearch after it with their beakes, and
wil (if they can) attaine it, though out of 
                     •
                  eculent places, which
are made 
                     •
                  at by mens excrements and vertues. What huge
multitudes of fiſhes are bread and nouriſhed in the Salt Sea?
The which being ſo apparant. I wonder that men are of ſo peruerſe
iudgement, that they knowe not, or at leaſt will not acknowledge,Salt the Balſam of nature
the admirable effects, of this radical balſam of nature.
And who wil not admire the vertual properties and qualities
of Salt, yea euen of that which is extracted out of liuing creatures:
which qualities are to be ſéene in making liquide, in clenſing,

in binding 
                     〈…〉
                   preſeruing from 
                     〈◊〉
                  
corruption, and 
                     〈…〉
                   
                   Are not
all theſe faculties and many others ſufficient,Salt hath life in it & is animal. to proue that Salt
is a thing animal? And ſo much the rather, becauſe there haue
bene ſome chiefe Phyloſophers, who haue affirmed the Mag
                     •
                  es
or Loadſtone to be animate▪ or indued with life; onely becauſe it
hath power to draw 
                     •
                  ron to it. How many faculties far greater
then theſe, yea and the ſame magnetical alſo, do we find in Salt,
if we looke diligently and throughly into them? What is greater,
and more admirable then the Salt of mans 
                     •
                  ri
                     •
                  e? which after
conuenient preparation, is made fit to diſſolue gold and ſiluer?
which by this their ſimpathy and concordance, 
                     •
                  o ſufficiently declare,
and manifeſtly giue attraction, and magnetical vertue, occaſioned
or cauſed by their coniunction and copulation. Who
ſeeth not thoſe admirable things, which are to be diſcerned, and
which fal out in the preparation thereof, and in the exaltation,
whether you reſpect ſo great variety of colours, or the coagulations,
and diſſolutions, when the ſpirit returneth into the body,
and the body paſſeth againe into ſpirit? Chriſtophorus Pariſienſis,
that great Phyloſopher, did not in vaine take the ſubiect herehence,
and begin the foundation of his worke. Thus I hope I
haue ſufficiently declared, that our Salt may be ſaide to be animate.
               
                   But that it may appeare alſo to be as vegeta
                     •
                  , as it is animal;
that is to ſay,Salt is alſo vegetal. that it is not depriued of the growing facultie, it
may hereby be demonſtrated, becauſe it is the firſt mouing thing
in nature, which maketh to grow, and to multiply, and therefore
ſerueth for the generation of all things: ſo as with the Poets and
auncient Phyloſophers it may be ſaid, that Venus the mother,
and firſt beginner of al generation,Salt the original matter of pearles and corall. is begotten of the Salt ſpume
or froath of the male, the which alſo Athenaeus confirmeth. For
this cauſe Venus was called by the Greekes Aligene, as aff
                     •
                  anced
to the Salt ſea. And alſo the generation of moſt precious pearles
in the ſhels of fiſhes, and of coral ſpringing out of the bowels of
hard ſtones and rockes in the ſea, ſpreading forth branches like a

                  
                     〈◊〉
                   doe yet more and more confirme this ſentence. The
                     ••
                   are
the 
                     ••
                  fects,Salt the fier of nature. which that fier of nature, Salt, bringeth forth, yea
euen in the middeſt of moſt cold water.
               But let vs ſee alſo what it worketh in the earth. The effects
which it hath in the earth are theſe: namely, it heateth and maketh
the earth fat:The effects of Salt in the earth. it anima
                     ••
                  th, fortifieth, and giueth power vnto
it: It increaſeth and giueth a vegetating and growing vertue
with ſéede into euery thing in the ſame. For what other thing is
it which 
                     〈◊〉
                   the earth 
                     〈◊〉
                  , and bringeth to paſſe, that one
graine multiplyeth into a hundred but a certaine 
                     ••
                  ercoration,
and ſpreading of 
                     〈…〉
                   which commeth from cattle?
What other thing openeth the earth and maketh it to ſproute 
                     •
                  n
the beginning of the ſpring time after that the Sunne is exalted
into the ſigne of Ari
                        ••
                     
                   (which ſigne is the full of Saturn, and the
houſe of Mars, ſignes altogether f
                     •
                  ery) but the eleuations and
ſubl
                     ••
                  ations of the ſpirits of the ſaid Salt, and of the balſam of
nature? This is 
                     〈…〉
                   and quickeneth, which
maketh to grow, and which 
                     〈◊〉
                   and ioyeth the medowes
and the fieldes, and which produceth that moſt ample and vniuerſal
vigor and vertue.
               Who ſeeth not this in the very a
                     •
                  er alſo,The effects of Salt in the aier. by the ſublimations
of the ſpirits of the 
                     〈◊〉
                   nature of Salt, which ſpirits being ſublenated
into aier in the ſaid ſpring time, doe fal againe in forme
of a deawe, vpon corne and all things that ſpring out of the earth?
And who ſeeth not that theſe deawes aryſing from the earth,
and falling againe from the aier, is a cauſe of vegetation and
growing. But that the dewe is the ſpirit of the foreſaid Salt, and
indued with Salt, they which thinke themſelues great Philoſophers,
againſt their wils and not without ſhame, do confeſſe,
when they ſée that the true Phyloſophers doe extract out of the
deawe a Salt, which diſſolueth corall and pearles, no leſſe then
doth the Salt▪ which is extracted out of common Salt, out of
Salt-Péeter, out of Niter, or out of other Salts which are prepared
for the ſame end.
               Furthermore, the ſame Salt, may rightly alſo be ſaid to bee

vegetall, becauſe it is manifeſtly found in all vegetables, and becauſe
thoſe things in the which it doth moſt abound, haue the
longer life and continuance, and doe more manifeſtly ſhew forth
the vegetable effects, either in their owne proper nature, 
                     •
                  or at
ſuch times as they are to ſerue for vſe.
               
                   Salt alſo is well known to be metallick or minerall. And all
men knowe it the better ſo to be,Salts minerall. for that ſuch ſundry and diuers
kinds of Salts are found in the bowels of the earth: ſuch
are Salt, Gem, Allum, Vitriol, Salt niter, and ſuch others moe,
all which are of metallick nature,Salts of diuers kinds. or elſe doe participate much
with the ſame. But a Phyloſopher knoweth how to 
                     〈◊〉
                  
this thing further, and to find out the innermoſt 
                     〈…〉
                   by
the helpe of diuers ſtrong waters, which hee knoweth how to
prepare: which are nothing elſe, but the ſpirits of the foreſaide
Salts which haue power to diſſolue and to bring metallick bodies
into waters,Stirring waters. as is knowne to euery one. I ſay, that by this
diſſolution, we may be
                     ••
                  ld the 
                     〈◊〉
                   ſimpathy of theſe
Salts, with the metallick nature. For becauſe they are like, they
wil be wel mingled together, conioyned and vnited, diſſoluing
his like, and aſſociating himſelfe to his like. For ſtrong waters
doe neuer worke vpon wood, or vpon any o
                     •
                  her matter, which
is not of metallick nature:Nature accord
                        ••
                     h with nature. As it was moſt truly ſaid of a certaine
great Phyloſopher▪ Nature loueth her like, and delighteth in her
owne nature▪ And by another wittily thus ſpoken: Eaſie is the
paſſage of things one into the other, which are one in likeneſſe.
Sulphur, and other things, which are of an oyle like nature, are
ſooner and better diſſolued with oyles, as with the oyles of Terebinth
and of Flaxe, or Linſede▪ which is moſt ſw
                     ••
                  te, then with
that great force, and moſt violent ſharpneſſe of ſtrong waters,
which are nothing elſe but the ſpirits of Salts, and by conſequent
doe diſagrée with Sulphur, which is a beginning contrary
to the ſaid ſpirits. Here i
                     •
                   offered large occaſion of 
                     〈…〉
                   i
                     •
                  
time and place would ſerue, but I omit it.
               Let vs returne to our Salt:Salt is fuſible the which if I ſhal ſhew that it
may be moulten and diſſolued, no leſſe then gold and ſiluer, with
the force of fire, and being cold againe, may be congealed into a

maſſe, as metalls be, then no doubt it wil euidently appeare, that
Salt is of a me
                     •
                  allick nature. And this I ſay is to be do
                     •
                  e, not
onely in Salt which is ſound in mines and in caues of the earth,
but alſo in the very Salt of the Sea. But for ſo much as the
ſame is better knowne to them that haue but meane ſkil in metalls,
then that I ſhal néede at this time to ſpend much labour about
it, I ceaſe to ſpeake any word more thereof.
               Hereby it doth appeare very euidently, that this opio
                     •
                  e of
Ariſtotle is falſe, where he ſaith, that cold diſſolueth the things
which are congealed with heate: and that thoſe things which
are coagulated by cold, are diſſolued by heate. The which notwithſtanding
we grant to be true on the one part, for that wée
knowe well, that Salt which is coagulated or congealed by the
heate of the Sunne▪ is diſſolued in cold water. But it muſt bée
confeſſed alſo to be true, that Salt, by the vehemencie of the
heat of fier, is to be diſſolued, moulten and made fluxible, and to
be caſt into a moulten lumpe, as eaſily as metalls be.
               Moreouer Salts may be extracted out of all calcined metals
which are to be diſſolued,Salts may be extracted out of metalls filtred, and coagulated, after the ſame
manner as are other ſalts, whether they be common and not
moulten, or whether they be moulten by the force of heate. For
it is known to a Chymiſt of ſmal practiſe, that out of one pound
of calcined lead, tenne or twelue ounces of Salt may be extracted.
All which things doe ſufficiently demonſtrate and proue,
that the nature of Salt is metallick: and that therefore metall is
nothing elſe but a certaine 
                     •
                  u
                     •
                  il Salt.
               By that which hath bene ſpoken, it may eaſily appeare, how
Salt is animal, vegetal, and mineral, and that it agreeth with
that which all the Phyloſophers haue decréed with one conſent
concerning the matter and ſubiect of the vniuerſal Medicine.
               And hereunto tend all other ſignes, whereby they deſcribe
their foreſaid matter, albeit moſt abſcurely. All which things to
agrée with the nature of Salt
                     •
                   as that 
                     〈◊〉
                   is of ſmal eſtimation:
that it is to be found in euery thing, 
                     〈…〉
                   our ſelues: the which
is moſt plaine, for ſo much as there is nothing compounded in

vniuerſal world, out of the which, and at all times, Salt cannot
be extracted.
            
            
               CHAP. II. The three principles of all things are contained
in Salt, extracted out of the
earth.
               
                  BVt to ſhewe now more particularly thoſe
things whereof we haue ſpoken generally,
namely, that Salt doe participate with the
animal, vegetal, and mineral nature, wée
wil vſe a common example, the which notwithſtanding,
being exactly and diligently
waighed and conſidered by a true Phyloſopher,
is a notable miſtery. The which, albeit
it bee taken from out of the earth, yet it may lift vp our eyes
to heauen.
               I meane to ſpeake of Niter, which men commonly cal Salt-Peeter.
I let paſſe the deteſtable and pernicious vſe thereof,
inuented for the deſtruction of men: And yet I muſt confeſſe
that it deſerueth great admiration, in that it ſheweth forth ſo
great, and incredible effects, when as we being in theſe lower
parts, it repreſenteth thundrings and lightenings, as if they
were in the aire aloft. But it we ſhould conſider what it is, and
of what quality, in his owne nature and compoſition, what diuers
faculties, and qualities, and effects there are in a thing ſo
vile and ſo common, it would no doubt make vs to wonder out
of meaſure.
               Niter is made and compounded of earth his mother, which
bringeth forth the ſame: or it is taken out of old rubbiſh gr
                     •
                  unds,
or out of places where ſtables for beaſts haue bene, or out of ſuch

kind of groundes which haue bene repleniſhed with ſalt liquor,
or with the vrine of beaſtes, rather then out of a leane hungry
land, waſhed with raine, or by ſome ſuch like occaſion, depriued
of that radical humour. It is moſt plentifully extracted from the
ground where doue-houſes are ſeated, and out of Pigeons dung:
and this is the beſt Niter of all others: the which is worthy the
noting. Whereby it appeareth, that Niter doth participate with
the excrements and vrines of liuing creatures.
               For vrines are nothing elſe, but a ſuperfluous ſeperation
of the Salt of vegetables, by which, liuing creatures are nouriſhed
and doe liue. Whereby it euidently appeare, how the
foreſaid Salt doth in kind participate with the nature animal,
and vegetable. For as touching that which pertaineth to the
mineral, it is not much pertinent to our purpoſe to ſpeake thereof,
ſauing that wée thinke good to adde thus much, that it is extracted
out of the earth, which is the reaſon why it is called Salt-Péeter,
when as more properly it ſhould be called the ſalt of the
earth. But let vs goe forward.
               Nature miniſtereth matter to Art, whereof Salt-Péeter
is compounded: Art cannot make by it ſelfe, no more then
nature can make Salt-Péeter-pure, and ſeperated from all terreſtrilie
and heterogeneal or vnkindly ſubſtance. For that it
may produce the ſame effects which the other produceth, it muſt
be prepared by the induſtry of workemen. For theſe make
choyſe of conuenient earth, and out of fit places, to them well
knowne, and being filtered, or ſtrained with hote common
water, againe and againe, through the ſame earth, as lyes
are vſually made with aſhes, it commeth to paſſe that a ſaltneſſe
or briniſh taſte is mingled therewith, which is proper to all
ſalts.
               Of the which like, or water ſo diſtreined, if two thirds or theraboutes
be vapored away by ſéething at the fire, and then let
coole, the ſalt will be thickened into an Ice, whereof the maker of
Salt-Péeter finiſheth his worke, purifying the ſame by ſundry
diſſolutions, and coagulations, that it may looſe his fatneſſe quite
and cleane.
               
                  
This common worke, being triuial, and no better then mechanical,
if it be rightly conſidered and weighed, is (as I haue
ſaid already) full of admiration. For by the very ſame preparation,
the thrée beginnings are extracted out of earth, which may
be ſeperated one from the other, and yet neuertheleſſe the whole
thrée, doe conſiſt in one and the ſame eſſence, and are onely diſtinguiſhed
in properties and vertues.A Figure of the Trinitie. And herein we may
plainly ſee as in a glaſſe (after a certaine manner) that in comprehenſible
miſery of the thrée perſons in one and the ſame Hypoſtaſis
or ſubſtance, which make the diuine Trinitie. For thus
it hath pleaſed the omnipotent Creator, to manifeſt and ſhewe
himſelfe a v
                     ••
                  trine, or Trinne, not onely herein, that he is found
ſo to be in the nature of earth, but vniuerſally in all the workes
of the creation. For this our compariſon of the Salt of the
earth is general, and is euery where found, and in all
things.
               Alſo in this compariſon of Salt,Phree diſtinct natures in Salt. wée may beholde thrée diſtinct
natures, which neuertheleſſe are and doe ſubſiſt in one
and the ſame eſſence. For the firſt nature is Salt common,
fixed, and conſtant: and the other nature is Volatil,
Salt, the which alone, the Sal-péeter-man ſeeketh after.
               This volatil or flying Salt, containeth in it two kindes of
Volatil Salt: the other full of Sulphur, eaſily catching flame,
which men call Niter: the other Mercurial, watery, ſower, partaking
of the nature of Salt Armoniac.
               Wherefore in that moſt common eſſence of earth, theſe thrée
ſeueral Salts are found, vnder one and the ſame nature of the
which thrée, all vegetables and animalls whatſoeuer doe participate.
And we determine to place our thrée hypoſtatical and
ſubſtantial beginnings, vpon theſe thrée Salts, as vpon the fundamental
grounds, in that our worke, concerning the hidden
nature of things, and the miſteries of Art, the which we had
thought to haue publiſhed before this time: whereof we thought
it conuenient to ſay ſome thing by the way, becauſe the groundworke
and beginnings of Medicines depend vpon them.
               
                  
Wherefore to the end ſo large & immenſurable doctrine, may
the better and more diligently be conſidered of all men, eſpecially
of the wiſer ſort, then heretofore it hath bene, I wil ſet plainly
before their eyes, thoſe three diſtinct natures of Salt, comprehended
(as already is ſayd) in one Hupoſtaſis, or ſubſtance.
               For the maker of Salt-peter, or Niter, to make his ſalt the
more effectual, volatile, and more apt to take fire, taketh away
the fatneſſe (as they terme it) from the ſame, and ſeperateth the
Salt thereof, which is al one with the ſea ſalt▪ or common ſalt,
which is diſſolued into common water: Contrariwiſe, Salt-peted
(as men cal it) is congealed into ſuch péeces, as we ſée it to be:
and ſo there is made a viſible ſeperation of both the Salts. For
the water (wherein the common Salt being defuſed and diſſolued
as we ſaid) being euaporated or boyled away, there remayneth
a portion of Salt in the bottome, which is ſomewhat like to
our common marine Salt, and of the nature thereof, for it hath
the ſame bryniſh qualities,Two ſalts appeare in the 
                        〈◊〉
                      of ſalt-peter. it is fixed, it melteth not in the fire,
neither is it ſet on fire, and therefore is wholy different from that
which is congealed in the ſame water, which is called Salt-peter.
The which thing truly deſerueth to bée diligently conſidered,
not of ordinary Salt-peter-men, which are ignorant of the
nature of things, but of Phyloſophers, if they deſire to be reputed,
and to be ſuch. To whom it ſhal manifeſtly appeare, that
Salt which by nature and qualitie (according to the common opinion
of Phyloſophers) is hote and dry, a ſulphurus Salt, fierie,
and apt to be ſet on fire, ſuch as is Salt peter, wil be coagulated
or congealed in water, wherein al other ſaltes are diſſolued,
no leſſe than that ſalt which procéeded from the very ſame eſſence
of Salt-peter, may be diſſolued in water, as we haue ſaid.
               Therefore not without great cauſe, the admirable nature of
Salt-peter deſerueth to be conſidered, which comprehendeth in
it two volatile partes: the one of Sulphur, the other of Mercurie.
The Sulphurus part is the ſoule thereof,Two flying parts of ſalt-peter. the Mercurial is his
ſpirit.
               The Sulphurus part commeth to that firſt moouing of nature,
which is nothing elſe, but an ethereal fire, which is neither

hote nor drie, not conſuming like the Elementarie fyre, but
is a certaine Celeſtial fyre, and Ayerie humour, hote and
moyſte,Sulphur of Nature. and ſuch as wée may almoſt beholde in Aqua Vitae;
a fyre, I ſay, contempered, ful of life, which in Vegetables,
wée cal the vegetating ſoule: in Animals, the hote and
moyſt radical: the natural and vnnatural heate, the true
Nectar of life, which falling into any ſubiect, whether it
bée Animal or Vegetable, death by and by enſueth. The
which commeth ſo to paſſe vppon no other cauſe, but vppon
the defect of this vital heate, which is the repayrer and conſeruer
of life.
               The ſame vital heate, is alſo to bée found, albeit more obſcurely
in Minerals:The Mercurial part of ſalt-peter. which may more eaſily bée comprehended
by the ſympathy and concordance, which the ſayd ſalt-peter hath
with Mettals: as is to be ſéene in the diſſolutions, whereof wée
haue ſpoken ſomewhat before.
               Beſide that ſulphurus part, there is alſo found in ſalt-peter,
a certaine Mercurial of ayerie nature, and which notwithſtanding
cannot take fyre, but is rather contrary therevnto.
This ſpirit is not hote in qualitie, but rather colde, as
appeareth by the tart and ſharpe taſte thereof: the which
ſharpneſſe and coldneſſe is wonderful, and is farre different
from the Elementary coldneſſe: for that it can diſſolue bodies,
and coagulate ſpirites, no leſſe then it doth congeale
ſalt-peter:The cauſe of ferment, is ſowerneſſe. the which ſowerneſſe is the generall
cauſe of Fermentation, and coagulation of al natural
things.
               This ſame ſower and tart ſpirit, is alſo found in ſulphurs,
of the ſame qualitie, not burning, nor ſetting on fire,
and which congealeth ſulpur, and maketh it firme, which otherwiſe
would bée running like Oyle. Vitriol, among al the
kindes of ſalt,Vitriolis of the nature of Copper. doth moſt of al abound with this ſpirit, becauſe it
is of the nature of 
                     Ʋenus, or Copper: which ſower ſpirit inconſtant
Mercurie (which notwithſtanding alwayes tendeth to
his perfection, that is to ſay, to his coagulation and fixation) ful
wel can make choyſe of, and attract it to him, that hée may bée

fixed and coagulated,The ſpirit of Vitriol fixeth Mercurie. when it is mixed and ſublimed with the
ſame vitriol. Euen as Bées ſuck hony from flowers, as Ripley
ſaith.
               Furthermore, this ſharpe, ſower, and cold ſpirit, is the cauſe
why Salt-Péeter hauing his ſulphur ſet on fire, giueth a cracke:
that ſo ſalt-péeter may be of the number of them, whereof Ariſtotle
writeth, as that they are moued with a contrary motion:
Which words of his are diligently to be conſidered. But what
doe I meane to open the gate of paſſage into the orchard of the
Heſperides, in ſpeaking ſo plainly of ſalt-péeter, giuing thereby a
free acceſſe vnto the doltiſh and ignorant? Be not therefore deceiued,
in taking my words according to the letter. Salt-Péeter
of the Phyloſophers or fuſile ſalt (whereof at the firſt came the
name of Halchymie) is not Salt-Péeter, or that common Niter:
yet neuertheleſſe, the compoſition and wonderful nature thereof,
is as it were a certaine example, and Leſbian rule our worke.
Howbeit I haue ſpoken more plainly & manifeſtly vnto you of
this matter, then any other which hath gone before me hath
done.
               Let therefore Momus from henceforth hold his peace, and
let ſlaunderous tongues bée hereafter ſilenced. Alſo let the ignorant
open their eares and eyes, and giue good héede to that
which followeth, wherein ſhal bée plainly ſhewed many admirable
things, and ſecrets of excéeding great profite. Wherewith
bée you wel ſatiſfied, and take my good will in good part,
till hereafter I ſhal deliuer that which ſhal better content you.
            
            
               
               CHAP. III. Wherein by Examples, the forces and properties
of Salt are manifeſted.
               
                  YEe haue ſéene out of that firſt remaining
Chaos (that is to ſay, out of that baſe earth,
or out of a matter confuſed and deformed)
an extraction, and ſeperation of a fairer,
bright cléere, and tranſparent forme: that is
to ſay, of that Salt, which is opt to receiue
many other formes, and which is endued
with diuers and wonderfull properties.
               Ye haue alſo ſéene, how out of one, and the ſame eſſence, thrée
diſtinct and ſeueral things, yea, thrée beginnings of Nature are
extracted: of the which all bodyes are compounded, and with
ſkilfull Chymiſt can extract and ſeperate out of euery natur
                     •
                  ll bodie,
that is to ſay, out of Mineral, Vegetal, and Animal: to wit,
Salt, Sulphur, and Mercurie: principles verily moſt pure,
moſt ſimple, and truely Elementarie of Nature, all comprehended
vnder one eſſence of Salt, Sulphur, and Mercurie,
which Phyloſophers are woont to compare with the body,Body, ſoule, and ſpirit.
Spirit and Soule: for the body is attributed to ſalt: the ſpirit to
Mercurie: and the ſoule to ſulphur: euery one to their apt and
conuenient attribute.
               And the ſpirit is as it were the mediator, and conſeruer of
the ſoule with the body, becauſe through the benefite thereof, it
is ioyned and coupled with the ſoule. And the ſoule, quickeneth
the ſpirit, and the body.
               Yée haue alſo ſeene in the aforeſaide ſalt, a Hermaphroditicall
Nature: Male and female: fixed and volatil: Agent and Pacient:
and which is more, hot and cold: fier and Ice, by mutual
friendſhip and ſimpathie ioyned in one, and vnited into one ſubſtance:
wherein is to be ſéene the wonderful nature thereof.
               The properties thereof are no leſſe wonderful: nay, rather

much more wonderful. For Salt-peter is the eſpecial key and
cheife Porter, which openeth moſt hard bodies, and the moſt
ſolid things, as wel ſtones as Metal: and bringeth gold and ſiluer
into liquor, which the proper water extracted out of the
whole maffe, without ſeparation of the male or fixed. And as
it maketh al bodyes metallick, ſpiritual and volatile: ſo on the
contrary part, it hath vertue to fixe and to incorporate ſpirits,
how flying ſoeuer they bée.
               Who now wil not wonder, or rather bée amazed, which
knoweth that Salt-peter is ſo apt & ready to take fire, by which
it paſſeth into ayre and ſmoake, and yet in the meane time ſeeth
that it remaineth liquid and fuſible in a red hote crucible, placed
in the center of burning coales? notwithſtanding the which moſt
burning heate, it conceiueth no flame, except the flame or fyre
happen to touch it. And which is more, being of nature ſo volatil,
it is at the length fixed, neither is it ouercome by the fire, neither
doth it yéelde bée it neuer ſo violent and burning, no more
then doth the Salamander (if it be true which is reported of that
beaſt) which before notwithſtanding it could not abide, nor by
any manner of meanes indure. Thus therefore yée ſée, that by
fire onely his nature is tranſformed.
               Furthermore the ſame Salt
                     •
                  peter, which was of late rightly
prepared and clenſed, ſo white and Chriſtalline, (at the leaſt
outwardly ſo appearing) being now put into a fixatorie fire, you
ſhal ſée that it conteineth within it al maner of colours, as gréene,
red, yellow, and white, with many others moe. The which if any
man wil hardly beléeue, becauſe he wil bée rather incredulous
than docile, I wiſh him to make tryal thereof, and then hée ſhal
learne ſo notable a myſterie of Nature, within the ſpace of tenne
houres, with very little coſt.
               And leaſt yée ſhould take mée for ſome Lycophrone, or Gramarian
writer of Tragedies, I wil teach you how to worke
truely and plainly.
               Take of Salt-peter the fineſt and cleareſt, one pound or two;
put it into a glaſſe Alembic with a couer,A practiſe. and ſet it in ſand: no
otherwiſe than if you ſhould diſtil Aqua Fortis. Put fyre vnder,

and moderate the ſame by degrées according to Art: ſhe which
fyre thou ſhalt increaſe the third or fourth houre after, in ſuch
wiſe, til the ſand appeare very hote. This fyre in the higheſt degrée
thou ſhalt continue by the ſpace of fiue or ſixe houres: and
then thou ſhalt finde and plainly ſée, that the ſpirits of Salt-peter,
haue penetrated the very glaſſe of the Alembic, and that it hath
diſſoloued the ſame as wel within as without.
               Furthermore the ſpirits of the Salt-peter, which are come
through the body of glaſſe, cleauing to the out-ſide therof like vnto
flower, yée make take off with a ſoft feather, and eaſilie gather together
in great quantitie. This flower is nothing elſe, but the ſpirit
of Salt-peter, wherein ye ſhal ſée al ſorts of colours very liuely
expreſſed.
               That which remaineth in the bottom of the Culcurbit, ſo white
as ſnow, and wholy fixed, is a ſpecial remedie to extinguiſh al
Feauers. It is giuen from halfe a drachme to a drachme, diſſolued
in ſome conuenient liquor.A good purgation of bad humours.
               
               And to ſpeake in a word, this remedy hath not his like, to cut,
to clenſe, and to purge, and euacuate the corruptions of humors,
and to conſerue the body from al pollution of corruption. For
ſéeing it is of the nature of Balſamic Salt, it muſt néedes bée indued
with ſuch vertues and properties. And in very déede to
deale plainly and truely, I cannot if I would, ſufficiently extol
with prayſes, the true Salt-peter, and Fuſile ſalt of the Phyloſophers.
This Salt, Homer cals diuine. And Plato writeth,
that this Salt, is a friend and familiar to diuine things. And many
Phyloſophers haue ſaid, that it is the ſoule of the vniuerſal,
the quickening ſpirit, and that which generateth al things.
               It may peraduenture ſéeme that we haue bene too tedious in
the inquiſition and ſpeculation, as wel of the general, as of the
particular, concerning the nature of Salt: but it is ſo profitable
and neceſſarie, that it is the Baſis, and foundation of al medicinable
faculties (as more at large ſhalbe ſhewed in his place) that
Phyſitians may haue wherewith to buſie themſelues, and to vnderſtand.
               But as touching a Chymical Philoſopher, let him know

that hée ought to beſtowe his labour moſt chiefely in fuſil Salts,
and to remember that Philoſophers haue not without good cauſe
euer and anon cryed; Bake it, Bake it, and bake it againe:
which is al one, as if they had ſayd, Calcine, calcine, or bring it
to aſhes.
               And in very déede if wée wil confeſſe the trueth of the matter,
al Chymical workings, as Diſtillations, Calcinations,
Reuerberations, Diſſolutions, Filtrations, Coagulations,
Decoctions, Fixations, and ſuch other appertaining to this Science,
tend to no other ende, then ſo to bring their bodies into
duſt or aſhes, that they may communicate the ſpirits of Saltes
and ſulphur which haue made them (placed neuertheleſſe vnder
one and the ſame eſſence) after a certaine imperceptible
manner, with their metallick water, and true Mercurie: and
that to this ende, that by the infernal vertue and force of Salt,
the Mercurie may bée conſumed, boyled, and altered from
his vile nature, into a more noble: when as of common Mercurie,
it is made by the benefite of the ſpirit of Salt, the
Mercurie of the Phyloſophers: which Salt it hath attracted
out of the aſhes, or calx vine Metallick.
               Euen like as it commeth to paſſe in the lye-waſh which
is made of aſhes and water, the which béeing oftentimes
meſſhed and drawen away, the aſhes leaue al their life and
ſtrength, communicating all their Salt to the foreſayd water:
the which water, albeit, it alwayes remaineth fluxile and
liquid, yet it abydeth not ſimple and pure water, colde, or of
ſmal vertue: but béeing now made lye, it is become hote,
and of a drying qualitie, clenſing, and of qualitie wholely
actiue, which is altogether the vertue and facultie of an altering
medicine.
               But it is to bée conſidered, of what matter this quicke and
metallick aſhes are to bée made. Alſo of what manner of water
the lye is to bée prepared, that thou mayeſt exalt the Salt or
Sulphur of the Phyloſophers, that is to ſay, the Balſamick medicine,
which is ful of actiue qualities like vnto thunder, béeing
reduced into a true liuing calx.
               
                  
And whereas at the firſt, it was a certaine dead body voyde
of life, it ſhal then be made a liuing body indued with ſpirit, and
medicinal vertue.
            
            
               CHAP. IIII. Gold animated, is the chiefe ſubiect of the
metallic Medicine of the
Philoſophers.
               
                  OF ſo great power and force is the Phyloſophical
Sulphur of Nature, that it multiplyeth
and increaſeth gold in ſtrength and
vertue, béeing already indued with great
perfection, not ſo much for the equal concurrencie
of Sulphur and Quick-ſiluer,
as in regard of the perfect combination,
adequation, equabilitie of Elements, and
of the principles which make gold.Gold tryumpheth in earth, in aier and in fire. And the ſayd principles or
beginnings (to wit, Salt, Sulphur, and Mercurie,) doe ſo order
themſelues, that the one doth not excéed the other: but being as
it were equally ballanced and proportionated, they make gold
to bée incorruptible: in ſuch wiſe, that neither the earth (béeing
buried therein) can canker, fret and corrupt it, nor the Ayre alter
it, nor yet the fire maiſter it, nor diminiſh the leaſt part of it.
               And the reaſon hereof is, for that (as the Phyloſopher ſaith)
No equal hath any commaund or maiſterie ouer his equal.
                  The incorruptibilitie of gold, maketh it the beſt Medicine to helpe a corruptible body. For becauſe
alſo, in euery body equalled and duly preportioned, no action
or paſſion can be found; Alſo this is onely that equalitie,
which Pithagoras called the Mother, the Nurce, and the defender
of the concord of al things. This is the cauſe that in gold and
in euery perfect body, wherein this equalitie is, there is a certaine
incontrollable and incorruptible compoſition. The which
when the ancient Phyloſophers obſerued, they ſought for that
great and incomparable Medicine in gold.
               
                  
And becauſe they vnderſtood, that gold was of ſo ſmal compacted
and firme compoſition, that it could not worke, and ſend
his effects into our body, ſo long as it remained in that ſolidity,
they ſought & indeuored to diſſolue and breake his hard bonds,
and by the benefit of vegetable Sulphur, and by the artificious
working of the Balſam of life, to bring it to a perfect adequation,
that the vegetable ſpirits of gold, (which now lay hidden as it
were idle, might make it of common gold, (which before it was)
gold phyloſophical and medicinable, which hauing gotten a
more perfect vegetation and ſeminal vertue, may be diſſolued into
any liquor, and may communicate vnto the ſame that flowing
and balſamic perfection, or the Balſam of life, and of our nature.
               And becauſe we are now ſpeaking of the animation of gold,The wonderful effects of potable gold.
be it known for a ſurety, that the auncient Fathers and Phyloſophers
ſweat and laboured much to find out the miſtery hereof,
that they might compound a certaine Balſamic Medicine, to
vegetate and corroborate, and by the noble adequation, and ſhe
integritie of nature thereof, to conſerue the radical Balſam, and
that Nectar of our life, in good and laudable temperament. But
indéed it is not to be wondered at, that gold being deliuered from
his mannacles and fetters, and being made ſo ſpiritual and animate,
and increaſed in vertue and ſtrength, doth corroborate nature,
and renue the Balſam of our nature, and doth conſerue vnto
the laſt period of life, being taken in a very ſmal doſe, as in the
quantity of one or two graines.
               And ſo much leſſe it is to be maruailed at, that forſomuch as
by that great adequation of temperature, it doth conueniently agrée
and communicate with our radical Balſam, it doth checke
the rule of phleame, the burning of choller, and the aduſtion of
melancholy, and by his incorruptible vertue, doth preſerue our
nature, but alſo to ouercome all the diſeaſes which belong to our
body. And ſo much the rather, in regard that the ſame Balſam of
nature, that natural ſpirit, is the principal cauſe in vs, of all actions,
operations, and of motions, not depending vpon temperature
or mixture, but concerning the ſame, as Galen himſelfe is
compelled to confeſſe, ſpeaking of that our natural heat. Ye muſt

vnderſtand (ſaith he) that Hypocrates calleth that, inſet heate,
which we call the natiue ſpirit in euery liuing thing. Neither
hath any other thing formed any liuing creature from the beginning,
or increaſed it, or nouriſhed it vnto the appointed time of
death, but onely this inſet or natural heate, which is the cauſe of
all natural workes.
               Therefore they can be excuſed by no maner of meanes, which
contumeliouſly, & without any reaſon, doe diſpiſe, diſcōmend, and
caluminat theſe kind of remedies, which doe principally tend to
the reſtoring & corroborating of our radical Balſam, which alone
(holpen with the ſaid medicine) is able to ſeperate thoſe things
which are vnkindly & grieuous to nature, & méerely heterogenial,
by expulſions conuenient, & ordinary euacuations: & to retaine
the homogenial & kindly parts, with the which it doth moſt eſpecially
agrée to their further conſeruation. Whereas, if for the corroborating
of mans ſtrength, there could bee any vſe made of
leafe gold (the which is nothing elſe but a certaine dead matter, in
no ſort fit to participate with our nature, & much leſſe able to be
digeſted by our natural heat) which is moſt cōmonly in vſe in all
reſtoring medicins, as in Confectione alkermes, electuario de gemmis,
aurea Alexandrina, Diamargariton Aricenna, and in ſuch other
like: why I pray you is the vſe of gold animate diſallowed,
preſcribed in that maner and forme already ſhewed? But in good
ſooth, they doe in vaine & too vnaduiſedly diſcōmend, & contemptuouſly
ſpeake againſt metallick remedies, as if they were no better
then poyſons: when as the world knoweth, that men which
are irrecouerably diſeaſed, when no other cōmon medicines wil
helpe, are then ſent to Bathes, to the Spawe, and to ſuch other waters
which are medicinable, in regard they ſpring from Niter,
Allum, Vitriol, Sulphur, Pitch, Antimonie, Lead, & ſuch like: all
which doe participate of a ſubſtance & ſpirit metallick, which we
haue found by experience, to purifie & to euacuate our bodies by
all manner of euacuation, not without great profit, as we will
declare more at large, when we come to ſpeake more particularly
of the ſame in our booke concerning the hidden nature of
things, and of the miſteries of Art: In the which worke we wil

ſhewe plainly and openly, the vertual qualities of thoſe metallick
ſpirits. And it ſhal be there proued by reaſon, and alſo by experience,
that thoſe metallick ſpirits, haue the ſame effects that the
foreſaid medicinable waters of Bath,
                  Bathes and waters artificial. and the S
                        •
                     awe, and other
ſuch like haue, which are natural and naturally hote: and therewithal
we wil ſhew plainly, that ſuch waters artificial, by induſtry
may be made at any time, and in any place, and with no
leſſe commodity and profit.
               There are a ſort of men, which in ſome meaſure are to be excuſed,
which being old, and thinke that they know all things, are
aſhamed to begin now to learne againe: but they which oppoſe
themſelues obſtinately, and through enuy and malice, doe carpe
and cauil, are more out of courſe, againſt whom we haue nothing
to ſay in our defence but this, that they bewray their groſſe
ignorance and malice.
               But the order and maner of preparing the Medicine, whereof
we treat here, was in old time called mineral, in regard that
the Phyloſophical Sulphur or Salt, which ſerueth for animation
or vegetation, is extracted out of the firſt vegetatiue ſpring of
mineral nature.
               Many Phyloſophers haue taken Saturn or Lead for the
mineral ſubiect. Other ſome haue taken the Saturnal Magneſia
or Loadſtone, which is the firſt metallick roote, and of the
ſtocke and kind of vitriol. Iſaac Holland, Ripley, and many other
Phyloſophers, haue written their workes concerning this matter,
the which, forſomuch as they are extant, euery one that liſt
may read them. For we haue no other purpoſe in this place,
but to teach and demonſtrate in plaine maner, what that Balſam
radical is, and that vniuerſal medicine, ſo much ſpoken of by
auncient phyloſophers, for the conſeruation of health, and for
the curing of diſeaſes in mans body.
               Others (among whom alſo is Raymund Lully) ſought their
fire of nature in a vegetable, to animate gold. For this
was that which al men eſpecially laboured for, to put life into
gold.
               
                  
And this is the reaſon why they all ſay▪ that there is onely
one way, and one matter, or Balſamick Sulphur and of
nature, which yéeldeth actiue and internal fire, to the ſame work.
               And among all vegetables, the chiefeſt is wine. For of all other
it partaketh very much of the vitriolated nature: which may
be gathered, not ſo much by that gréene collor of the vnripe cluſters
of grapes and their ſharpe faſt: as by the ſaphiric and reddy
colour of thoſe that are ripe, which appeareth both within
and alſo without, and by the ſharpe taſt: all which things doe
plainly declare both the external and internal qualities of Vitriol.
               It is alſo wel knowne that there are certaine ſuch waters in
Auuergne in France, which haue the taſte of wine with a certaine
pricking facultie or reliſh.
               Vineger alſo, whereto wines is eaſily brought, when his ſulphurus
life is gone, (that is to ſay, when his ſpirit is ſeperated)
doth repreſent the tart qualitie of Vitriol, as doth alſo other impreſſions
of wine ſufficiently known to true Phyloſophers.The Chymical miniſtries The
which alſo may be gathered by the concordance and agréement
which wine hath with the metallick nature, ſéeing that as well
out of wine as out of Vitriol, the Menſtrue of Chymical Art may
be prepared, which is able to diſſolue metals into liquor.
               Theſe are (I ſay) the reaſons why Raymund Lully, and other
famous Phyloſophers, placed their workings in wine, for the extracting
of their Balſamick Sulphur, that thereby they might
make true potable gold, and the infallible Balſamick medicine.
               But now we wil goe forward to open in few wordes Lullies
method, which he ſo greatly hid in his booke of Quinteſſence, and
in other places, which if it be rightly vnderſtood, it wil eaſily direct
and inſtruct euery true Phyloſopher, to extract out of all
things (and therefore to compound) that Balſamick medicine.Balſam is in euery thing.
For the ſcope is euery where all one, there is but one ende, and
there is but one onely way, to the compoſition of that Balſam, or
Phyloſophical Sulphur, which exiſteth in all things, mineral, vegetable,
and animal: howbeit in ſome more, in other ſome leſſe.
            
            
               
               CHAP. V. By what Art the Sulphur and Mercury of the Phyloſophers
may be prepared out of a vegetable, to
make true potable gold.
               
                  THerefore to the end all things may be duly
performed,The ſpirit of wine. which are required to ſuch working,
choyſe muſt be made of the beſt red
wine that can be gotten, being made of that
vine whoſe wood is all ſo red, and of this
wine muſt bee taken one hogs-head at the
leaſt, out of the which thou ſhalt extract an
Aqua vitae, according to the woonted maner, the which thou ſhalt
rectifie to the higheſt perfection. This ſpirit of wine thou ſhalt
ſet vp in a moſt cold place, in a veſſel very cloſe ſtopt, leaſt that it
breath out, by reaſon of the excéeding ſubtilty thereof. The remainder
of the wine thou ſhalt diſtill againe, and there wil come
out of the ſame a middle Aqua Vitae, if the wine bee of the beſt
ſort. The which ſo diſtilled, kéepe apart, or by it ſelfe. This thou
ſhalt doe againe with the reſt of the wine, ſeperating as afore
the Aqua Vitae from his fleame, euery one ſeuerally reſtrained
by it ſelfe. At the laſt thou ſhalt gather the forces which remaine
in the bottom, out of the which thou ſhalt drawe the laſt humidutie,
by a Balneum vaporoſum, or by moyſt Balneum, or by aſhes,
vntil it waxe thick and pyththie. Theſe pitchy remainders
being put into diuers alembicks (if they be much) put ſo much
thereto of the reſerued fleame, as may ſtand aboue it foure or
fiue fingers thicke: Put altogether vpon a hote Balme, or vppon
hote aſhes: ſo within fewe dayes, the fleame which afore
was white, receiuing tincture againe, will become very red,

hauing attracted vnto it a combuſtible Sulphur, out of the impure
feces or lées of the wine.
               Seperate this tincted fleame by inclination, and kéepe it by it
ſelfe if you will, for ſuch vſes as hereafter ſhall bee ſhewed.
               After that againe powre a newe quantitie of fleame vppon
the ſame feces, in ſeueral allembickes, if there be great plenty
of them, as is ſhewed afore: that which is tincted with red, ſeperate
againe as afore, and powre it to that which is already tincted
and ſeperated.
               Thou ſhalt continue this ſo often, vntill the fleame will
drawe no more rudeneſſe with it, and that the feces are
now become ſomewhat white, or Chriſtalline. The which
that thou maieſt the more eaſily knowe, powre vpon it an
other fleame, and with thy finger or a cleane ſticke ſtirre
them together, that thereby thou mayeſt ſée whether any
more tincture remaineth. For all muſt bée cleane extracted,
that the leaſt fleame being powred vpon it, will tinct or colour
no more. By which proofe thou ſhalt certainly know,
that the reſidence is very well depured, which in another
place wée will call the Chryſtal of tartar:The Chriſtal of Tartar. becauſe out of all
common lées, and by a more eaſie method, the like chriſtalls are
extracted.
               This is a moſt pleaſant and ſwéete remedy, and if any
in the world bée acceptable it is this. It doth very readily
clenſe the ſtomack, the liuer and the ſpléene from their
impurities, prouoking vrine, and mouing one or two ſieges extraordinarily.The good effects of the ſpirit of wine.
But let vs returne to our worke.
               The 
                     •
                  eces aforeſaide being now rightly and conueniently
prepared and depured as is ſaide, muſt bee put into
diuers ſmal cucurbits with long neckes, and into euery
one of them, put of the rectified ſpirit of wine, ſo much, as
that it may ſtand ouer it three fingers thicke: preſently
ſet vppon euery one of them a ſmal cappe or couer, with
his receiuer, ſtrongly and well luted, Hermetically cloſed

rounde about, that nothing breathe through: then ſet
them vppon the hote aſhes that they may boyle, and diſtill:
powring in againe the ſame which ſhall diſtill forth,
and ſo let them boyle againe. After that ſuffer all to
coole.
               Then as warily as thou canſt by inclination, ſeperate
the ſpirit, that nothing thick or troubled paſſe forth therewith.
And then againe, powre into euery cucurbittel another
ſpirit of wine, and doe as thou diddeſt afore. This
thou ſhalt doe ſo often, and continue it, vntill the feces which
by their owne proper nature are calcined, beginne to waxe
blacke and to ſmoake, if they be put vpon a red hote plate. For
this is a ſigne, that the firſt Phyloſophycall calcination is finiſhed,
and that the ſpirit, by the ſame worke, is now become
animate by reaſon of the tarte Balſam, and Ferment
of nature, contained in the foreſaid feces, reduced into Chriſtal,
as is ſaid.
               Theſe animated ſpirits ioyned together, and very well reſerued,
that they breathe not, nor iſſue forth, thou ſhalt put
the foreſaide feces into veſſels which are called Matrats, like vnto
round globes, hauing ſtraite neckes, by which the matter is
powred in.
               Theſe veſſels being Hermetically cloſed, and ſtopt, that
nothing may vapour forth, let them bee couered in ſand, in
the Furnace of Athanor, which will yéelde flame, round about
the compaſſe of the foreſaide veſſell. Then put fire
thereunto by the continuance of fiue or ſixe dayes, vntill
the earth doe become as white as ſnowe, and is well calcined
and fixed. The which, that thou maieſt make the
more volatil or flying, and maieſt alſo make the Sulphur and
Mercury of the Phyloſophers, thou mayeſt if thou wilt diuide
this thy callixe into two or thrée cucurbittils of conuenient greatneſſe,
firſt waighing the waight of euery of the calxes, and powring
vpon euery of them a forth part of the ſpirit of wine, animated
as aforeſaide.
               
                  
Put a ſmal head vpon each of the cucurbittels, with their ſeueral
receiuers wel fitted as afore. Place them in B. M. which
is moyſt,B. M. ſignifieth Balneum 
                        •
                     arie by the ſpace of one day. After that, the ſame veſſels being
ſet in aſhes, put thereto a meane fire that the liquor may
diſtill forth, which whereas afore it was moſt ardent and moſt
ſharpe, now it ſhal come forth altogether without taſte, hauing
no other reliſh vppon the tongue and palat, then hath common
wel-water: the reaſon hereof is, for that the foreſaid ſpirit, hath
left and forſaken his Balſamic Salt, which afore being mixed
with the ſpirit ſtilled forth with the Salt of the foreſaid Calx: For
nature loueth nature, and followeth her in her nature, as Phyloſophers
teach.
               Then againe thou ſhalt powre on another ſpirit of wine
animate, as afore, in the ſame proportion, and the former
order of diſtillation obſerued, vntill in taſte thou finde
the foreſaide animate ſpirit, to come forth and to diſtil, as
ſtrong in taſte and reliſh, as it was then when thou powredſt it
on.
               For this ſhall be a ſigne, that the foreſaide fixed Salt, hath
retained out of the volatil, ſo much as ſhal be ſufficient and conuenient
to retaine.
               And now if thou waigh and counterpoyſe thy matters, thou
ſhalt finde that they are increaſed a third part in waight:
as if there were one ounce in euery veſſell of Calxe, thou
ſhalt finde that euery of them doth waigh thrée ounces or
more.
               The which is diligently to bée obſerued for ſublimation,
and for the laſt working which as yet reſteth to bee done
that the volatill may tranſcende, and ouercome the fixed.
               In the which buſineſſe that thou maieſt procéede the
more ſafely, thou muſt take ſ
                     •
                  me of the foreſaide Phyloſophycal
Calxe vine, and caſt it vppon a red hote plate of
yron, and if thou ſée all the ſaide Calxe to vapour away and
to vaniſh in ſmoake, like Salarmoniack, thou haſt an abſolute

and perfect woorke. If otherwiſe, thou muſt begin the foreſaide
worke againe, and continue it, vntil the foreſaid ſigne doe appeare.
               This done, thou ſhalt put theſe matters into ſmal long Lymbeckes
in forme of a Sublimatorie, with heads vpon them, and
receiuers to receiue the ſpiritual ſulphurus humiditie: and then
thou ſhalt diſtil it in aſhes with a gentle fire, by ye ſpace of a whole
day: afterward thou ſhalt increaſe the fire by a further degrée,
more & more, ſo long, vntil about the end of eightéene houres or
twenty, the fire bée made ſublimatorie, and that thou ſee the veſſels
to bèe no more obſucred or darkenes with ſpirites: or with
white fumes. And then ſhal yée ſée the ſublimated matter cleaning
to the ſides of the glaſſes, fayre and bright, and tranſparent
like vnto pearles, or ſuch like. Vppon this matter beaten into
pouder, in a Purphorie morter of ſmal bigneſſe, thou ſhalt pouder
the ſulphurus ſpirit diſtilled, moyſtening it by little and little,
and boyling or ſtraining the whole by the ſpace of foure dayes in
a ſtrong Athanor.
               And thus thou ſhalt haue a pearelike matter,A Balſam Radica
                        •
                     . a Balſam radical,
extracted from a Vegetable, the Mercurie of the Phyloſophers,
the Sulpur Balſamick, and to conclude, that fire of Nature
ſo much commended, and ſo hidden by al the Philoſophers,
which with one conſent ſay, Ignis & azoc tibi ſufficient: Let
Fire, and the Matter ſuffice thée.
               This onely Balſam is the vniuerſal medicine, to defend and
conſerue health, if it be giuen with ſome conuenient liquor to the
quantitie of one or two graines. Great and admirable is the
vertue thereof, to reſtore our radical Balſam: the which wée affirme
to be the Medicine of diſeaſes, euen by the common conſent
of al Phyſitians.
               But our Lullie and other Phyloſophers, are not content
with this, but procéeding further, do diſſolue the forſaid Phyloſophical
Sulphur in a conuenient portion of the ſpirit of wine,
rectified to perfection, as afore, and ſuffer them to be vnited, and
very well coupled together by way of Circulation in a Pellican
Hermetically ſtopt or cloſed: and within fewe dayes, the water

is made azure like or Celeſtial: which béeing diſtilled, is of force
to diſſolue gold, and doth reduce it into the true Calxe of the
Phyloſophers, into a precious liquor, which itterated circulations
and diſtillations, can alſo paſſe by the necke of the Allembic
or by Retort.
               In the which working, if thou procéede as thou ſhouldſt, thou
ſhalt be able to ſeparate from gold (already phyloſophically diſſolued
and animated) thy phyloſophical diſſoluing, which wil
continually ſerue for newe diſſolutions. For very little is loſt
in euery diſſolution.Potable gold. And ſo thou haſt the true potable golde:
the vniuerſal Medicine, which neuer can bée valued béeing ineſtimable,
nor yet ſufficiently commended.
               After the ſame manner thou ſhalt make the diſſolutions of
Pearles, and of pretious ſtones, moſt general remedies, and deſeruing
to be placed among the chiefe, if they bée diſſolued after
the order and manner aforeſaid, with a natural diſſoluing. Remedies
I ſay, which can much better confirme and ſtrengthen
our nature, than if according to the common manner, they bée
onely powdred and ſearced, as is wont to bée done in thoſe our
common preparations and cordial powders.
               But ſome paraduenture wil ſay, that theſe kinde of preparations
are too hard, or ſuch as they vnderſtand not, or at leaſt care
not to vnderſtand.
               But this is a vaine obiection to preuent for excuſe of their ignorance,
the difficultie of theſe preparations, and the protract al
time, when as the thing is neither difficile, nor long, to them
which know how to take it in hand. Theſe things are not to bée
eſtéemed, nor labour is to bée ſpared, to attaine ſo excellent & precious
medicine, which in ſo little & ſmal a doſe, as in the quantitie
of one or two graines, can worke ſo great and wonderful effects:
which bringeth great commendation and honour to the
Phyſitian, and to the ſicke perfect health and vnſpeakable ſollace
and ioy.
               
                  But to conclude, I wil ſay with Cicero, in his Tuſculans:
There is no meaſure of ſeeking after the truth: and to be wearie
of ſeeking, is diſgrace, whē that which is ſought for is moſt excellent.
            
            
               
               CHAP. VI. The way to prepare and make the Balſamick Medicine,
out of all things.
               
                  BY the foreſaid preparation of ſulphur, Balſamick
vegetable, which wée haue before
taught, faithfully, plainly, and manifeſtly, it
is eaſie to vnderſtand, after what manner
the ſame Sulphur may bée extracted out of
euery mixed body. In the wich bodie (that
I may ſummarily gather al things together)
there is firſt found a liquor,1. Phlegme. without
al odour,2. Mercury. or relliſhing taſte, which is called Phlegme, or paſſiue
water.3. Sulphur. Then commeth a liquor which hath taſte, colour, odour,
and other impreſſions of vertual qualities, which is called the
Hercurial liquor. And after that commeth foorth an oylie
liquor, which floteth aloft, and conceiuing flame, which is called
Sulphur.
               After the extraction of theſe thrée ſeueral moyſtures, there
remaineth nothing but aſhes, or dry part: out o
                     •
                   the which
aſhes,4. Salt. béeing wel calcined, Salt is extracted, with his proper
Phlegme, meſſhing oftentimes, and powring water warmed,
vpon the foreſaid aſhes, put into Hypocrates bagge, and repeating
this ſo often times, til you perceiue a Salt water to come,
which hath a briniſh taſte: after the ſame manner, as women
are woont to make their lye-waſh.
               This béeing done, let the moyſt be diſtilled, and the ſalt wil
remaine in the bottome. The which ſalt notwithſtanding, in this
firſt preparation is not made cleane enough, nor ſufficiently purified.
Wherefore the ſame diſtilled water is to be powred vp againe,
that the Salt may againe bée diſſolued in the ſame: the
which ſo diſſolued, filter it, or ſtraine it through a bag oftentimes,
as afore, til it be moſt cleare: then coagulate it at a gentle heate.
And after this maner thou mayſt extract a Salt, cleare & pure, out

of al vegetable aſhes. Vppon this Salt being put into an Allembic,
powre al his mercurial ſharpe water: let them be digeſted
by the ſpace of one or two dayes, in the gentle heate of the
Balme: and then let them be diſtilled by aſhes, and ſo the water
wil diſtil forth without taſte or relliſh. Becauſe whatſoeuer it
contained of the volatile Salt, wil reſide in the bottome with his
per fixed ſalt. Goe forward therefore in thy working as before I
taught thée concerning the wine.
               Or if thou wilt not worke ſo exactly, meſhe vp againe al the
mercurial liquor, and make it paſſe through the foreſaid Salt,
which wil take into it, al that vitriol impreſſion which that water
ſhal haue, and the water or liquor, ſhal haue neither relliſh nor
taſte, but ſhal be altogether like to common water. But if thou
adde ſo much that the volatile part doe excéed the fixed, that is to
ſay, that there be more of the volatile, than of the fixed, (the which
thou ſhalt eaſily know by waight, becauſe it wil be increaſed
thréefold, or by trial vpon a red hote copper or Iron plate, when
this matter béeing caſt vppon the ſame, vapoureth and paſſeth
away in ſmoke) then thou muſt ſublime it, and it wil become the
Sal A
                     •
                  moniack of the Philoſophers: (ſo it pleaſeth them to cal
this matter) which wil bée cleare and tranſparant like pearles.
               Vppon this powdred matter, thou ſhalt powre by little and
litle the oylie liquor purified, and thou ſhalt boyle this matter,
that of volatil it may be fixed againe. Neuertheleſſe, that which
ſhal be fixed, ſhal be of nature more fuſible than waxe, and conſequences
wil more eaſily communicate with ſpirits and with
our natural Balſam, when it is ſeperated from his paſſiue water,
and paſſiue earth which are vnprofitable.
               Both which matters the Phyloſophers cal the paſſiue Element,Elements paſſiue.
becauſe they containe no propertie in them, neither doe
they ſhew forth any action. And thus a body or nature is made
wholely homogenical & ſimple: albeit there are to bée ſéene, thrée
diſtinct natures, the which notwithſtanding are of one or the
ſame eſſence and nature.
               And ſo a body ſhal bée compounded exactly pure out of thoſe
three hypoſtatical beginnings, namely ſalt, Mercurie, and Sulphur.

The which Sulphur in ſome part is anſwerable to
truely ſimple, and Elementarie fire: Mercurie, to Ayre and
to Water: in like manner moſt ſimply and truely Elementarie:
and Salt, to pure Earth, ſimple and Elementarie.
The which Earth is not colde and dead, but hote
earth,Actiue El
                        •
                     
                     ments. liuing earth, and full of actiue, and vegetable qualities.
               Beholde then how a perfect and vniuerſall Medicine is prepared
out of all the things of Nature. The which if thou
wilt vſe for purgation, chooſe for thy ſubiect ſome purging ſimple,
if thou wilt, eſpecially corroborate and ſtrengthen, make
choiſe of ſuch things as doe yéelde moſt comfort. If thou wilt
either ſpecially or generally lenifie, and mittigate paine, then
chooſe ſuch things as are moſt lenifying and aſſwagers of
paine.
               And yet know thou this, that in one and the ſame Remedie
onely, prepared in this manner, as for example, in the nature
of Balſamick Salt, thou haſt a clenſer and a purger, and
an vniuerſal emptier, a corrector of all impurities and corruptions.
               Thou haſt alſo in the particular nature of Sulphur, a general
and ſpiritual anodine or aſſwager.A Medicine particular and general. In the Mercurial nature,
there is an vniuerſal comfortatiue and the ſame nouriſhing:
Al which natures ioyned together as afore, by the Art and induſtrie
of a true Phyſition and Phyloſopher, are able to performe
and effect al theſe functions, without any griefe and perturbation:
and in the meane time it doth corroborate by
his Balſamical vertue, or radical Balſam, ſupplying vnto it
al meanes, not onely for defence, but alſo for expulſion and ſuppreſſion
of al diſeaſes.
               And this is the true Medicine, this is the reaſon of his vniuerſalitie,
this is his puritie and perfection.
               Neither is there any thing more eaſie then the preparation
thereof, if it be rightly vnderſtood. Moreouer, ſo exceeding great
is the vtillitie and excellencie thereof, that no labour, no
paines, no induſtrie, ought to bée omitted, or to bée reputed

hard, whatſoeuer difficultie or doubts may ariſe, or bée
obiected.
               But if there bée any man, which wil not take vpon him
this labour, albeit moſt profitable, and ordained for health and
the prolonging of mans life, and for the ſame hée may exactly
prepare theſe Balſamick medicines: yet at the leaſt hée wil by
the meanes thereof, as it were by a certaine Director,
ſeeke out in general, the euacuating, mundifying, and
clenſing faculties, which are in moſt vſe, and which chiefly
conſiſt in Salts: and in like manner the aſſwagers, mittigators,
ayd healers, in Sulphur and Oile: and finally the nouriſhers,
reſtorers, and comforters in the liquor or Mercurie.
               And by the ſame way and reaſon it ſhal bée taught, that
the true correctors of all remedies, are purifying and coctions
only: and that theſe alone are the true hony and Sugar, to
ſwéeten al things.
               For thoſe things alſo which are moſt tart, ſharpe, and
ſowre, yea and bitter, are by this meanes made ſwéete, and al
manner of euil qualitie corrected, and contempered, euen as
fruites before their perfect concoction, and maturitie, are
tart, ſharpe and ſowre, euery one according to their kinde
and qualitie.
               So wée ſée, that wines, in whoſe maturation or rypening the
heate of the Sunne failed, are made more crude and ſharpe:
which is the reaſon why ſome yéeres, wines are made more ripe,
acceptable, and better agréeing with nature, albeit they came
as wel afore,
                     
                        〈…〉
                     . as then, from one vine. Albeit much héerein is to
be attributed to the region alſo, and to the place, whereinto the
beames of the Sunne may make a more ſtrong impreſſion.
               And this may bee the cauſe, that ſome are ſweete, and ful of
wine, ſome meane, others very crude, and ſcarce wine.
               So the Tigurine wines, and others in mountaine places,
which are colde, are for the moſt part crude; and muſt haue a
for her rypening in their caſkes, before they can bee drunke
with pleaſure and profite▪ Alſo the ſame wines wanting a

kindely rypening and concoction, remaining ſtill crude, are ſo
full of léeſe, and tartarous matter, that the inhabitants
which dwell in thoſe places,Crude wines breede the ſtone. where theſe wines doe growe,
are more ſubiect to the diſeaſe of the Stone, than others.
               Now, if this defect bée to bée ſeene in wine, ſo greatly nutritiue,
and agréeing with our nature: what ſhall wee ſay of Hellebor,
and of many other poiſonfull M
                     •••
                  nes which ſpring out
of moſt colde Mountaines, and wilde, without Tillage, much
leſſe are they concocted by the Moone?
               Therefore no maruaile that our Hellebor anſwereth not
thoſe effects,Hellebor
                        •
                      poiſonfull. which Hypocrates attributeth vnto it. For that
which he commendeth in Greece, commeth out of a conuenient
Region, where no doubt there are Plants and Vines of
greater efficacie. Wherefore I haue vſed for a firſt preparation
of Hellebor
                        •
                     , to tranſplant them into gardens, ſcituate in
a more temperate 
                     〈◊〉
                   and place.
               The which how much they differ from thoſe which grow
vpon wild and cold mountaines,Tranſplanting of herbs helpeth their nature. as do alſo garden Succorie and
endiue, from the wylde, the difference and vſe, doe ſufficiently
declare.
               But thoſe preparations, which procéede and are done by
Art, and the concoctions which Art imitating nature finiſheth,
are much better, and more contracted and ſwéetned, as
by the preparation following, farre more exact than that thoſe
common, in which there appeareth nothing but that which is
crude and impure, ſhal manifeſtly appeare, and the thing it
ſelfe plainely proue.
            
            
               
               CHAP. VII. The vertue, and preheminence of the Medicine Balſamick.
               
                  SOme Phyloſophers ſéeke the matter of
Medicine in our ſelues: otherſome in the
hony of the animal and Celeſtial nature:
otherſome in a certain animal nature, not
in act or effect, but in power: which repreſenteth
the ſimilitude of the world, and
which conteineth in his belly Gold and ſiluer,
white and red: Sulphur, and Mercury:
which Nature the moſt ancient diſpoſes vnder God, hath
mixed together by due proportion. Out of the which matters▪
by ſundry fayre and long preparations, they prepared their vniuerſal
Medicine: which by reaſon of perfect 
                     ••
                  temperance, adequation,
and puritie, can contemperate, conſerue, and alſo increaſe
the radical humour, and that quickening Nectar of ours:
becauſe in puritie of his ſpiritual nature, hée doth communicate
with our ſpirits.
               Furthermore, let vs ſée how much the ſaid Medicine performeth
in the driuing away diſeaſes, and what infinite multitude
of remedies it hath. And firſt, forſomuch as it may be applyed
and fitted to al intentions requiſitie (as may be gathered by that
which hath béene ſaid afore) and forſomuch as it may bée giuen
in ſo ſmall a doſe, which wil bring no violent action, nor loathſomneſſe
to our body, nor any kind of perturbation, and yet neuertherleſſe
worketh excéeding wel, according to the diſpoſition
of our nature, I ſée no reaſon why this vniuerſal and moſt
noble Medicine, ſhould not be preferred before theſe rapſodies of
Medicines.
               Who ſo vſeth rightly this Medicine, and in fit time, ſhal
bée refreſhed and corroborate, and ſo armed with ſtrength,
that from thenceforth hée ſhal more eaſily and readily ſhake

off his ſickneſſe: whereof nature otherwiſe being deſtitute,
would eaſily be ouercome. Let vs vſe a familiar example that
thoſe things which we haue hitherto ſpoken, may more plainly
appeare to all men.
               We ſée in our elemental fire, that if thou caſt into the ſame▪ any
thing that wil eaſily take flame, as ſtrawe, or any ſuch thing
which wil readily burne and increaſe the force of burning, which
before was almoſt extinguiſhed, for becauſe it was deſtitute as it
were of nouriſhment, and wholy as it were ouerwhelmed of aſſhes:
So alſo our radicall Balſam the fire brand, and burning
lampe of the fire of our nature, wanting conuenient and proper
nouriſhment whereby it fainteth, or elſe ſo ouerwhelmed by the
feces and aſhes of obſtructions, that it is in danger of ſuffocation
and ſmoothering, or elſe kindred by ſome other cauſe, whereby it
cannot exerciſe liuing flame for the conſeruation of our life: then
indéed it ſtandeth in néede of a calefactor, and reſtorer of heate,
that in better maner and more readily it may ſhew forth the proper
qualities and functions. The like reaſon and conſideration
alſo is to be had concerning our natural Balſam, the which
being diminiſhed, or being hindred or hurt by any occurrent
outwardly, being againe increaſed by that Balſamick medicine,
it ariſeth eſt ſoone, and moſt perfectly performeth his woonted
functions. For ſéeing that medicinall Balſam is of a certaine ethereal
nature or a heauenly fire, becauſe it quickeneth and burneth
not, nor conſumeth: therefore out of hand, as if it were a
permanent and certaine ſpiritual water of life, it doth comm
                     •
                  
                  nicate,
and is as it were vnited with our ſpirit, and doth repaire
and increaſe it, by reaſon of the ſimpathy, and common likeneſſe
therewith. Neither is it to be thought, that this commeth ſo to
paſſe, for any other cauſe, but only of this (as was ſaid euen now)
namely of that friendly conuenience, and agréeing friendſhip,
which that Balſamick medicine, hath with our radical Balſam.
The which is the onely reaſon why I call the one, Balſam of
life, and the other the medicinal Balſam, euen for the relatiue
conuenience of them both. And yet beſide this ſimilitude and familiarity
of nature, it hath other particular vertues. For it is endu
                     •
                  d

with great actiuitie, it is ſpiritual and excéeding pearcing:
for this cauſe it doth attenuate and make thinne, it doth digeſt,
diſſolue, and euacuate theſe ſeculent ſ
                     •
                  uffings and aſhes, threatening
peril of ſuffocation and choaking to the Balſam of life.
Moreouer, if there be any impurity or corruption, by which it is
much offended, by what other meanes can it bee more ſafely
and better rooted out, then by a thing ſo pure and incorruptible?
And if any burning feauer doe inuade the body and the inſtrumental
parts of life about the heart, with what more conuenient
ſharpe Syrup, or Syrup of Limons, canſt thou extinguiſh it,
then by the Balſamick ſharpneſſe of this our medicine? Let
gun-poulder ſpeake for vs: and by a ſufficient teſtimony of this
thing, which this liquor doth not onely extinguiſh, but alſo will
not ſuffer it to take flame, but maketh it idle. Witneſſes alſo are
the moſt burning and volatil ſpirits, which al the Iſe of the Northerne
mountaines cannot congeale, and yet are congealed with
that liquor in Baln
                        ••
                      Mariae: & yet with all, the ſame liquor hath
this property, that it wil attemperate and diſſolue the moſt hard
Iſe. Is there any paine and griefe that would be aſſwaged?
This medicine ſhal be thy mittigating anodine, and moſt healthſome
Nepenthes. Is there any peſtilent poyſon, or malignant
quality to be e
                     •
                  tyrped? There is not a more ſafe Treacle or Mithridate
then this, which is the ſumme of all Alexipharmacons, &
the moſt chiefe preſeruatiue from all infection. Is the heart to be
corroborated, & the ſpirits to be vegetated? No confection Alkermes,
no confection of Hyacinth, is to be preferred before this balſam.
To conclude, what more ſpéedy altering medicine can there
be found, which is able to correct a diſtemperature, then that moſt
temperat remedy? To theſe vnſpeakeable vertues, adde yet this
one, that this medicine, neuer bringeth with it a glutting loathſomneſſe,
or perturbation of the body: but quickly, ſafely, & pleaſantly
performeth his workings. And the ſame with ſo ſmall adoe,
that whereas in other medicine, ounces, are required, in this
a few graines diſſolued in wine or in broath, or in other conuenient
liq
                     •••
                  , are ſufficient to be oppoſed againſt the ſickneſſe, which
produce great and wonderful effects.
               
                  
Theſe are thoſe great properties of this vniuerſal medicine ſo
much ſpoken of by the ancient Phyloſophers. Theſe are the admirable
vertues of our ſaid medicinable Balſam, the coadintor,
& priuie director of our natural Balſam, which is the only meane
to conſerue our life: which natural Balſam, is the onely immediate
putter away of ſickneſſes, and of all corporal infirmities. For
if ſickneſſes (as Galen ſaith) be an effect againſt nature, hurting
actions, then muſt it alſo needes be contrary to our radical Balſam
& Nectar of our life, which is nothing elſe but the ſame nature
or elſe an inſtrument ſo reſiſting it, & conioyned with it, that without
the helpe hereof, it can intend to doe or performe nothing.
               Therefore now whether the functions be diminiſhed, or depraued,
or altogether aboliſhed, it cannot otherwiſe be, but that
our ſaid radical Balſam, is in ſome part hurt, ſeeing it is certaine
that all thoſe laudable functions procéed there from. This is that
which Hypocrates calleth mans nature. This is that diſpoſer,
which maketh the attractions, expulſions, mixtions, ſeperations,
and concoctions of meates and drinkes. To this
chiefely, the ſame Hypocrates attributeth al the foreſaid functions
of our body. Not that the ſame Balſam of our radical, can take
vpon it ſelfe and on his ſubſtance, alterations, and that it can ſuffer,
ſéeing it is of an ethereal and celeſtial nature, & therefore after
a certaine maner incorruptible: but becauſe his action is delayed,
or hindered by lets, which lye hidden in the internal members
and bowels, and which doe occupy and trouble the ſame.
               This is the occaſion, this is the beginning, and principall
foundation of diſeaſes.Obiection. Therfore to take vpon me the diſpute, and
to defend it, thus I determine.
               If ſuch a diſeaſe comming vpon a man, be to be taken cleane
away, firſt of all nature is to be reſtored to her landable, whole,
and woonted ſtate: to the which end, all our cogitations ought to
tend.Anſwer
                        •
                     . Firſt of all therefore, we muſt prouide to take away all lets.
               To this the diſciples of Hermes Triſmegiſtus anſwere: Al this
may be ſufficiently performed & done, onely by reſtoring the radical
Balſam, for that vpon the ſame all action, & demonſtration
of health, do depend: the which Balſam being holpen as is conueuenient,

it wil come to paſſe, that the ſicke man, within the 
                     〈◊〉
                  
of one hower, ſhal haue and féele more ſolace, and ſo much the
more, when the ſame Balſam of life, being holpen with that
Balſamick medicine, doth more boldly expulſe the enemy: and
that in a very ſhort time, I ſay to the greater ioy and comfort of
the ſicke, then can the huge multitude of common potions,
powred into the loathing of the patient, bring to paſſe, and that
very hardly in a long time.
               And leaſt any man might thinke, that theſe are our owne inuentions,Galen. Lib. 13. Method.
raſhly and inconſideratly broached by vs, let vs heare
what Galen ſaith. The principal intention (ſaith he) of the Phyſition,
ought to be to reduce the ſicke to his natural eſtate, and
that neglecting all other things, his onely care muſt be to conſerue
that, from whence the faculty of acting cometh. And this
conſiſteth in that natural heate, the which ſo long as it is of
force and not hindred, it preſerueth the body in ſafety, in ſuch
wiſe, that whatſoeuer happeneth to the body vnnaturally, and
muſt be taken away, it is an vndoubted axiome, that it ſtandeth
in néede of a ſtrong natural heate. And albeit in external ſickneſſes,
and in certaine others, it may ſéeme that natural heate is
little auaileable, as in the remouing of fleſh which groweth too
ranke in a wound, or for the reuniting of the lippes of a wound,
yet for all that, the coniunction and generation of fleſh, and the
healing thereof, cannot be done without natural heate. This
foreſpeaketh Galen, and very truly. Yea, all his followers wil
willingly confeſſe, that it is onely nature, and that quickening
radical Balſam, which ſheweth forth all thoſe wholſome functions:
the which nature both here and before by the authoritie of
Galen, we haue rightly called the true healer of all ſickneſſes: but
ſo farre forth nature is holpen, ſtirred vp, and corroborated by all
maner helpe and arte of that Balſamick medicine, that it can
expel, ouercome, and caſt out all whatſoeuer is grieuous or contrary
vnto it. Thus farre forth they and we agrée together.
               Neuertheleſſe, this alſo is to be granted, that the ſame nature
is the beginning, and as it were the firſt mouing to all curing:
becauſe without the ſtrength and vigor of nature, all medicine

is vnprofitable and vaine. For nature is alwaies one and like to
her ſelfe, neither is ſhe at any time idle in vs, but is perpetually
occupied, alway ſtirring mouing, and vegetating, vntill by too
much let, ſhe being hindred, ſhée doe worke more ſlowly and
weakely. The which impediments and contrarieties, ſhe her
ſelfe of her owne accorde, and by her owne proper ſtrength goeth
about to put away and ouercome: But when ſhe hath to
doe with a moſt ſtrong enemie, or with many, ſhe ſooner and far
more eaſily can ouercome them, if ſhe be ſtrengthened with the
helpes of arte, and hauing conuenient meanes, ſhe ſhall with
greater ſtrength and ſecurity preuaile.
               To bring which thing to paſſe, our Balſamick medicine by
that exquiſite preparation, hath gotten a moſt pure, quickening,
ſpiritual, ſtrengthening, and kindly nature, which without all
exception, is farre more conuenient and effectual, then other medicines
of common Phyſitians, prepared by no arte, by no induſtry,
or dexterity.
               The which, forſomuch as they are yet crude, impure, and
groſſe, and are clogged with a terreſtrial thickneſſe, they doe rather
cloy and ouerlay nature, before ſhe can extract their maligne
quality, concoct their cruditie, and deuide their earthly groſneſſe
and impurity: the which being her taſke and burden,
ſhee fainteth before ſhee can receiue any helpe or comfort.
               And that we may not digreſſe from our ſimilitude, let vs apply
that which is ſaid, to fire, whereof we haue ſpoken before.
As we ſée fire when it is ouerwhelmed with many aſhes, and
hindered from taking aier, (by which it is nouriſhed) is eaſily
ſmoothered and put out: and that the ſame againe is ſtirred vp,
if a man with his hand doe take away the aſhes, and doe blowe
the ſparkes which remaine, giuing frée acceſſe of the aier: héere
the cauſe of the fires refreſhing and beginning againe, is attributed
to him which remoued the Aſhes, when as indéede hee
was but the inſtrument of reſtoring the fire.
               But the principal efficient conſiſteth in the fire it ſelfe, the
which he had ſpread abroad and winded or bellowſed in vaine,

if it had bene quite and cleane out. Therefore that renuing is
to be attributed to the fire alone which remained, as to the firſt,
next, and inſet cauſe, onely the outward ventilation or winding
comming betwéene as the inſtrument.
               Moreouer, as we ſée, that when the fire is ſo weake, that
very fewe ſparkes are to bee found, that then in vaine a
great heape of dead coales are caſt vpon the ſame to make a
ſpéedy fire, which will ſooner put altogether out, then make a
quick fire.
               But if thou put vpon them quicke burning coales, they will
by and by increaſe the fire, without feare of extinction: euen ſo in
like maner, the principal vertue or function, is alway to be aſcribed
to our vital or radical Balſam, rather then to the Phyſition
or Medicine, albeit the ſame may bee ſome helpe, in
putting away the aſhie feces, and in diſſoluing the troubled lées
which are an impediment, that ſo it may more fréely haue tranſpiration
and aire, that by them it be not oppreſſed and choaked.
               Such is this Balſamick Medicine, which being purified,
exalted, and brought vnto the higheſt eſſence and perfection, it
doth ſtirre vppe, refreſh, and reſtore our vitall fire, liuing,
but yet languiſhing, to his former vigor and ſtrength. The
which, forſomuch as it doth ſooner, more ſafely, and more
pleaſantly performe without all compariſon then that other
ordinary and common Phyſick, thou ſhalt not miſcompare
that of theirs to dead coales, or to gréene wood, but this of ours
as prepared▪ and brought to a Balſam, to a burning coale, which
is the ſumme of our whole diſputation.
               Let theſe things ſuffice to be ſpoken concerning the property,
quality, & excellency of our Balſamick medicine, which Phyloſophers
prepare out of one thing onely, not out of many, whether
it be mineral, vegetal, or animal. Of this medicine alone is the
ſaying of the wiſe man to be vnderſtood,Syrach. 38. 4 when he ſaith; The
Lord hath created medicine out of the earth, and he that is wiſe
wil not abhorre it. For by this word (Medicine) he vnderſtandeth

remedy, not the Art of Phyſick. For it was ordinary and common
in thoſe firſt ages, to vſe this medicine, taken out of one
onely matter. But the latter age ſucceeding, after long ſearch,
found out that radical Balſam, and ſaw by experience, that it
was in ſome thing more, and in other ſome leſſe. Whatſoeuer it
is, it is knowne that they of olde time did vſe moſt ſimple remedies:
neither did they care for ſo great confuſion of compoſitions
and mixtures which fill a whole ware-houſe and ſhoppe, as our
Phyſitians and Apothecaries do at this day.
               And if we will conſider of thoſe things which Theophraſtus
Dioſcorides, and others of the auncients haue left vnto vs in
writing, concerning medicine, and the vertues of ſimple remedies,
we ſhal perceiue and finde, that they vſed the moſt ſimple
method and order of curing, and that they had not ſo much reſpect
to the actiue or paſſiue qualities, of hote and cold, of dry and
moyſt, out of the which came the originall of ſo many mixtions
and confuſions. But it is plaine and euident, that they attributed
to their ſimples, this and that property, either becauſe they
had ſo learned from others, peraduenture by tradition, or elſe by
experience, obſeruing the impreſſions, formes, and figures of
their ſimples.
               But they of more late time haue bene ſo raſh of iudgement,
that they wil take vpon them to iudge of the faculties of ſimples
by their taſte and reliſh, and thereby diſcerne and determine,
their firſt, ſecond, and third qualities, to the which afterward
all the vertue of the ſaide ſimples was attributed. But becauſe
they found not this an vniuerſal rule alwaies and in all
things, and that it did deceiue, therefore ſome fled to the ſecret
and hidden properties, aryſing from the forme, and the whole
ſubſtance.
               Theſe and ſuch like ſtarting holes and ſubtilties, haue
brought vpon vs great incertainty and doubtfulneſſe, which way
to diſcerne and find out thoſe things, which ſerue for our beſt
good.
               Tell me I pray you (if you can) how many bitter things

there are in taſte, which neuertheleſſe according to the edict of
that rule, are not hote at all? Of this ſort among others many
moe is Opium and Cichory. Againe, how many ſowre things are
there, which by their rule ſhould be moſt cold, which notwithſtanding
are moſt hote, as the ſpirits of Vineger, of Niter, and of
Sulphur? How many ſwéet things are there in outward taſte,
which in their internal ſubſtance are nothing at all contempered.
How many things are outwardly and at the firſt beginning
of taſte altogether vnſauory and without reliſh, which inwardly
and in faculty,A Diſſoluing water. are moſt ſharpe and byting, Honey, Caſſia, and
Sugar, are in their internal ſubſtance ſo hote and violent, that
out of them alſo may be prepared ſuch diſſoluers, as are woont
to be made out of Aqua Fortis, or Aqua Regalis: which can diſſolue
gold and ſiluer as ſpéedily as the other.
               Lead yéeldeth out no taſte to the tongue:Copper is red without and greens within. and yet his internall
ſubſtance, is a certaine ſugared delightfull ſwéeteneſſe.
So outwardly Copper hath no reliſh and is of a ruddie
colour: but that gréene where into it is changed, is moſt
ſharpe.
               We might ſhewe of ſuch examples, almoſt an infinit number,
whereunto we muſt not raſhly giue credit, nor ſtand vpon
taſte, nor leane to much vpon the exteriour qualities and temperament
of things. For if they be more inwardly and exactly
examined, then by that ſuperficiary and ſlight maner of taſting
and experimenting, and that their inward bowels, be diligently
anatomized, they ſhal be found farre otherwiſe, and oftentimes
different, not onely in taſte, but alſo in odour, in colour, and in
their whole ſubſtance.
               But if ſo be a ſeperation be made of the thrée hypoſtaticall or
ſubſtantial eſſential beginnings, as of Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury,
then there will appeare a true and lawfull difference of
taſtes. Becauſe one and the ſame ſubſtance may containe
in it ſeuerall taſtes. How then canſt thou giue a ſafe iudgement
of his properties and vertues? As for example, conſider
well of Guaiacum: whoſe diuers vertues and properties therein
contained, thou canſt not eaſily diſcerne by ſimple taſte.
               
                  
Neither canſt thou alleage any certaine cauſe why it ſhould
be Diaphoretical, that is to ſay, apt to prouoke ſweates: which
by the ſeparation of the aforeſaid beginnings, thou canſt attaine
vnto. For thou ſhalt find in his mercurial tartneſſe, & in his oylie
ſulphurus, and thinner ſubſtance, that facultie to enforce ſweate,
which is alſo in Iuniper, in Boxe, in Oake, in Aſhe, and almoſt
in al woodes and barkes, as alſo in many other things: but hereafter
wée wil ſhewe the cauſe, why thoſe ſharpe and ſulphurus
ſubſtances, doe prouoke ſweates. But you may alſo extract out
of the ſame bitteriſh Guaiacum, a Salt apt for purgation, and
euacuation of humours. The like is to bée ſaid of Cinamom,
and almoſt of all other things. For Cinamom hath facultie both
to bind and to looſe. The opening force conſiſteth in his ſulphurus
oilie, and thinne ſubſtance, which being ſeparated from his
feces, thou ſhalt find a ſubſtance of the nature of Allum, wonderfully
binding.
               Alſo whereas Opium is bitter,Narcotical is Stupefactiue. that commeth by reaſon of
his Salt, from the which being ſeparated by his oile or narcotical
Sulphur, it becommeth purging no leſſe than out of any other
bitter thing, as if out of Gentian Centorie, & ſuch like, the ſame
Salt ſhould bée ſeparated and rightly prepared.
               To theſe bitter Salts is giuen the name of Salt-gemme as
a difference of other Saltes, whereof there is great diuerſitie of
kindes, as more at large ſhall be ſhewed in another place. But
nowe in fewe wordes I ſay, that ſome Saltes are bitter, ſome
ſweete, ſome tart, ſowre, ſharpe, auſtere, pricking, and briniſh:
whoſe particular facultie, is rightly attributes to the proper ſubſtance
of the ſame Salt, rather than to any other qualitie, whatſoeuer
the ſame be.
            
         
         
            
            THE THIRD PART OF THIS
Worke: wherein is contained a ſmall Treatiſe,
concerning the Seales and Impreſsions of things,
by Hermeticall Philoſophers, with much
care, and ſingular diligence, gathered
and brought to light.
            
               ALl men follow not one way to attaine to a
generall knowledge of all things. The
way of the Empericks is vncertaine, for
that it is traced in the darkeneſſe of ignorance.
Theſe haue reſpect to the external
impreſſions, and to ſome inſet qualitites,
eſpecially to thoſe which may be ſéen, taſted,
and ſmelt. Furthermore, they haue great regard to the firſt qualities,
hote, cold, moyſt and drie: which they haue made the
beginnings and firſt foundations of theſe faculties or vertues.
            But the Hermeticall Phyloſophers and Chymiſts, leauing
thoſe bare qualities of the bodyes, ſought the foundations of
their actions, taſtes, odours, and colours, elſe where. At the laſt
by wittie inquiſition they knew that there were thrée diſtinct ſubſtances
in euery natural elemented body: that is to ſay, Salt,
Sulphur, and Mercurie. And theſe internal beginnings of
things, they called hypoſtatical vertual, and ordinatiue beginnings.
For in theſe thrée hypoſta
                  •
               tical beginnings, th
                  •
               ſe foreſaid
vertual and ſenſible qualities, are to be found, not by imagination,
analogie, or coniecture, but in very déede and in effect.
That is to ſay, taſtes in Salt, moſt chiefly: odours, in Sulphur:
colours out of both, but moſt chiefely out of Mercurie: becauſe

Mercurie hath the volatile Salt of al things,Taſte, odour, and colours. ioyned vnto it.
            For there are two kindes of ſalts,Salt of 2. ſorts. the one fixed, other volatile,
as ſhal be ſhewed anon.
            Therefore ſalt is firme,Salt defined. fixed, and ſubſtantifying beginning
of al things: and therefore it is compared with the pure Element
of Earth.Salt and earth. Becauſe falt is not cold & dry by his owne nature
(as it is holden of ſome that the Earth is) the which qualities
are the death of things: but it is rather hote, and endued
with an actiue qualitie, for that it is appointed to ſerue for the
generation of all things.
            Sulphur is compared to fire,Sulphur and Fire. for as fire, ſo ſulphur doth quickly
take flame and burne: euen as alſo do al other things, which
partake of the nature thereof, ſuch as are Roſinie, fat, and oylie.
            Mercurie by Analogie anſwereth the Ayre,Mercurie, Ayre, and Water, and Water.
For not only that dry minerall water, (which is alſo called Hydrargire
and Quick-ſiluer) is called Mercurie: but alſo euery
water or actiue liquor endued with any vertue, is alſo for the excellencie
thereof called Mercurie. The which Mercurie, (as we
haue ſaid) may bée likened to either Element, that is to ſay, to
Ayre, and to Water: to Ayre, becauſe when it is put to the fire,
it is found almoſt nothing but Ayre, or a vapour, which vaniſheth
away.Mercurie a moyſt actiue. This if you pleaſe you may call a moyſt actiue.
            And it may bée compared to water alſo, becauſe it is running:
and ſo long as it continueth in his owne nature, it is not contained
in his owne liſtes, but in the limmits of another: which
according to Arictotle, is the definition of moyſt.
            Theſe thrée beginnings, (I ſay) are found in all bodyes as
internal and neceſſarie ſubſtances for the compoſition of a mixt
body.
            For ſeeing the foreſaid Mercurial, volatile, and ſpirituall humiditie,
cannot eaſily be conioyned with the earthie, corporeat,
and fixed part, by reaſon of that great difference and contrariety
of either of them: it is neceſſarily required, that there ſhould bée
a meane, and indifferent partaking of either: that is, as wel
of the ſpirituall as of the fixed, to conioyne both in one.
            
               
And this indifferent meane is Sulphur or oile,Sulphur the meane to ioyne ſalt and Mercurie. which holdeth
a meane betwéene that which is fixed, and that which is
flying. For oyles, are neuer ſo quickly, ſo eaſily, and ſo wel diſtilled,
as are waters: becauſe the ſubſtance of Sulphur, or of
an oylie bodie is tenax and retentiue, and therefore moſt apt to
combinde the other two, to effect a good, perfect and equal mixture.
            To make the matter more plaine by example. For as a man
can neuer make good cloſing morter, of water and ſand onely,
without the mixture of lime, which bindeth the other two together
like oile and glue: ſo Sulphur or the oily ſubſtance, is the
mediator of Salt and Mercurie, and coupleth them both together:
neither doth it onely couple them to death, but it doth alſo
repreſſe and contemperate the acrimonie of Salt, and the ſharpneſſe
of Mercurie, which is found to bée very much therein.
Much like to the coniunction which the Spirite and quickening
moyſt radical maketh betwéene the ſoule, and incorporeat ſubſtance,
and the body, which very much differeth from the ſame.
            Thus then it appeareth,Three natures in one. after what manner theſe thrée natures
may conſiſt in one, together, and ſo to be made a mixed and
perfect bodie. For as ſalt by it ſelfe a lone cannot bring this thing
to paſſe: euen ſo neither theſe two fluxible and mouing humors,
cannot without Salt by their nature compoſe a firme, fixed, and
ſolyd body.
            Moreouer Sulphur moſt néedes bée had as a Glue without
the which the Mercurial liquor wil be ſwallowed vp by the
drineſſe of the terreſtrial Salt, and through the violence of the
heate of the fire, which by the Sulphur is contained. But the
Mercurial humour, is as it were the chariot of the other two,
ſeruing to penetrate, and to make the mixture eaſie and ſpéedy.
            If there bée any man, which through obſtinacie, or blockiſhneſſe
of wit, doth not well conceiue and vnderſtand this: let him
beholde and conſider of the blood which is in mans body, how
in the ſame, the whaye is as a chariot or mediator, and combiner
of the other two beginnings together, as may appeare by
the preparation and ſeparation thereof.
            
               
Very fitly wée may vſe this example in this place. And hereafter,
by infallable and euident demonſtration, we wil ſhew after
what manner, the other two beginnings, beſide the whaye
(which ſupplyeth the place of Mercuries) are in blood.Salt cauſeth Vicers in the body. When
Salt is predominate and beareth the ſwaye, it produceth ſo many
kinds of diuers Vicers and many other diſeaſes: beſide that
portion of ſalt which paſſeth through the reines and bladder, by
Vrines. In like maner we haue already ſhewed how Sulphur,
or the oilie part, is in the ſame blood. This ſulphur being exalted, it
cauſeth ſulphurus exhalation, as inflamatiōs, from whence come
ſo many kindes of Feauers. So, Mercurial ſublimations raiſe
Rheumes and Catarres, with other diſeaſes Mercurial.
            
               Chymiſtes determine, that there are ſundry kindes of ſalt, which
as they are found apart in nature, ſ
                  •
                alſo in all mixt bodyes.
            That is to ſay, common ſalt (which the Sea by his ſecret

                  〈◊〉
                pypes doth conuey through the earth:)Saltes of diuers ſortes. Salt gemme alſo,
Allum (whereof there are diuers kindes) Vitriol, Salt-Armoniac,
and Salt-Niter, which men commonly call Salt peter.
            Among theſe ſalts, two are flying, and are mixed with
liquors after an inſenſible manner: that is to ſay, Niter, & Salt-Armoniac
of nature. Niter doth participate of ſulphur, and of
the oylie liquor of things: Armoniac partaketh of Mercurie,
or of the Mercurial humour of things.
            And theſe foreſaid ſalts, (which are found both in earthie, and
metallick ſubſtances) are deriued through the benefite of rootes,
into hearbs, plants, and trées: which becauſe they are alwayes
in the earth, they retaine the nature moſt chiefly of fixed ſalt.
            And after the ſame manner, the nature of fixed ſalt, is to bée
ſought for in rootes. In flowers alſo and in leaues, there is
great ſtore of the other two flying Salts, which béeing ſuch,
they eaſily vaniſh away and come to nothing; when the flowers
and leaues doe wyther and waxe dry. But thoſe plants and
hearbes which take their nouriſhment from fixed ſalt, are alwayes
kept flowriſhing and gréene: and therefore they doe
the more ſtrongly reſiſt the fainting heate of Sommer, and the
morifying cold of Winter.
            
               
Moreouer, their Rootes ſtanding déepe in the ground, they
doe the more eaſily withſtand all external iniuries. And when
the Spring commeth, and the Sunne ſendeth foorth his heate
entring into the ſigne of Aries, piercing the earth with his quickning
beames, hée ſtirreth the ſame, and cauſeth her to open her
boſome, out of the which at the laſt ſhée powreth foorth abundantly
thoſe two liquid beginnings, whereof wée haue ſpoken
before.
            The liquor, or Mercurial vapour, which is lifted vp through
the Rootes with Salt Armoniac of a volatile nature (by a
certaine wonderfull manner of nature
                  •
                diſtilling) and aſcending
into the trunke, vnder the barke, (at which time trées
may eaſily bée disbarked) raiſeth vp, quickeneth, and adorneth
with gréene leaues, trees and plants, now hanging downe their
heads, and halfe dead. And the other kinde of volatile ſalt. Nitre-ſulphurus,
mixed with the more volatile ſulphur, and oyle of
nature, doth cloath and decke the whole earth euery wherewith
ſundry ſorts of moſt beautiful flowers.
            And yet wée muſt not thinke héereupon, that one vaporous
liquor, which procéedeth out of the earth, is not partaker of the
other, ſéeing the Mercurial liquor is not without his ſulphurus,
nor the ſulphurus without his Mercurial. And this is the
cauſe why in the vegetable nature, wée doe ſée that ſome
doe put out their leaues and flowers ſooner than other
ſome.
            Nature therefore hath moſt wiſely diſtributed thoſe beginnings
into all things. And experience doth teach, that ſomethings
doe partake of this or that, more than ſome other things. For
thou canſt not eaſily draw an oyle out of leaues: but a mercurial
liquor plentifully out of al: and out of very fewe, ſome ſulphurus,
or oylie liquor. The reaſon is, becauſe Mercurie doth carry
the rule in leaues, and is their chiefe nouriſhment, beginning
and foundatiō as we haue already ſaid.Mercurie is properly extracted from leaues. But the ſulphurus liquor
is the cauſe of the increaſe & plentie of flowers, but yet the ſame
ſulphur is not alone and pure, but mixed with ſome portion of
Mercurial liquor, but with the leaſt quantitie of ſalt.
            
               
For this cauſe thou maieſt extract out of flowers, both Sulphur
or oyle, and alſo Mercurie, but that oyle more volatil: and
of Salt, the leaſt quantity. But out of ſéedes is extracted
much of the more fixed Sulphur,Sulphur out of Seedes. but of Mercury and Salt
almoſt nothing. The cauſe is, for that Sulphur hath giuen
beginning and the principal conſtitution, (not that volatil
Nitrous and airey Sulphur, but that which is indéede oylelike
and fat, and which holdeth a meane betwéene fixed and
flying: both which lye hid in ſéedes, euen in thoſe ſéedes which
are in great Mercurial hearbes and fleſhlike fruites, as in Apples,Salt out of wood and rootes.
Peares, Goordes, and ſuch like. But Salt is in all theſe,
as the moſt fixed and neceſſarie beginning, for the conſtitution
and compacting of all bodies. But this Salt doth moſt chiefely
re
                  •
               ide in the wood, and in the roote, not as in his center or proper
ſeate fixed, (for his principal rooting is in the earth) but becauſe
it is firſt and moſt plentifully communicated to the wood and
roote. From hence afterward much is deriued to the branches
and leaues, and but little to the flowers and fruites.
            Whereupon out of many leaues a ſufficient quantity of ſalt
may be extracted: but out of flowers and ſéedes a very ſmal quantitie
in regard of the others.
            Thus you ſée after what maner theſe thrée beginnings doe
order and determine all vegetables as hypoſtatical beginnings,
and doe bring them forth, conſerue, make them to ſprout and
floriſh, and doe giue vnto them diuers forces and vertues. It is
alſo euident, that the ſaide thrée beginnings, are in all things, but
in ſome more, and in other ſome leſſe.
            Therefore,A mixture of the 3. beginnings. none of thoſe thrée beginnings is found ſimple,
and alone, which doth not paticipate alſo with another. For
Salt, through the benefite of the other two Saltes, Niter
and Armoniac, containeth in it ſelfe an oylely and a Mercuriall
ſubſtance: Sulphur containeth a Salte, and a Mercurial
ſubſtance: and Mercurie a Sulphurus and Salt ſubſtance.
            But euery one of theſe retaineth the name of that, whereof

               
                  〈◊〉
                it doth moſt partake.
            But yet, if we conſider of the matter exactly, we ſhal finde
that al the other doe ſpring from ſalt,Salt, the root of the other beginnings. as from the firme and conſtant
beginning. The nature whereof wil enforce vs to lift vp
our eyes to heauen, ſeeing that from theſe inferiour and natural
things, that admirable and venerable Trinitie in Vnitie, is ſo
clearly and euidently to be ſéene.
            And foraſmuch as thoſe thrée ſubſtancefying beginnings
are, and commonly be found in al the things of nature, wée muſt
not thinke that they are ſo in them, as without effect, or vtterly
ſpoiled of al vertue: but wée muſt rather bée ſure of the contrarie,
namely, that from theſe chiefely, al the qualities, properties,
and vertuals doe ſpring. For whatſoeuer hath taſte, the
ſame if it bée bitter commeth from Salt Gemme. And ſuch
haue vertue to clenſe,Bitter things doe purge. to euacuate, or purge. So others
which haue in them bitterneſſe, are found to bée ſuch, as haue
the ſame from this kinde of Salt, and by the benefit thereof,
are reckoned among the number of clenſing and purging
medicines. Such are all bitter hearbes, and their Iuices. In
like maner all gaules. For without theſe thrée, ther can be no due
excretion or ſep
                  •
               rating in bodies, of ſuperfluities and excrements.
For nature by the conduit of her inſtrument, called Cholido
               
                  ••
               n,
caſting out into the bowels ſome quantitie of gaule, ſtirreth
vp the expulſer, and prouoketh it to ſende forth the excrements,
and alſo clenſeth, purgeth, and emptieth it ſelfe,
by it ſelfe. The which being vndone, the Expulſer lyeth as it
were buried, and ouerwhelmed, neither is there any good from
thence to be looked for.
            And that bitter Iuices, (as alſo the very gaule it ſelfe) are
of the nature of Salt, it may eaſily bee gathered hereby, becauſe
the guale is oftentimes congealed as a fixed Salt into ſtones, in
his owne bladder.
            Alſo out of bitter hearbes,Salt extracted out of bitter things. as out of Woorme-wood, out
of the leſſer Centaurie, (which ſome call the gaule of the
earth) much Salt is extracted, as they that be workemen know.
            
               
Moreouer out of the 
                  ••
               ules of liuing creatures, there is a
Salt to bee extracted very bitter, which purgeth wonderfully.
So alſo there is Salt in vrine, which purgeth the blood by the
vaines,Salt in vrin
                     •
                  
                which ſend it into the reines, and from thence by the
water pipes into the bladder, and ſo through the conduit thereto
appointed.
            In bitter Opium, which all men affirme to be ſo notably
ſtuperfectiue and cold, there is a bitter and Nitrous Salt, which
if thou canſt ſeperate from his ſtinking Sulphur (by the meanes
whereof it is ſo ſtuperfectiue) thou ſhalt make it a notable purger.
            So in like maner the ſkilfull know how to exiract out of Centaury,Purgers. Gentian, Rue, Fumitory, and all ſuch like, very good
purgers.
            Salt which is alluminous, giueth a ſower taſte: Vitriol a ſtiptic
or a ſtringent taſte: Armoniac a ſharpe taſte. And a diuers
mixture of the ſame Salts, procureth ſundry taſtes and reliſhes:
and that moſt chiefely by the benefit of the two volatile Salts,
which of all other wil be beſt mingled, by reaſon of their ſubtilty
and ſpiritous ſubſtance. Armoniac, which is ſharp, is more plentiful
in vitriol, and in things vitriolated, then in any other Salt
ſubſtance or metallick. For that ſharpe Salt, or that ſharpeneſſe
of nature, is the fermentation thereof, and the cauſe of coagulations,
and of the diſſolutions of all things: as we haue already
touched before, and will in another place more manifeſtly declare.
Therefore it is certaine, that thoſe things which are ſtiptick
or ſtopping, and haue outwardly a gréene colour or vitriolated
with an inward ſharpneſſe and certaine rednes, (as is to be
ſeene in Pomegranats, Barberies, and Limons) it is certaine that
they haue it from vitriol, and from the ſharp Salt Armoniac: for
the vitriol of nature is outwardly gréene, and red within, if thou
ſearch it by ſkilful Anatomie.
            So alſo thou maieſt extract out of the barke of the ſaid fruits,
as of Granates, a ſubſtance comming moſt néere to the vertue of
vitriol.Diſſoluing liquors. And the liquor which is extracted out of their red graines,
or out of the iuice of Limons, or fruite of Barberies, hath force to

diſſolue pearles, and corall, euen as the ſpirit of vitriol hath. And
this commeth by the vertue of Salt Armoniac ſharpe of nature,
and by the nature of mixture: but ſo mixed, as by the induſtrie
of the artificer it may be ſeperated, in ſuch wife, that the ſame
Salt Armoniac being extracted, the ſame liquor will be made
ſwéete and potable, and the Salt remaine by it ſelfe: the which
being againe mixed with ſpring water, or with any other liquor
deuoid of taſte, it wil make the ſame ſharpe.
            That ſame ſharpneſſe or Salt Armoniac ſpirituall, is
not onely found in Vitriol, but alſo in common Salt, in Niter,
yea in Sulphur alſo it ſelfe, as alſo in all things. For
that ſharpneſſe is that very ſame, which coagulateth Sulphur,
which is plentifully found therein. For without it, Sulphur
will not cleane vnited, but would be running, as are other oyle-like
liquors.
            The ſame Salt Armoniac of nature, is manifeſted vnto vs,
by that extraction of ſharpe oyle, which is drawen out of Sulphur:
whoſe nature is farre different from that of the ſaid Sulphur.
For it is ſo farre from taking fleame, that contrariwiſe,
it is a hinderance to gun-poulder, not-ſuffering it to be inflamed
with the touch of fire,Diſſoluing liquor. as is ſaid already. The ſame liquor
doth diſſolue pearles and coral, no leſſe then doth the iuice of
Limons, of Barberies, or any other of that nature, the which
power it hath by the diſſoluing vertue of Salt Armoniac of nature
which is in it. The like, and by the ſame reaſon, doth
Vineger performe. For Wine (as is ſaide afore) partaketh
of the nature of Vitriol, more then any other vegetable,
and containeth much of the foreſaide ſharpe Salt of
nature.
            He which doth exactly conſider theſe things, ſhal readily, and
out of true grounded reaſons, diſſolue the queſtion, concerning
the true and natural qualitie of Vineger, which queſtion hath
troubled many of the moſt learned Piyſitians. For the diſſoluing
vertue which appeareth to be in Vineger, euen in this, that when
clay or earth is put into it, it wil as it were boyle, argueth that
the nature thereof is altogether hote.
            
               
Others on the co
                  •
               trary part, denying Vineger to be colde,
appoint it as a chiefe remedy to extinguiſh and repreſſe external
Inflamations. Alſo by the taſte, which they affirme
to bee the effect of coldneſſe, they conclude that Vineger is
colde. But they can very eaſily end this controuerſie, which
haue the perfect knowledge of the nature of Salt Armoniac,
which Vineger containeth mat. For this Salt is the true cauſe
of diſſoluing vertue.
            But becauſe the 
                  •
               ame Salt is of force to coagulate ſpirits,
and to diſſolue bodies, therefore it is effectual, and a ſingular remedy
againſt both inward and outward inflamations. For it
doth coagulate the Niter Sulphurus exhalations, which ſtirreth
vp thoſe inflamations. For ſuch heates and feauerous paſſions,
doe procéed out of the ſpirits onely, either Niterous, or Sulphurus,
aryſing out of the Salt
                  •
               Niter Sulphurus or tartarus of our
body, and lifted vp into euaporations, which cauſe ſuch vnkindly
heates. The which cōmeth not ſo to paſſe when the ſame ſpirits
be as yet bound together, and lye as it they were buried in
their proper bodies, or tartarous feces.
            But if thou wilt yet knowe more manifeſtly the corroſiue
force,Diſſoluing ſpirits. and inflaming heate of the ſaide ſpirits, conſider the
ſtrong waters, (which are nothing elſe but the ſpirits of Niter,
and Vitriol) which thou ſhalt ſée will diſſolue ſiluer, or any
hard metall. But if thou put but one onely ounce of ſiluer, to
one hundred pound waight of Vitriol and Niter, as they are in
their owne nature and body, yet they will neuer be able to diſſolue
it.
            It is therefore manifeſt, that ſuch violent forces and operations,
are onely in the ſpirits, ſeperated, euaporated, and diſſolued
from their body: the which forces thou ſhalt by no ſafer
meanes take away and ſuppreſſe, then if the ſame ſpirits bée againe
incorporated, and coagulated. And this is performed by
that Salt Armoniac ſharpe of nature, which is in Vineger, as alſo
in other things which haue ſharpneſſe.
            But peraduenture there are ſome, which now thinking that
wee haue killed our ſelues with our owne ſwoord,Obiection. will inferre

vpon the ſame example by vs alleaged, that ſuch eſſences
prepared by Chymiſts, are all for the moſt part ſpiritual, and therfore
by conſequence, are more violent remedies then is fitting
for nature to beare,Anſwere. and therefore cannot be giuen with ſafetie. I
would haue thoſe which make this obiection, to be in this wiſe
anſwered. That the reaſon is not all one, and therefore the concl
                  •
               ſion
not good. For it we take the ſpirit of Vitriol, or of Salt-Péeter,
which indéed are ſpirits partaking of the terreſtrial fire,
yet neuertheleſſe they may bee ſo ſwéetened, and mingled with
broathes or other conuenient liquor, that they wil be very familiar
to nature, grateful, ſauory, and gentle, and not without great
vertue and efficacie. The iuice of Limons giuen by it ſelfe alone
into great plenty, can hurt the ſtomack. For the which cauſe our
maner is, to mingle it with ſome liquor, or with ſugar, and to
bring it into a ſyrup or Iulep, no leſſe profitable then pleaſing to
the ſtomack.
            But the vertue of the ſpirit of vitriol is better knowne at this
day,The ſpirit of vitriol and his vertue. and commended of the moſt approued Phyſitians of diuers
countries, then that the ignorant can detract any thing from
the dignity and praiſe there
                  •
               f. It is reported very credibly, that
in France it is much vſed and commended for the effects it hath
to extinguiſh burning feauers. And not without iuſt cauſe: for it
is a moſt ſingular remedy, not onely againſt feauers, but alſo againſt
many other contumacious ſickneſſes, as hereafter in due
place, ſhal be ſhewed: but it is fit, that no other preſume to adminiſter
it, then ſuch as are expert Phiſitians, not Emperikes, and
ſuch as try concluſions by killing men.
            Furthermore, the ſharpe ſpirit, drawen out of Niter alone, or
Sulphur (among the metallick Salts) is of the ſame nature and
property. For theſe doe auaile no leſſe then the other, to extinguiſh
feauers of what kind ſoeuer, by their coagulati
                  •
               e vertue,
whereby they doe tame,A remedy againſt feauers. ſubdue, and coagulate, thoſe Sulphurs
and burning ſpirits of our body.
            Moreouer, there are other ſome, which iudge vs worthy of
much reprehenſion, becauſe we ſaid afore, that one and the ſelfeſame
ſharpe Salt Armoniar,Obiection. hath both vertue to diſſolue, and alſo

to congeale: which being effects contrary, cannot procéed from
one and the ſame cauſe, according to the common opinion of
Phyloſophers.
            To this we anſwere, that as we haue ſpoken it, ſo we will
maintaine it. And therefore we ſay againe, that this Salt Armoniac
ſharpe of nature, whereof we ſpeake, can both diſſolue bodies,
and alſo (which is more to be maruailed at) congeale ſpirits:
yea and which is yet more wonderfull, euen in the middeſt
of fire it can congeale.
            And concerning diſſolution, it ſhall not be neceſſary that we
proue this, becauſe it is well known to perſons of very meane
ſkill. And now to ſay ſomewhat for the ignorants ſake: The ſpirit
of Vitriol or of Sulphur, or of ſower Niter, wel prepared, and
ſeperated from all terreſtreitie, doth diſſolue corall and pearles.
            By which diſſolution, an excellent remedy is made to ſtop the
fluxes hepatic, Lienterie, and Dyſſenterie, where the liuer hath
néed of ſpéedy corroboration. But they muſt neceſſarily be prepared
according to Art.A remedy to ſtoppe fluxes.
            
            But now time and reaſon perſwadeth vs, that we ſay ſomewhat
concerning the contrarie faculty of this ſharpneſſe, which
is contrary to the other coagulating effect. To doe this, little wit,
and leſſe labour wil ſerue. For they which are but meanely ſéene
in the Spargerick Art, and haue bene Chymiſts a very ſhort time,
or if they be but common Apothecaries, they know this, and
haue ſéene it in the preparation of quickſiluer: whoſe liquor and
running nature, no exterior coldneſſe, no Elementall froſt, how
great ſoeuer the ſame be,The fixing of quick-ſiluer. congeale or fixe. But if it be ſublimed
with Vitriol onely meanely calcined, it will come to paſſe, that
Mercury or quick-ſiluer which deſireth his coagulation as his
perfection, by a certaine magnetical vertue, draweth into it ſelfe
that Sulphur, or that Salt Armoniac ſharpe of nature, by the benefit
whereof, of running it is made ſolid and firme, ſo as thou
maieſt eaſily handle it.
            Being brought into this forme, it is commonly called Sublimate.
But to make it yet more perfect, thoſe which are careful
and ſkilfull workmen, reiterate their ſublimations, adding

to this new Vitriol, that by his Salt Armoniac of nature, it
may be impregnated. And thus at the laſt it becommeth ſolid, and
cleare as any Chriſtal Venis-glaſſe.
            
               Spargeric Phyloſophers, can ſo diſpoyle againe this Mercurie
ſo prepared, of his coagulation, or of his ſharpe Salt
Armoniac of nature, that he ſhal returne to his former ſtate, and
of fixed ſhal become moueable and running. But he is now perfectly
clen
                  •
               ed, and is now no more commō Mercury or Hydrargyre,Mercurie of the Phyloſophers.
but the Phyloſophers Mercury.
            And now, if the foreſaid water be exhaled or vapored, that there
may remaine nothing but a ſharpe liquor, like vnto the ſpirit of
Vitriol, thou ſhalt haue a liquor more excellent then any Vitriolated
ſpirit, and truly ſpiritual. And ſo in ſtéede of a great poyſon
which was mixed with Mercurie (which was then nothing but
a certaine terreſtrial corroſiue fire) thou ſhalt now haue the true
ſpirit of Vitriol: whoſe greater and better part vaporeth away,
is conſumed and loſt, if it bee extracted according to the
common manner, with that great and violent fire by Retort.
            This ſpirit prepared after the ſaide manner, excéeding
good,The right ſpirit of Vitriol: good againſt the falling euil. and a ſpecial commaunder of the Epilepſte, if it be adminiſtred
by a ſkilful Phyſitian, not by an Emperick, with proper
and conuenient liquor. And this is one tryal of the vertue of
coagulating Mercury.
            The ſame coagulating force of his doth manifeſtly appeare in
thoſe preparations which are called precipitations, which are
made with the ſharpe ſpirits of Vitriol and of Sulphur, by the
meanes whereof it may be brought into a poulder, which cannot
be eaſily done by fire.
            But that it may appeare that this coagulating power of Armoniac
of nature, is not o
                  •
               ely vppon Mercurie, (ouer
whome it can exerciſe this power) but nothing at all vpon the
ſpirits Niter.A remedy for Gangrena, & eating vl
                     •
                  ers. Sulphurus of our bodies, with the which quick-ſiluer
hath no ſimpathy, or conuenience) we wil ſhew it by a certaine
other manifeſt demonſtration, and the ſame moſt true:
as ſhall appeare to them which will try it. And in the ſame

experiment I wil alſo teach a very excellent remedy againſt
Gangrena, and all ſorts of cankerous Vlcers: if any bee
loth to take it inwardly into the body, becauſe of the vrine ingredient.
            Take the vrine of a boy, betwéene the age of ten and ſixtéene,
which drinketh wine in good quantity: let it be depured according
to Art: Adde hereunto of Romane, or Hungarian Vitriol (for by
theſe the operation wil be the better) I ſay of the Vitriol, twiſe ſo
much. Put it to digeſtion in Balneo Mar, which is moyſt, by
the ſpace of fixe or eight dayes, in one, or in ſeueral glaſſe Allembicks.
For there is required much matter. This digeſtion being
ended,Water for the Ophthalmie. thou ſhalt increaſe the fire of Balne til the water

                  〈◊〉
               . Preſently ſet on a head with a receiuer, and diſtill the
water.
            And the ſame which firſt commeth forth, is an excellent Ophthalmick
water for the eyes. The ſecond ſomething more ſharp
then the former,Water to eaſe the gout. is excellent good to aſſwage the paines of the
Gout.
            Thus goe forward, brging the heate of the Balne, or elſe by
hote aſhes, vntill the matter in the bottom of the Alembic remaine
like vnto hony. The which afterward thou ſhalt put into
an yron veſſel, and putting fire vnder it, ſtirre it continually
with an yron ſpattle, that it cleane not too: & this thou ſhalt continue
ſo long, vntil all the liquor is vapored away, and that there
remaineth onely the Salt of Vitriol, and of the vrine dry in the
bottome, and in a certaine maſſe. This being pouldred, put it into
a cornute, wel luted, hauing a wide receiuer, wel cloſed, that
the ſpirits iſſue not forth. Then put to a vehement fire, ſuch as is
néedful for the making of ſtrong water, or the ſpirit of Vitrioll.
            But the fire muſt bee moderated by degrées, vntill it
come to the higheſt degrée, as Art requireth. And then
at the laſt you ſhall ſée the receiuer filled euery where with
white ſpirits, which in that great heate will be congealed as it
were into Iſ
                  •
               -
                  •
               ickels, hauing all bout the body of the receiuer:

much like vnto the hayſe or white thréedes, which in time of
froſt are congealed out of foggy miſtes, and doe hang vpon the
trées. Theſe are the ſpirits of the Salt, which through the vehement
heate of the fire, are thus formed.
            This Iſe may be kept,A remedy againſt obſeruations, and to breake the Stone. after the maner of Salt Niter. Wherof
if thou giue one ſcruple or halfe a ſcruple, in broath, wine, or other
conuenient liquor, it will ſhewe it ſelfe an excellent remedy
againſt all obſtructions of the Liuer and of the ſpleene, it prouoketh
vrines, and is alſo a ſpecial remedy againſt the Stone.
            The ſame Iſe being brought into water (for it will eaſily be
diſſolued) is a principal remedy for Inflamations and Gangrenas,Gangrena 
                     •
                  ured.
which very ſodainly it extinguiſheth. Out of this ſo faire
and noble experient, euery true Phyloſopher and Phyſitian,
will take occaſion of ſéeking and ſearching further then the common
ſort are woont:Cauſes of the Ston
                     •
                  . and ſo he may more certainly finde out the
cauſes of ſtones congealed, which are ingendred of the ſame ſalts
or tartarous matter in diuers parts of our body.
            He will alſo haue more quick inſight into many other diſeaſes
which come by the coagulation of the foreſaid ſharp and Vitciolated
ſpirits, or elſe of the euaporations of other moſt ſharpe ſpirits,
from whence Inflamations, and gouty paines with ſwellings
doe ſpring, by the inward vertue of the thickened ſpirits aforeſaid.
Theſe things being thus knowne, a remedy wil eaſily
be found to mittigate, and to diſſolue ſuch calculous and ſtony
matter, if we marke and conſider diligently, where that ſharpe
vertue lyeth hidden, and wherein alſo the coagulatiue propertie
of the ſaid ſpirits are.
            Alſo the ſame contemplation, will giue occaſion to prie into
the diuers and ſundry meteors, which ſhewe themſelues
in man, the little world, out of thoſe continual vapours and exhalations
which are lifted vp from the lower belly (which we fitly
cōpare with the earth) into the aire, that is to ſay, into the vppermoſt
region of the body, the braine. So it ſhal appeare, that from
the Mercurial vapours, thickened into cloudes through the
coldneſſe of the braine, and by the ſame not able to be diſpreſſed,
doe fall ſometimes moderate ſhowers, and ſimple in ſhewe,

and ſometime out of thicke clouds abundance of waters. Wherof
come either gentle Rheumes, o
                  •
                violent catarres, which are
called ſuffocatiue, becauſe the matter ruſheth after a certaine violent
maner, vpon the vital partes. Furthermore, out of the ſame
contemplations thou ſhalt finde the true original of windes, of
haile, of ſnowe, whereof commeth the tingling in the eares, the
Palſey, the Apoplexe, and ſuch like deſeaſes, ſtirred vp from the
Mercurial thickened vapours. The which diſeaſes come not (as
ſome doth thinke) becauſe of coldneſſe onely: but the cauſe alſo
thereof is the ſharpeneſſe of Salt vitriolated, which being mixed
with thoſe Mercurial vapours, doth ſuddenly coagulate and congeale
them: and this is the cauſe of Apoplexes and ſuch like. For
to take an example from our owne body, to manifeſt this thing,
the vrine which we make, is ſo repleniſhed with theſe mercurial
humours, mixed with ſharpe ſalt, that it hath force and power to
coagulate. Wherefore this which wee haue ſaide muſt ſimply
be granted vnto vs that Salt-Armoniac of natural ſharpe,Sal-Armoniac a coagulator and a diſſotuer. hath
force to diſſolue bodies, and to coagulate ſpirits, as wee haue
plainely declared in the foreſaid experiments.
            But paraduenture ſome yong ſcoffing Scholler, which neuer
knew what Phyloſophie ment, with great confidence and
no ſhame (as of late one which ſhewed him ſelfe an Aſſe and
Calfe, and yet of a ripe wit did) dare riſe vp againſt vs and ſa
                  •
               
that in our body, no vitriolated nature can bée found, nor an
                  •
               
thing like vnto it. But this fellowe and ſuch like, wée w
                  •
               
teach ſufficiently and moderately (if they wil not refuſe to learne
                  •
               
in our booke concerning the hidden nature of things, and the perfection
of art, where wée wil declare this thing, and many other
profitable queſtions, neceſſary for a true Phiſitian. But yet not
to let the matter vtterly paſſe, without ſome thing ſpoken concerning
this point, I wil vtter my ſelfe in fewe words.
            Firſt of al I wiſh, that exact conſideration bée had, which is
that fire of nature, and which is the authour of the concoction of
meate in our ſtomach, which diſſolueth & chaungeth the ſame, and
that in ſo ſhort a time, as neither ſéething water, nor elementarie

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
fire can doe, no not in long time. Let them alſo I pray you conſider
what is the cauſe of that dog-like appetite which ſome men
haue, by which they are woont ſo readily to conſume all the meat
in their ſtomach, that nature hath ſcarce lawful ſpace to nouriſh
her ſelfe: and from whence this inſatiable hunger commeth.
According to the common opinion, it befalleth ſome man to haue
this appetite, by reaſon of a certaine ſharpe and melancholick humour,
which being thruſt downe into his ſides, doth ſometimes
boyle vp like moſt ſtrong vinegar, or rather in déed like oile of vitriol,
or like ſome ſuch diſſoluing and deuouring thing.The cauſe of dogge-like appetite. For truly,
if that ſharpneſſe were diligently conſidered, and throughly
looked into by Phyloſophical anatomie, it would eaſily be iudged
by good and indifferent men, that it ſhould not more vnfitly to
bée ſayde vitriolated, than melancholicke: nay more aptly and
better: becauſe melancholie, neither can, nor hath béen woont
to worke ſuch effects, except by the ſowreneſſe aforeſaid. For
by this manner of ſpeaking, the diſſoluing vertue, and al other
properties, are in farre better ſort expreſſed, which ſhal eaſily
appeare in him which wil throughly ſ
                  •
               ann
                  •
                and weigh al
things.
            And what doth let vs now, to call ſuch faculties and humours
vitriolated, when as al their properties and forces, doe come ſo
néere to the nature of vitriol? Shal it bée frée and permitted to
common Phyſitians,Choller, ruſtie, yeallow, and greene. to cal choler, Aeruginus, Vitelline, & Proracious,
for the likeneſſe & affinitie of thoſe things from whence
the name is borrowed: and why then ſhal it not bée lawful for
vs to doe the like, and to ſay that humors are vitriolated, becauſe
they partake of the nature of vitriole?
            But let vs returne is our Meteors which are in our bodie:
hauing already ſpoken of them which are raiſed vp by the vapours
of mercurial liquors, which haue a ſimilitude with the watery,
and alſo with thoſe which procéed out of the méere vapours
of the earth of the great world. Now it remaineth that wée ſay
ſomething alſo of the others.
            Therefore euen as as the vapours and exhalations ſulphurus,
Nitrous, or Antimonial, carryed vp out of the eath into the

Ayre and cloudes,The Philoſophical cauſe of Meteors &c. doe cauſe fiery Meteors, Corr
                  •
               ſcations, Lightnings,
Thundrings, Comets, and ſuch like: euen ſo alſo in our
bodyes, from the fumes and ſmoakie euaporations procéeding
from burnt and ſcorched blood, and from ſo manifold and diuers
tartarous, ſulphurus, and niterous fumes, with the which our
bowels doe abound, the like Meteors are produced. For ſuch
fuming matter, lying burning in the ſides, néere to the Liuer
and the Spléen
                  •
               , hindered by windineſſe, being thereof cauſed,
or elſe ſtirred vp by an immoderate and 
                  〈◊〉
                heate, being
at the the laſt lifted vp and carried into the braine,The cauſe of madneſſe, Phrenſie, and ſuch like. and therin ſet
an fire, ſtirre vp Meteors, long madneſſes, burning phrenzies,
ſetled melanchollies, dotings, paines of the head, falling ſickneſſes,
and many ſuch like. Some of theſe continue long, by reaſon
of the clammie hardineſſe or aboundance of the matter, as
madneſſe: other ſome are ſooner gone, as Phrenzies: ſome doe
more fearſely exerciſe a man, ſome more gently, according as
the ſaide fuming matters bée more or leſſe ſharpe, abundant,
cleauing, Salt, ſulphurus, or of qualitie more or leſſe inflameable,
or by any manner of other meanes hurtfull. For there
is great diuerſitie of theſe fumie matters: no leſſe than wée
ſée differences of fires and ſmoakes in combuſtible woods,
whereof ſome are more clammie, ſome more ſalt, ſome ſulphurus,
and ſuch like diuerſities.
            The ſame diuerſitie alſo is to bée ſéene in the ſeparation of
the ſpirits of Léeſe, of Ale, of Cider, of Wine, of Hydromel,
and of ſuch like drinkes, the diuerſititie whereof doth manifeſtly
appeare, by the odours which doe abundantly aſcend into the
noſe.
            Alſo in Saltes, Sulphurs and oyles, which are diſtilled, the
diuerſitie of vapoures, (which are nothing but the ſpirits produced
out of many tartarous matters) doe manifeſtly declare
the ſame. For of theſe, ſome are ſharpe, ſome ſowre,
ſome biting, ſome ſtinking, ſome odoriferous, ſome ſo
pearcing, that the very odour doth ſtrike the brayne, and
doe cauſe extraordinary néeſing, or elſe by ſome other

meanes doe hurt the braine, dazeling, dulling, or troubling the
ſpirits, or elſe by fumes which are ſulphurus and ſtupefactiue.
            The ſame differences are to be made in Antimonials, Arſenicals,
and Mineral humours, or vapours, and that out of their
effect, either ſeplic putrifying, or cauſtic burning, the which effects
are in the ſaid fumes, by the meanes of ſalt. Such pearcing
fumes are too wel knowne, and felt of our eyes oftentimes, to
which they bring by their ſharpeneſſe, paines, inflamations, and
flowing of teares. Héereupon out of this diuerſitie of fumes,
there ariſe diuers paſſions, in continuance, in maladie, and in vemencie,
more or leſſe inuading and troubling, according to the
nature, mineral, and condition of the qualitie or quantitie of the
exhalations, and of their ſubſtances, which are lifted vp with
them, as it were in a certaine chariot.
            Moreouer, we ſée in the bowels of the earth of the little world,
man, no leſſe then in the great worlds belly: in the bellies I ſay
of both, almoſt the ſame effects are to bée ſeene of Meteors, as
wel waterie as fierie. For example, the Tympanie, the ſwelling
of the Coddes, windineſſe of the ſtomach, and bellie: al which
doe repreſent the windes, raynes, and Earth-quakes of the
earth: and the waters within the body, and betwéene the ſkin
and the fleſh, doe repreſent the Sea, the Riuers and Springs of
the earth.
            Alſo there are in man diuers fierie Meteors, by reaſon of
the exhalations, of the Niterous and Sulphurus ſpirits, which
being ſet on fire, ſtirre vp ſuch diuerſities of Feauers and inflamations.
            There are bred alſo in man, diuers metallic ſubſtances, as
landes, and ſtones, which are commonly ingendered in diuers
parts of his bodie, as in his bowels, ſtomach, gaule, ſpléene, lyuer,
yea, in the lunges and braine: but more often in the reynes
and bladder, which are the moſt fertile mines of al the reſt.
            There are alſo procreated in mans bodie, certaine concreate &
congealed Iuices; as many kindes of Sulphurs, but of Saltes
more differences, vitriolated, alluminous, niterous, and Gemmeus.
Salt-gemme, or common ſalt, is plentifull in Salt ſpittle:

ſower Salt-Armoniac, in ſower flegme or ſpittle, and alſo in a
certaine kinde of ſower melancholy: ſalt vitriolated and of the
colour of ruſtie metal, in choller that is of the ſame complexion:
Salt aluminous, pricking and ſtiptick
                  •
               , in glaſſy fleame, of the
ſame qualitie: Salt niterous and bitter, in bitter choller. Moreouer,
Vrines which are wholy niterous,Salts of diuers kinds in mands body. doe repreſent a matter
moſt like to Niter. There are alſo in this little worlde, as alſo
in the greater world, found many differences of Salts: as a ſugered
ſalt, in ſwéete flegme: as alſo an Arſenical and corroding
Salt, in malignant and peſtilent humours. From the reſolutions
of the which Saltes, but moſt eſpecially of the ſtiplick or corroding
ſalts, come certaine kindes of Chollickes, which afterwards
degenerate into contractions of the bowels: From
the corroſiue Salts ſpring diuers kindes of diſenterie fluxes:
from the briniſh ſalts, come the burnings of Vlrines: from the
tart Salts, commeth the appetite of the Stomach: from the
Arſenicall Salts, comes Carbuncles cankerous Vlcers, running
pockes, & ſuch like. And of the congelations of theſe ſalts, comes
Goutes, Stones, Scirrhus hardneſſe, and diuers kindes of obſtructions,
according to the diuerſitie of tartars, and of Salts
which are ingendred and procreate to nature, in our body. From
theſe things, are the cauſes of diſeaſes in mans body, to be truely
and exactly learned and diſcerned: without the which wée ſhal in
vaine ſéeke for remedies.
            But to make al which, hath béene hitherto ſpoken more plaine,
wée wil adde certayne manifeſt demonſtrations, and playne
to ſenſe, but yet in as briefe manner as I can, ſéeing wée haue
reſerued a more ample and ſpecial Treatiſe of theſe things to our
worke, concerning the hidden nature of things.
            It is known and confeſſed of al, by the Edict of Hyppocrates,
the chiefeſt Authour of Phiſitians, that our body conſiſteth of
things containing of things contained, and of things enforcing.
The things containing, are the ſolide and more firme
partes, as the bones, griſtles, ligaments, fleſh, which doe
containe, and as it were reſtraine, the more ſoft and delicate
parts.
            
               
The contents are in a two-fold difference: ſome are violent
breathing out, and enforcing: (as Phyſitians ſpeake) otherſome
moyſtening, and flowing out. The firſt ſort, are the ſpirits
of our radical Balſam, which they call naturall ſpirits,
whether they bée firmely fixed in any one part, or whether
they haue ſcope and recourſe throughout the whole body; generated
of the moſt pure ſubſtance ſpiritual of the Sulphurus liquor,
and of the 
                  〈◊〉
                of the nouriſhments of our life. Furthermore,
they diuide the ſpirits, into natural, vital, and animal.
            All theſe, are either natural and pure, or elſe impure and ſeculent.
The one are of a moſt pure nature, ethereal and conſeruers
of life: the other groſſe and impure in compariſon of them,
ſubiect to alterations, for that they participate much of the ſeculent
impuritie of Mercurie, and of the liquors of Salt, and alſo
of the aliments of Sulphur: of the which beginnings wée doe
conſiſt, as wée ſaid before. The moyſtening parts are mercucurial
liquors, or that which they commonly call humours, as
well the natural, profiting and nouriſhing, which retaine ſomewhat
of the ſpirit of life, as the vnprofitable and excremental.
            The out-flowing and breathing foorth, are the breathes, vnder
which name alſo wée comprehend the vapours, of the which we
made mention before: which vapours are a diſtillation, and that
moyſt euaporation, taken from the more watery part of humoral
or mercurial things: or elſe a dry exhalation; of Sulphurus
and tartarous things, and of Salts of our body.
            And ſuch exhalations alſo are no other thing, but fumes and
ſpiritual ſmoakes, but yet excremental, and therefore ſuperfluous.
For beſide thoſe firſt ſeperations, which nature maketh
out of the more groſſe part of nouriſhments, by the excretion
and ſeparation of the ordinarie impure feces: there are yet alſo
in the Chylus, or good Iuice, and in the very blood,
which of all other humours are moſt noble, certaine ſuperfluous
impurities, which for the ſame cauſe Nature ſeperateth.
            Therefore the more m
                  •
               yſt ſuperfluities are ſeparated by euaporations,
and thoſe onely which are ſeperated in the third concoction,

which could not be made ſemblable or like to the nouriſhing
parts. For the which cauſe nature expelleth them by inſenſible
paſſages, euē through the pores of the ſkin, that our natural
heate may the more fréely be winded by the ayre, and the burning
of the heart comforted.
            The breathing ſuperfluities alſo, doe paticipate as much of
the drie as of the moyſt: that is to ſay, of thoſe which are exhaled
and euaporated out of the ſulphurus ſalt matters, and mercurial
liquors. Whereof the more thinne and breathie part, paſſe by
inſenſible tranſpirations: the more waterie, by ſweates: but
the more foule, and that which is feculent, cleaueth to the outſide
of the ſkinne.
            But now, if ſuch vapouring exhalations be retained ſtil in our
body, (the which ſometime commeth to paſſe through the coldneſſe
of the ayre cōpaſſing vs about,The ſtopping of the pores procureth ſickneſſe. by the ſhrinking of the ſkin,
by occaſion of place, or of age, by intemperate life, by a naturall
diſpoſition, by the thickneſſe of the ſkinne, or by ſuch like occaſions)
then it cannot be, but that ſuch bodies ſhal be ſubiect to many
other diſeaſes, than thoſe whereof we haue ſpoken before.
            It is alſo to bée remembred in this place, that in all theſe euaporations,
& ordinarie exhalations, ſomewhat of our ſubſtancetying
nectar of life, or of our radical Balſam, doth alſo breathe away.
The which breathing, if it be gently and ſparingly, and
without all manner violence and force, but by a certaine voluntarie
continuance, and naturall, then our age is prolonged, in the
meane time declining to extreame old age by little and little, vntill
al our water of life, or radical oyle (which continueth the
lampe of our life) be conſumed.
            But if the ſayd exhalation or breathing bée violently
and ſuddenly enforced, as it commeth to paſſe in burning feauours,
and in many other ſickneſſes, faintings, paſſions, and
moſt vehement motions of the ſpirits of our body, then our life
ſhall be preuented before age. Haereupon commeth the vntimely,
and in ſome ſort, the violant death of many: and yet the cauſe
of ſuch violence comming from an internal occaſion.
            
               
And becauſe it is very pertinent and neceſſarie, that wée
rightly vnderſtand thoſe things which wée haue now ſpoken,
concerning the natures of the contents in vs, that is to
ſay, of the enforcings, moyſtenings, and out-flowings: and ſo
much the rather, becauſe by them wée come to the knowledge of
our 
                  •
               pirits, and of our radicial moyſture, or nectar of life, and
alſo to the cauſes of the conſeruation, prolongation, deſtruction,
and abreuiation of our life, I wil therefore now declare them all
by an example, whereby euery one which wil giue eare, may
come to the perfect knowledge of thoſe things.
            And yet wée doe not much eſtéeme preſumptions, probable
reaſons, or authorities, but wée wil ground our demonſtration
vppon the very ſenſes themſelues, that thoſe things which wée
ſpeake, may bée both ſéene and felt. And if ſo bée any bée ſo
farre deuoyd of ſhame, that hée will yet obſtinately contradict vs,
we will ſay to him, as ſometime A
                     •
                  errho ſaid: One experience, is
more of value, than many reaſons. Experience cannot bée without
ſenſe: & he which denieth ſenſe, is worthy to haue no vſe of ſenſe.
            And foraſmuch as Ariſtotle ſayd, that the foundation of all
demonſtration is in ſenſe, Who is hee that dare gaineſay
it.
            Therefore wée wil take Wine againe for an example,
forſomuch as wée vſed the ſame before. In which wine
how apparantly and manifeſtly doe ſuch ſeparations; and
excrements appeare to bée made? And this it doth by his owne
proper nature, that the more eaſily the nature of either of
them, and of both, may manifeſtly bée knowen by this Analogie
and reſemblance which it hath with our blood. For by
the clenſing of wine, wée know the vitall Anatomie of
our blood: and by the ſame it will appeare which are our natural
ſpirits ethereal, as alſo which is our natiue heate, and radicall
moyſture, which two doe vphold our body, and defend
our life, and of whoſe helpe either of them haue néede:
foraſmuch as that radicall moyſture is the foode and nouriſher
of heate, and this ſame heate ſubſiſteth by the benefite of
that moyſture.
            
               
Thus theſe two repleniſhed with ſpirit, and as it were knit
together, are ſpred and diffuſed through the whole body. By this
ſame example, the difference betwéene nouriſhing vital humiditie,
and that which is vnprofitable and excremental, wil plainly
appeare. Furthermore, it wil appeare which be moyſt, and which
be dry, in that kind of moyſtures which are outflowing: and
which of them are hurtful to our nature, and which profitable.
By which anatomie of blood, the reader willing to learne, ſhal
profit more (as I thinke) becauſe we referre thoſe foure humors,
(whereof they make blood one) to the very ſame, and doe by a
certaine analogie and reſemblance, compare it therewith. But to
come to the 
                  〈◊〉
               .
            Therefore when the wine is prepared, the cluſters of grapes
are cruſhed in the wine-preſſe firſt, and the ſkinnes and kernels
with the ſtalkes are throwne away. Then the vnprofitable clenſings
and excrements, being partly by mans induſtrie, and partly
by the nature of the wine it ſelfe being reiected, the wine is
powred into caſkes and veſſels. In theſe, digeſtion being made, by
his owne force, it ſeperateth and purgeth forth together thoſe ſeculent
and more groſſe ſuperfluities. This done, the wine is all
moſt perfect, and fit for drinke and nouriſhment.
            That firſt artificiall preperation of wine, (which is made by
the expreſſion and ſeparation of the Vintners) doth after a certaine
manner repreſent vnto vs, the preparation of wheate, in
the which ſeparation, the chaffe and the branne being taken away,
the reſt is groūd into meale, that it may be more fit for nouriſhment.
Euen ſo in like maner in our mouthes, firſt preparation
of the fleſh is made from the bones, or ſuch like: And the expreſſion
or grinding is made with the mouth and téeth, then after
due chewing, the meate is ſent down into the ſtomach. This
is the firſt reſembled preparation of our nouriſhment, with that
firſt preparation of wine, and wheate, and that which is put into
our ſtomach, anſwereth that wine, which at the firſt is put into
veſſels, & the meale which is ground. Therefore after this, there
is another working in the ſtomach by nature. For whatſoeuer
the ſtomach receiueth, it concocteth, and digeſteth: yea all kind of

meates mixed together, like wine in his caſk
                  •
               , or any other kind
of drinke, made of hony, fruites, barley, or of water wherein diuers
things are ſodden.
            The ſtomach therefore is that veſſell of nature, wherein not
only the matter put into it is concocted and digeſted: but alſo it is
the ſame which ſeperateth the tartarous feces, and whatſoeuer
is excremental therein, by ſuch paſſages and vents, as nature
hath prouided to that end. At the length after much purifying, the
blood is clenſed, being the red fountaine, and the original of the
ſpirits of our life: euen like as wine which throughly fined is preferred
before all others, which ſerue for the nouriſhing and reſtoring
of our life. But let vs now procéede. 
                  〈…〉
               .
            Out of this artificial wine, with the h
                  ••
               pe of gentle fire, by
circulatorie veſſels (as they terme them) is extracted a fire of
nature, which attendeth the radical moyſture: namely, a water of
life, wholy fiery and ethereal, a quinteſſence, altogether ſpiritual,
and almoſt of an incorruptible nature.
            After the very ſame manner, through the benefite of nature,
and by Circulation which is made by the heate of the
Heart, and of the Liuer, there is generated and extracted
in vs that quickening fire, accompanied and nouriſhed with
his proper vnctuous humour, and radical, which is the water of
life, and true and quickening Nectar, the quinteſſence, and almoſt
the ethereal ſpirit, the incorruptible vpholder and conſeruer of
our life.
            This alſo here by the way commeth to be noted in the operatiō
of the foreſaid wine, which is alſo worthy the marking and
admiration: namely, that two or thrée fiery coales and no moe,
put vnder a large veſſel or chaldrone,Spirit of wine. (which may containe ſixe
gallons, will heate the ſame wine, and will procure the ſpirit of
wine to diſtill: when as by that ſmall heate, a much leſſe portion
of water, cannot bée made blood warme. But which is
more to bée maruailed at and obſerued, when the ſame ſpirit of
wine, doth paſſe through the Colunrina (as they terme it)
namely by very long cunduites and pipes of braſſe reforſed, fit
for this diſtillation, it doth ſo heate them, as alſo a whole

pipeful of cold water-beſid
                  •
                and far
                  •
                enough from fire, (in the
which the ſaide pipes are moyſtened) that a man may ſcarce
handle them. The which is to bee attributed to the great
heate which the ſpirit of wine giueth to the colde water paſſing
through the foreſaide pipes. For when all the ſpirit of
wine is diſtilled forth; although thou put vnder the ſaide veſſell
a much more vehement fire, yet thou ſhalt féele the heate
of that water in the veſſel contained, to bée extinguiſhed and
cooled. The which ſhould put vs in minde what is the next
cauſe and original of natural or connatural heate in vs: for this
heate is ſtirres vp in vs by the continual circulation of the quickening
ſpirit of our blood.
            When all this water of life is at laſt diſtilled forth by a certaine
internal, external, and violent heate, or elſe vtterly
waſted by progreſſe of time, then doth appeare the extinction of
that quickening heate, and cold death inſueth. But to returne to
the matter.
            After the extraction of the true Aqua-Vitae, or ſpirit of wine,
(which is the whole purity of thoſe thrée ſubſtantial beginnings)
whole liquor repreſenteth Mercury, whoſe flame, which it
readily conceiueth, ſheweth the Sulphurus nature, and the
excéeding ſtrong taſte, declareth the ſpirit of Salt Armoniac)
there remaineth great plenty of 
                  ••
               eame, or of Mercurial water,
which as yet containeth ſome quantity of ſpirit of wine.
            But the laſt remainder is no better then vnprofitable water,
which ſoone corrupteth in like manner, after the extraction of the
water of life, (which is truly ſpiritual,) from out of our
blood, there remaineth in our body, that moyſt and moyſtening
liquor, which is partly nouriſhing, and partly excrementall,
as is ſaide afore. Laſtly, there remaine ouer
and aboue the former, the Feces Tartarous reſidences,
and Niterus Sulphurus matter, which containe
many ſtinking Impurities, as alſo greate plentie of
Salt.
            The impurities, doe ſufficiently ſhewe the impurities in

the eyes, and filthy ſtinkes out of the noſthrils, where as diuers
oyles are diſtilled out of the ſaid feces by vehement fire. And out
of the very feces there is extracted Salt, if they be calcined, and
the ſame is alſo fixed with his proper fleame, as we haue ſhewed
afore in the working of the ſame vegetable. This Salt is made
Volatil, with Salt Armoniac, flying contained in his own ſpirit,
or water of life, procéeding as we haue already ſhewed.
            In like ſort in blood, beſide that ſpirit of life and Mercurial liquor,
(which two may in very déede be ſeperated from blood it
ſelfe, and ſhewed to the eye, after conuenient digeſtions, in the
heate of Balne Mary, which reſembleth the heate of nature, that
it may the better and more eaſily appeare, how the ſame heate,
and the ſame nature in vs, maketh the ſame ſeperations and operations)
I ſay, beſide thoſe two, a certaine ſoft conſiſtence like
liquor, wil reſide in the bottome, wherein thou ſhalt finde many
impurities, to be ſéene and ſmelt, if the ſame matter be dryed vpon
a fire of aſhes, proportionable to the heate of a feauer, and no
greater.
            This Niter-Sulphurus ſtinke is that, which manifeſtly cauſeth
in vs fiery meteors, as wel in the vpper, as in the inferiour
part of the body, and which bringeth forth innumerable paſſions
and paines beſide, as is already ſhewed afore.
            So alſo by the force of the fire, Sulphurs and oyles, thick and
gluing like pitch, may be ſeperated out of the feces and tartar of
blood, no leſſe then out of wine, ſo offenſiue with ſtinke, as thou
art not able to abide the odour thereof: whereof, how many diſeaſes
may ariſe in our bodies, euery man may eaſily coniecture.
            This done, there wil remaine aſhes, out of which a Salt is
extracted, the which (by the vertue of the Salt Armoniac of nature)
may be made Volatil, and the very ſame which Lullie calleth
the greater Lunarie, for the imitation of the vegetable work.
This worke is very admirable, by which the true Numie, the
vniuerſal Medicine, and the true Balſam conſeruing and reſtoring
nature is made. And this is the true and vital anatomie of
blood, which by manifeſt demonſtration we haue ſhewed, that
it hath a great analogie, proportion and reſemblance with wine:

when as a true Phyloſopher, as wel out of the one as out of the
other (ſauing that the one requireth greater artifice) knoweth
how to ſeperate waters of life méerely ſpirituall, which are ſaide
to be very forcible and ſtrong: and beſide theſe, Mercuriall liquors,
which are as wel profitable as hurtful, which are alſo
moyſtening: and finally, which knoweth how to extract vapors,
and exhalations fuming, which are called out-flowings.
            Now therefore, if ſo be in wine, which we eaſily vſe to nouriſh
our bodies, and the ſame pure and cleare after the ſeperation of
the ſpirit thereof, we ſée and behold ſo many vnkindly things, and
ſo impure; how many more groſſe impurities I pray you ſhall
we finde in the Lées of wines cleaning to the caſkes, and in the
groſſe reſidence of the ſame?
            They which knowe and vnderſtand that great and excéeding
blackneſſe of wine lées (which is manifeſtly to be ſéene in
the calcination thereof) and the ſepreation of his ſpirit, and of his
oyle, red, blacke and ſtinking, which is done by deſtillation,
they (I ſay) can giue cleare teſtimony and credibly informe,
what a great ſtinke there is in the Sulphur thereof: and how
great the acrimony and byting ſharpneſſe is in the ſame tartar
or lées, by reaſon of the Salt which is extracted out of
the ſame, and the oyle which is made by the reſolution of the
ſame Salt of tartar. And truſt mée, in the feces of the ſame
wine, there are found, beſide the things already ſpoken,
thoſe matters which are more groſſe, impure and ſtinking,
as they wel knowe, who to calcine them into aſhes (which they
call clanelated) are compelled to goe out of the Cities into the
fieldes, and places further off, by reaſon of their excéeding infection
and ſtinke, with the which they are wont to infect the places
néere adioyning.
            What maruaile is it then, as is ſhewed afore, if in our blood,
after the ſeperation of the true ſpirit, there are found ſo many
vnkindly, tartarous, ſtinking and Sulphurus impurities?
But what maruaile I ſay, if more and greater impurities
and ſtinkes, are to bee found in diuers of the Heterogeneal
parts of the Chylus, or beſt matter digeſted in the

ſtomach for nouriſhment, from whence blood draweth his firſt beginning
of his compoſition? That tartar or lées, is of the blood
which cleaueth to the veſſels of the bowels. Now the feces of
the Chylus are nothing elſe, but that huge heape of excrements
of diuers ſorts, which are in that nouriſhment exiſting in diuers
parts of the body. And when thoſe Niter-Sulphurus and tartarous
impurities, cannot by nature be digeſted, ouercome and
expelled, they ſtuffe the bowels, they are made the ſeminarie and
ſtore-houſe of moſt grieuous ſickneſſes: ſo that if we will confeſſe
ye truth, we muſt of neceſſity ſay with great Hipocrates, that
ſickneſſes haue both their ſéedes, and alſo their rootes in our bodies:
the which moſt euidently appeareth by the foreſaide compariſon
of wine and blood. The which ſtandeth vpon apparant
and ſenſible foundations, and not vpon doubtfull figments and
Imaginations.
            And as we ſée in the ſpring times, when nature putteth forth
her flowers, that the lées of wine, are mixed with the wine it
ſelfe, and doe trouble it, and oftentimes corrupt it: and that
as in the excéeding heate of the Sommer Sunne, the more hote
Sulphurus part of the ſame wine, that is, the ſpirit, may and
is woont to vapour away, whereof followeth the corruption
of the ſame wine: euen ſo alſo, about the ſame ſeaſons and times,
the feces, and tartarous heape mixed with our blood, doth at
the laſt peruert, and corrupt it: hereof commeth the occaſion
and multiplication of ſickneſſes. For the ſpirit of blood being
diſprearced and ſeperated, both by external and alſo by internal
heate, it muſt needes bée corrupted, to the which corruption,
ariſing of the ſaid cauſes, the cauſe of many ſickneſſes is
rather to be referred, then to thoſe bare ſimple qualities, of hote
and cold, dry and moyſt.
            As therefore we haue taught in the ſeperation of the true ſpirit
of wine (which reſembleth the celeſtiall and ſpiritual Nectar
of our life) many impurities thereof doe manifeſtly appeare: euen
ſo, and after the very ſame ſort, it fareth with wheate with fruits,
and with meates and drinkes prepared of them, and generally
with all other vegetable things, procéeding after the ſame maner

as we haue ſaid, concerning wine. For they haue no light proportion
with our blood; according to this ſaying: We are nouriſhed
with thoſe things whereof we conſiſt: which thou maieſt aptly
turne and ſay; we conſiſt of thoſe things, wherewith we are nouriſhed.
But the one partaketh of the other, or of this or of that
more then of the other: as for example, of the ſpirit, of the Mercurial
liquor, of Salt, of the feces, & of the ſtinking & vnprofitable
excremēts: which is the reaſon, that out of this or that more commendable
kinde of meate, the more worthy and commendable
blood is generated.
            Therefore to adde one example more in ſtéed of a ſurpluſſage
of waight, let it not be forgotten, that out of Hydromel, Cider,
Ale, or ſuch like kind of drinkes, & out of their feces, the ſame preparations
and ſeperations, as wel of a commendable liquor, as
of feces, may be made after the ſame maner, as we haue before
ſhewed to be done concerning wine: and that the beginnings
and heterogeneall and vnnaturall parts, may in the ſame ſort be
extracted out of theſe, as out of that other.
            To conclude, thou maieſt with better ſucceſſe learne the beginnings
of ſickneſſes, by making a compariſon betwéene the
preparation and ſeperation of thoſe things which giue nouriſhment
vnto man, and our blood, then if according to the cōmon
maner thou haue recourſe to the humours, & bare qualities, and
ſo to ſéeke out and diſcerne the cauſes & originals of ſickneſſes,
by a certaine witty contemplation, rather then by that which is
more true and infallible.
            Thus we haue thought good to ſet down theſe things by way
of anticipation, concerning the exact, and internal anatomy of humours,
& concerning alſo the artificiall examining of them: both
that thereby it might appeare from whence the natural impreſſions
of things, & the infallible cauſes of diſeaſes are to be ſought,
as alſo that the true Philoſophers & Phyſitians may vnderſtand
thereby the way to cōpound prepare, and adminiſter artificially
medicines and remedies, which now we intend to ſhew, euen
according to the order and method of the Dogmatickes. So as
wée thinke it not good, vtterly to reiect the olde, nor wholy
to followe the newe, but to reſtore the old forme of compoſition

of Medicines increaſed and amended with many of our inuentions,
experiments, and compoſitions, for the publique good,
and for the health of the ſicke, as alſo for the inſtruction of ſome
ignorant Phyſitians.
            
               
                  An Elixir of our deſcription. A wonderfull remedy to cure inueterate and almoſt deſperate
diſeaſes, and to conſerue health, and to prolong life, as
followeth.
               TAke of the roote of Zedoary, of Angelica, of Gentian, of Valerian,
Tormentil, or Setfoyle, Goates beard, Galanga,
the wood Aloes, and citrine or yeallow Sanders, of each thrée
Ounces. Of Baume, of red Mint, Maioran, Baſil, Hyſope, Germander,
Chamepithis, of each halfe a handfull: of Lawrell Berries
& Iuniper, of the ſéedes Peony, of Seſeli, or Comin, of Anis,
of Mugwoort, of Cardus-Benedictus, of each two ounces: the
barke of Citrine, of Miſſel of the oake, and of all the Mirabolans,
of each one Ounce. Cloues, Cinamum, Mace, Ginger, Cubebs,
Cardamony, Pepper, long and round, Spikenard, of each one
ounce and a halfe. Aloes Hepat, Myrrhe, Olebanum, Maſtic, of
each ſixe Drachmes. The flowers of Roſemary, of Sage, of
Stechados, of Mary-golds, of Saint Ihons woort, of centaury the
leſſer, of Betonie, of the Linden tree, of each ſo many as yée can
gripe with two fingers and the thumbe at twiſe: of the flowers
of Chicory, commonly called Suckary, of red Roſes, and of Bugloſſe,
of each one gripe in like ſort onely, of gruat hony, and of
white Suger, of each one pound. Of Aqua-Vitae after the beſt
maner rectified ten pound. Cut that which is to be cut, and beate
that which is to be beaten.
               All theſe things being put into a large Matrat, and cloſe ſtopt
that no breath come forth, ſet in horſe-dung meanely hote, by the
ſpace of eight or ten dayes, to putrifie.
               Being putrified, let them be hard and well preſſed or ſtrained,
and put the liquor diſtrained into an Allembic, and diſtill it by a
Cornute, at aconuenient fire.
               The firſt water which commeth forth from the diſtrained

liquor wil be moſt cleare: kéepe it by it ſelfe for it is precious.
               Thy Receiuer being of glaſſe muſt be of good receit, and muſt
be paſſing wel cloſed with the Cornute by the necke, that the
leaſt vapour come not forth. And when the Receyuer beginneth
to bée darkened, and to be filled with white ſpirits, thou ſhalt
increaſe thy fire by degrées a little and a little, according to arte,
vntil the ſaid whited ſpirits appeare no more.The water of 2. degree. Mercurie.
               
               Then take away the Receiuer, that thou mayſt put by it ſelf
that water which commeth foorth the ſecond time, and kéepe it
wel: it is called the mother of Balſam, being very profitable to
roote out many ſickneſſes, and to conſerue health.
               Then againe put to thy Receyuer,An Oyle. and increaſe thy fire by
degrées,Sulphur. as thou didſt before, ſo long vntil at the firſt, there diſtill
foorth a yealow oyle:Fyer. after that a red oyle, the matters in the
Matrat remaining drie: and yet not throughly drie, leaſt the liquor
which ſhall diſtil foorth doe ſmel of burning.
               Theſe things done, take that moſt cléere water which came
forth firſt of all in good plentie: powre it vpon the feces remayning:
and make them to digeſt together by the ſpace of 6. or 7.
dayes, at the heate of Baln-marie, vntil the water be coloured
and waxe yellow:The Feces. that is to ſay, vntill it hath attracted the more
fierie and oylie portion of the matter:Salt. and the feces which ſhall
remaine,Earth. when they haue yéelded their whole tincture to the foreſaid
water, reſerue and kéepe apart to ſuch vſe as herafter ſhal be
declared.
               (But if you think good, you may reſerue a portion of euery of the
ſaid liquors to ſuch medicinable vſes as is before ſhewed, and vſe
the reſt in the progreſſe of the foreſaid worke, and in the ſubſequent.)
               After you haue drawne the foreſaid liquors, & that alſo which
tooke laſt tincture from the feces, thou ſhalt mixe them together,
that from thence thou mayeſt extract a farre more Elixir of life,
than the former, and moſt precious: procéeding in manner following.
               When thou haſte mixed the foreſaid thrée liquors together,A moſt precious Elixir.
thou ſhalt diſtil them by a Corrnute, or by a glaſſe Allembic, pretermitting

al digeſtion, vſing in other than the ſayd mixture: vſe
and follow the ſame way & order, which thou diddeſt before, ſeperating
the Elements, and beginnings of liquors.
               For thou ſhalt draw out of the firſt moſt cleare water, which
thou ſhalt reſerue by it ſelfe, namely, at ſuch time as thou ſhalt
perceiue the receiuer to be darkened with a cloudie fume: then
chaunging the Receiuer, and putting too fire as thou didſt before,
thou ſhalt continue it ſo long, vntil thou ſée the liquor to iſſue
foorth of yealow colour, the which alſo thou ſhalt kéepe apart as
thou diddeſt the former.
               In the meane time while the foreſaide diſtillations, or ſeperations
of Elements, that is to ſay, of the two beginnings,
Mercurie and Sulphur, are in hand, thou ſhalt calcine, at a
Reuerberatorie fire, the Feces which thou reſeruedſt before:
out of the which, being brought to aſhes, thou ſhalt extract ſalt,
according to Arte, with thy firſt moſt cleare water; the water
ſeaſoned with his Salt, ſhal be mingled with the other two liquors
which were reſerued, that ſo at the leaſt out of a Tryangle,
thou mayeſt make a Circle O, as Philoſophers ſpeake:
that is to ſay, that out of thoſe thrée ſeueral waters, by circulation
(in a Pellican) made according to Arte, there may come
foorth one eſſence: and ſo by that meanes that great Elixir of
life, and admirable ſecret ſhal be made.
               And not onely made, but alſo by ſo ſhort a way, ſo eaſie, and
ſo well knowen to true Philoſophers, that they know thereby,
how, and in what order to make Elixirs out of all
things.
               The vertues of this Elixir are vnſpeakable, both to the curing
& alſo to the preuenting of giddineſſes in the head, the Falling
ſickeneſſe, Apoplexies, Palſies, madnes, Melancholy, the
Aſthma, and diſeaſes of the Lungs, faintings and ſoundings,
traunces, weakeneſſe of the ſtomach, and of other parts, conſumptions
procéeding of an euil diſpoſition of the bodies, paſſions
procéeding from the gaule, and ſuch like heauie and lamentable
griefes.
               Certaine droppes onely of this, being giuen in ſome conuenient

breath, and fitting for the ſickneſſe. As for example, againſt
the Epilepſie, with water of Peonie; of Lillyes, Connally, or
of flowers of the Linden trée. Againſt the palſie, with the water
Mary goldes: againſt the peſtilence with the water of Goates
beard, or of water of Cardus Benedictus: againſt the Aſthma or
Tiſſick, with the water of Scabioſe, or of Fole-foote, or ſuch like.
               Moreouer this Elixir, is of force to reſtore and conſerue our
radial Balſam, if fower or fiue droppes thereof, be giuen in
broath, wine, or other conuenient liquor.
               But peraduenture thou wilt ſay, that the preparation of this
Elixir, requireth too much labour, & is too tedious. But it is much
better and more neceſſarie to ſpend the time in things ſo admirable
and of ſo great importance, than about Medicines that are
altogether vnprofitable. And yet to ſerue euery mans turne, I
wil ſet downe the preparation of an other Eilxir, more eaſie,
and peraduenture more pleaſing, to conſerue health, and to prolong
life.
            
            
               Another Elixir of life moſt eaſie to be made.
               TAke the Rootes of Gentian ſlit in pieces, and dryed with
a gentle heate, alſo the roote of the leſſer Centaurie, of each
thrée ounces. Galanga, Cinimon, Mace, Cloues, of each
one ounce. Flowers of Sage, of S. Iohns woort, of each two
grypes with two fingers and a thumbe. Of the beſt white wine
6. pound. Infuſe theſe in a glaſſe Matrate, wel ſtopped, by the
ſpace of eight dayes, at a gentle fire of Balne-Marie. Then let
them be wel ſtreined, & ſo diſtilled by a glaſſe Allembic in aſhes,
til nothing remaine but dryneſſe.
               Then powre the water diſtilled vppon the feces, that from
them thou mayeſt drawe away the whole tincture, in a milke
warme Balne-Mary:
                  Hippocrates bagge, is like the bagge where through Hypocras runneth. Bring the Feces (after the drawing away
of the tincture) into aſhes, which thou ſhalt put into Hyppocrates
bag, powring the ſaid coloured water oftentimes vpon
the aſhes, that it may draw vnto it the proper ſalt.
               Giue of this Elixir the fourth part of a ſpoonefull in ſome conuenient
liquor. Vſe it a long time. It is a ſpecial remedie for
all conſumptions, for the weakneſſe of the ſtomache, which

it purgeth from tough and ſlimy humours which cleane to the
ſame: It ſtayeth the breeding of wormes, and kéepeth the body in
health. Take of this twiſe in one wéeke and continue with it.
            
            
               A Treacle-water for the head, helping all paines of the
ſame, proper for the Apoplexie, Epilepſie, Palſey
                     •
                  , and
ſuch like.
               TAke of the rootes of Peony, of Miſſelto, of common Acorns
or Cane, of each thrée ounces. Of ripe Iuniparberryes,
and of the ſéeds of Peony, of each, one ounce: Of
Cloues and Maces, of each 6. drachmes. Of Caſtoreum,
halfe an ounce: Of the flowers of Stechados, Mary-gold, Roſemary,
Sage, Lillyes co
                     ••
                  ally, of the Linden trée, of each, two
grypes with two fingers and the thumbe. Cut that which is to
bee cut, and beate that which is to bée beaten: and infuſe them
by the ſpace of 3. dayes, by the heat of a hote Balne, in white
wine of the beſt, 2. pound: and with the waters of Peony, Sage,
and of Mary-goldes, of each one pound.
               Then ſtraning them hard. To this liquor adde of Treacle of
Alexandria, ounces 4. of Anacardine confectionem Me
                        •
                     u, one
ounce and a halfe, of Diamoſch, and Aromatici Gabriel, of each
halfe an ounce.
               Stéepe or infuſe theſe againe, by the ſpace of two or thrée
dayes, at the fire gentle of Blan▪ M. Then ſtraine them againe,
and diſtil them vpon aſhes to drineſſe: and thereof a Treacle-water
will bée made.
               A very ſmal ſpoonefull of this is ſufficient to be giuen at once
againſt the diſeaſes before expreſſed.
            
            
               Another Treacle-water cordiall, and comfortable for the
heart, very good againſt al peſtiferous effects therof vſed, with
great profite.
               TAke of the rootes of Angelica, of Cloues, of Goates beard,
of Tormentil or Set-foyle, of Bifolium, or two-blades of

Enula campans, of each two ounces. Of yealow Sanders, and
of the barke of the ſame, of each one ounce and a halfe. Of white
Diptani, of Scabioſe, of Rus, of Goates beard, otherwiſe called
Méedwoort, of each one handfull. Of the Flowers of the leſſe
Centaure, of S. Iohns-woort, of Broome, of Violets, of Borage,
of Bugloſſe, of Water-Lyllie, of Red Roſes, of each, a thrée finger
gripe. Put theſe into 3. pound of Malmeſie infuſed by the
ſpace of 4. dayes, ſet vpon the fire of Baln M. and the Iuice of
Lemons, the water Meliſſa, Aeetouſe, and of Roſes mingled
with the ſayd Wine, of each one pound. Then ſtrayne them.
               In the liqnor diſtrained, put of Treacle ounces thrée, of the
confection of Hiacinth, one ounce. Of the confection Alchermes,
6. drachmes. Of Diamargarit friged, Diatria Santali, of each
3. drachmes: of Diambre, and Diacoral, of each two drachmes,
of Saffron, and Myrrhe, of each halfe a drachme.
               Infuſe them againe, by the ſpace of two or thrée dayes, at the
ſame fire of Baln. M. Then diſtil them to drineſſe by fire of aſhes:
and it will be a Treacle water. But to make it the more effectuall,
the Salt muſt be extracted out of the feces which remaine, according
to arte, and then mingeled with the foreſaid water.
            
            
               A water againſt Poyſons, and againſt all peſtilentiall
effects.
               TAke of the Rootes of Angelica, of the Carline-thiſtle, of
Set-foyle, & of the Barke of the Olibian Trée, of each two
ounces, of Cardus Benedictus, of Méede-woort, called
Goates beard, of all the Sanders, of each halfe an ounce: the
Treacles of Mythridate, and the confection of Hiacinth, of each
2, ounces: the ſpeces of Diamarg. Frigid, Camphor, of each
2. Drachmes. Let theſe be groſſely beaten or bruſed, & put into a
glaſſe Allembic, powring thereon 3. pound of rectified Aqua vitae.
Then let them be digeſted in a veſſel wel cloſed, & ſo diſtilled by
aſhes, or a vaporous Baln. This water is wonderfull effectuall
againſt poyſonful and peſtilential effects. The quantitie which
muſt be giuen, is halfe a ſpoonfull.
            
            
               
               An excellent water to be giuen againſt Feuers, burning
and peſtilentiall.
               TAke of the rootes of Angelica, Bugloſſe, of Scorzonerae Ac
                        ••
                     y,
one ounce: of the Treacle Alexandrine, 2 ounces: of
the Iuice of Lemons clenſed, of the waters Fumetarie,
Gotes beard, and Cardui Benedictus, and of the leſſer centaure,
of each, ounces 4. Diamar
                        ••
                     . Frigid halfe an ounce. Let theſe
lye infuſed by the ſpace of thrée or 4. dayes: then let them be diſtrained
and diſtilled Of the which let the ſicke drinke 4. ounces:
and then being well couered in his bed, he ſhal ſweate more than
ordinary.
            
            
               Principall Remedies to eaſe the torments and extreame
paines of the Goute.
               TAke of the leaues of Miſſel, which groweth on the Apple-trée,
cut or ſhred very ſmal, halfe a pound: the flowers of
white Mulline, of Chamomil, of Lyllies, of Wallwoort, or
Danewoort, all the kindes of Poppey, with their caſes which
containe the ſéed, new gathered, and before they be full ripe, of
each one gripe of the 2. fingers and the thumbe, of gréene Frogs,
or in ſtéed of them, the Ielly or ſperme of Frogges, which is to be
found in ſtanding waters in the Moneth of March, one pound:
the ſéed of white Poppey bruſed, 4. ounces: of Crabbes of Crafiſhes
ſhelles, and all beaten or cruſhed together, 20. in number:
of red Snailes, and Earth-wormes, both wel waſhed in
good white wine, of each 4. ounces: of Badgers greaſe 
                     •
                  xe
ounces; of Sperma Ceti, 4. ounces: of the oyle of violets or water
Lilly, newly made, 6 pound: or if you wil, in ſteede of theſe
oyles, take ſo much of oyle Oliue.
               Put theſe into a glaſſe veſſel, for that purpoſe conuenient,
and cloſe ſtopt ſet it in horſe dung by the ſpace of 7. or 8. dayes.
But if néed require more haſte, let them boyle in a Copper veſſel
ouer the fire, by the ſpace of two houres, and then ſtraine them
ſtrongly. The which alſo you ſhalt doe, if they ſtand in Horſe
dung to be digeſted.
               
                  
Thou then ſhalt ſeperate the oyle from the watery part thereof
according to arte: to the which oyle, thou ſhalt adde of Saffron
2. ounces, of Camphyre, hale an ounce.
               Put all theſe into a glaſſe veſſel, and ſet them againe in Horſe
dung, or in Balneo, or in the Sunne, by the ſpace of 5. dayes,
and thou ſhalt haue a moſt excellent Balſam to aſſwage and qualifie
all paines of the Goute and in the ioynts.
               I wiſh that all Apothecaries would prepare this, to be reary
at al times for preſent vſe: for that they cannot appoint themſelues
of any thing better than this, which my ſelfe haue found
true by experience.
            
            
               A plaiſter to helpe and eaſie all paines of the Goute.
               TAke the marrow or pulpe of Caſſia foure ounces, of new
Treacle, the newer the better, halfe an ounce. The meale
of Barley and Oates, of each three ounces. The crumbes
of white bread
                     •
                   foure ounces: of Cowe-milke, two or thrée
pound.
               Let al theſe be ſodden in the forme of a Cataplaſme; which
thou ſhalt apply warme to the grieued parts. It thou ſhalt adde
one ounce of vitriol calcined, and beaten into the pouder, thou
ſhal
                     •
                   make it much better.
            
            
               Another Cataplaſme.
               TAke the diſtilled water of whyte Mulleyn, and of Ferne, of
each halfe a pound: of calcined vitriol as before, one ounce
and a halfe of Oate meale 4. ounces: Of Saffron two

                     〈◊〉
                   make a Cataplaſme.
            
            
               A water againſt the paine of the Coute.
               THis water following prepared in due time, wil much auaile
againſt the greateſt paines of the Gout, where there appeareth
redneſſe, and much heat
                     •
                  .
               Take of the diſtilled water of the ſperme of Frogges, of
Hightaper & of Ferne, of each one pound and a halfe. In theſe
infuſe Tuttie, and Lytharge of each two ounces: Vitriol calcined
and Allum, of each one ounce. Let the grieued parts, be moyſtened
with linnen clo
                     ••
                  es wet in the ſame, applyed warme, renuing
the ſame diuers times.
            
            
               
               Another excellent water againſt the Goute.
               TAke of the Sope of Genua, that which is white and good,
one ounce. Of liquid Salt, made to runne at a ſtrong
fire, one ounce and a halfe: of Vitriol, one ounce: of Acatia,
halfe an ounce. Let them all boyle together in a pinte of
Roſe vinegar, or of common vinegar. With this liquor waſh
both the greiued partes.
            
            
               An excellent playſter, which being layed vpon the knots
and puffes of the Gout, diſſolueth them.
               TAke of the oyle of Apple Miſſel, of our deſcription, one
or two pound: warme it in a veſſel at the fire: béeing
made warme, put into it of ſhaued or ſcrapings of Sope
4. ounces, let them be well ſtirred together with a ſpattle,
vntil the oyle and Sope bée wel incorporated together. After
this put thereto Venis Ceruſe, and Lytharge, of each 2. ounces,
euer mingling and ſtirring them with a ſpattell▪ of Vitriol calcined
til it be red, and pouldred one ounce▪ Of 
                     〈◊〉
                   halfe an
ounce. When any of the aforeſaid things are put in, ſtirre it wel
til it come to a conuenient thickneſſe for a playſter: which thou
ſhalt apply to the knots: it helpeth not onely theſe▪ but alſo of callous,
and hollow vlcers and pockes.
            
            
               An excellent water to the ſame effect.
               TAke Vnſ
                     •
                  ickt-Lime, let it lye in Spring water fiue 
                     〈◊〉
                   ſixe 
dayes, that thou mayeſt draw out the Salt, Let the water
be foure or fiue fingers aboue the Lyme. Of this water
take 3. pound: in the which thou ſhalt quench a red hote plate of
Stéele, twelue times, and oftener.
               After this, thou ſhalt put therein of burnt copper brought into
pouder 3. ounces: of Cinabar, halfe and ounce. Let them ſtand
by the ſpace of foure or fiue dayes, in which time the water will
be of a gréene colour, by meanes of the inward vitriol of the burnt
copper. This water is an excellent remedy to qualifie and alay
ſuddenly all manner aches and paines.
            
            
               
               A remedy to diſſolue the Stone.
               AFter ſome conuenient gentle purgation, let the patient grieued
with the Stone, take one little ſpoonefull of this poulder
following, which not onely openeth the conduits prouoking
vrine, but alſo diminiſheth and hindereth the growing of the
Stone.
               Take of the kernels which are in Medlars, Gromel, called
Milium Solis, the ſéedes of the great Burre, Saxifrage, Hollyhock,
Auis ſéedes, Fennel-ſéedes, of each thrée drammes: of Chriſtall
ſtones and of Tartar, fix drammes: of the ſtones which
are called commonly Crabbes eyes, halfe an Ounce, of the Salt
of ground Furze, one drachme: of Cinamon one Ounce and a
halfe: of Violated Suger, two Ounces and a halfe: mingle theſe
and make a poulder. This poulder being taken, let the partie
drinke vpon it, a little wine Iuniperated, or of this water following.
               Take of the rootes of Eryngium, of ground Furze, and of the
fiue rootes apertiue, of each one Ounce: of the barke of Lemons,
one Ounce and a halfe: of the foure greater cold ſéedes, of the
ſéedes of Mallowes, and Hollihock, of each thrée Ounces, of the
ſéedes of Saxifrage, of Gromel, of the greater Radiſh, of the Burdock,
and of ripe Iunipar Berries, of each, Drachmes ſix: of Aſkakeng
Berries, twenty in number, of Iui
                     •
                  bes ſix couple, of
Dictam, of the flowers of Broome, of Saint Iohns woort, of Betonie
of the greateſt Mallow of each two gripes with the thomb
and two fingers: of liquirice, two ounces and a halfe: of the wood
of Caffia, one Ounce: beate and poulder that which is to be pouldered:
and let them be ſtéeped or infuſed in water of ſiluer wéed,
called wilde Tanſey, and of Parietory of the wall, of each one
pound and a halfe: of the beſt white wine two pound, and that
by the ſpace of foure daies, in Bal. M. hote: and then let it be
ſtrongly ſtrained.
               Into the liquor, put of the Species of Diatragaganthum Frigidum,
and of the Trochiſcks of Alkakenge, without Opium,

of each one Ounce. Let them be digeſted againe at the fire of
Baln. Mar, by the ſpace of one or two dayes: and let them be diſtilled
by a glaſſe Allembic, according to Art. This water alſo taken
by it ſelfe alone, c
                     ••
                  teth and thinneth groſſe matters, and
clenſeth the raynes and ſucking-vaines, and the bladder, from
the ſtopping of ſand and grauel, and fr
                     •
                  eth them from groſſe
humours.
               Of this water by it ſelfe alone, the doſe to be giuen at one time
is two Ounces, with ſome conuenient ſyrrup.
            
            
               An other excellent water againſt the Stone.
               TAke the Iuice of Radiſh, of L
                        ••
                     t
                        •
                     ns, of each one pound and
a halfe, of the waters of Betonie, of wild Tanſey, of Saxifrage,
of Veruaine, of each one pound: of Hydromel, and of
Malmeſey, two pound. In theſe liquors mixed together, infuſe
by the ſpace of foure or fiue dayes at a gentle fire of Baln. Mar,
Iunipar Berries ripe and newe gathered, being bruiſed, thrée
Ounces, of Gromel, of the ſéede of the Burdock, of the greater
Radiſh, of Saxifrage, of Nettels, of Onions, of Anis, of Fenel, of
each, one Ounce and a halfe, the foure cold ſéedes, the ſéedes of
great mallowes, of each ſix drach
                     ••
                  es: the ſpecies of Lithontri,
the Electuarie Duis & Iuſtini Nicolai, of each halfe one Ounce:
the Calxe of Egge-ſhels, Cinamon, of each thrée Drachmes, of
Camphore two Drachmes. Let all againe be well diſtrained and
then diſtilled by aſhes.
               Two ounces of this water taken, doth wonderfully clenſe
the Counduits, prouoke vrine, and wil breake and expell the
Stone. To this if you adde his proper Salt, or one ſcruple of the
extract of Betonie, it will be a more effectual remedy.
            
         
         
            
            The concluſion of this Treatiſe.
            ALchymie or Spagyrick, which ſome account among the
foure pillers of medicine, and which openeth and demonſtrateth
the compoſitions and diſſolutions of all bodies,
together with their preparations alterations, and exaltations,
the ſame I ſay is ſhe which is the inuenter and Schoolemiſtreſſe
of diſtillation.
            For Alchymie vſeth ſeuen workes, which are as it were certaine
degrées, by which as it were by certaine neceſſary inſtruments,
ſhe ordereth and finiſheth the tranſmutations of things.
By tranſmutation I meane, when any thing ſo forgoeth his outward
forme, and is ſo changed, that it is vtterly vnlike to his former
ſubſtance and woonted forme, but hath put on another forme,
and hath aſſumed an other eſſence, another colour, another vertue,
and another nature and properly. As for example, when linnen
rags are turned into paper: metall into glaſſe: ſkins or leather
into glue: an hearbe into aſhes: aſhes into Salt▪ Salt into water,
and Mercury ſo moueable, into a fixed body, as into Sinabar, and
poulder.
            
               The ſeauen degrees of working are theſe mentioned before
in the Practiſe.
               
                  1 Calcination, Which is the bringing of any thing to
aſhes.
               
                  2 Digeſtion, Is a diſſoluing of that which is thick into
thinne, to be purified.
               
                  3 Fermentation, Is a mixing of kindly matter for multiplication▪
or the kindly ſeaſoning, or
leauining of a thing.
               
                  4 Diſtiliation, Is an extraction of a liquor from a body,
by heate.
               
                  5 Circulation, Is to rectifie any thing to a higher perfection.
               
                  6 Sublimation, Is the lifting vp of moyſt matter, to
make it more pure and dry.
               
                  7 Fixation,Is to make that which is flying, to abide
with his body. 
            
            
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               Beſide theſe, there
are diuers other
workings, as

                  Diſſolutiō, is to diſſolue y• which is groſſe
                  Putrifaction, is the meane to generation.
                  Exaltation, is euaporation of the impure
humour.
                  Rectification, is a reiterated Diſtillation to
perfection.
                  Coagulatiō is the congealing of moiſture.
                  Cohobatiō, is a repetition of Diſtillation,
by which the liquor diſtilled is powred
vpon the feces, and diſtilled againe.
               
            
            Diſtillations are diuers, according to the diuerſities of reaſons,
maners, and of ſubiects: whereupon ariſe ſundry differences
of diſtillation. The firſt difference is taken from things, out
of which a moiſture or liquor may be drawne. For after one maner
Hony: after another, Sulphur: after another Wine: after an
other Waxe: after another Turpentines and Gimmes, as Maſtic,
Euphorbum, Styrar, and ſuch like: after another, Salts; after
another Hearbs: after another, Rootes: after another many
ſeedes are to be diſtilled.
            The ſecond difference is taken from the diuerſitie of the liquor
diſtilled. For waters, are otherwiſe extracted then are oyles.
As for example, out of Hearbes, Rootes, Flowers and ſeedes,
which are not dry, but growing, waters are extracted by ſimple
diſtillation, without the admixture of any other liquor. But out
of Rootes, Hearbes, Flowers, and ſéedes which are dry and odoriferus,
the floating oyles are not extracted, without the meanes
of ſome water or other liquor as a helpe.
            The third difference dependeth vpon the matter and faſhion
of the veſſels▪ Vpon the matter: for one veſſel is of earth, another
of braſſe, another of lead, another of glaſſe.
            Vpon the faſhion alſo: for there is one maner of diſtillation
by an Allembic, another by a Cornut, another by a Matrat, and
another by a Pellican, and ſo of others.
            The fourth difference is by the ſite and placing of the veſſell.
            
               
For if it be by a right Cucurbit, which hath a head with a
pipe or beake, or whether it be inclining or crooked, we call ſuch
diſtillations, by aſcent: or when the neck of one Matrate or cucurbit,
is put into the neck of another, that is to ſay, whē the veſſels
by concourſe are ſo ioyned together, that one taketh in the
mouth of the other, and the ſame by a diuers poſition: and by
theſe moſt commonly are diſtilled thoſe things which doe hardly
aſcend, and haue ſmall ſtore of iuice.
            Many things alſo are diſtilled by diſcent, that veſſell which
containeth the matter turned the wrong way, and put into the
other, the which manner of working is called by Diſcent, and is
contrary to that which is by Aſcent.
            By Diſcent are diſtilled Ceates, and ſundry kinds of fat wood,
as Giraiacum, Iunipar, and thoſe of roſen ſort.
            The fifth difference is, by the degrees of fire, which are foure:
the firſt, ſecond, third, and fourth.
            The firſt is ſoft and gentle, ſuch is the fire of Balne. M. or of
vapour: the ſecond, is of aſhes: the third is of ſand, or of the duſt
of yron that falleth from the Smithes hammer in his worke at
the Stythée. The fourth is of bare fire.
            By the firſt and ſecond degrée of fire, we diſtill by Aſcent: by
the third and fourth, we diſtil by concourſe and Diſcent: Thus
oyles are diſtilled out of Salts▪ as out of common Salt, out of Vitriol,
and out of ſuch like.
            But before you begin to diſtil, be ſure that you diſſolue & putrifie.
            But becauſe mention is made before of Digeſtion and Fermentation,
I will ſhew you plainly, how by theſe two meanes
you may extract out of Roſes a moſt Fragrant water of life, and
ſo excellent, that one droppe thereof, ſhall giue a ſwéete ſent
and odour to a great quantity of common water, and wil alſo
make the the ſame moſt profitable and ſwéete.
            Therefore take Roſes gathered it 
                  〈…〉
               , when there
is neither raine nor 
                  〈◊〉
                vppon them, but tarry till
the Sunne with his beames hath 
                  〈◊〉
                and taken away
that humiditie. Gather then of them a good quantity:
and then bruiſe or beate them in a ſtone 
                  〈◊〉
               , or elſe

thou ſhalt put them into a ſmall bonlet of oake, and ſhalt with
diligence preſſe them in with thy hands, in ſuch ſort that the veſſell
may bee ſtuffed ful almoſt to the toppe. Then ſtoppe
and cloſe it vp, that Digeſtion may more eaſily bee made,
and ſet in a wine ſeller by the ſpace of one moneth, or longer
if néede require, vntill thou ſhalt perceiue that the foreſaide
matter haue the odour of tart wine: whereby thou
ſhalt knowe that the Fermentation is perfected: and ſo long
it muſt at any hand bee delayed vntill the foreſaide ſigne doe
appeare.
            Theſe things thus finiſhed, take to thée the fourth or fifth
part of the Roſes Fermented, according to the greatneſſe of
thy veſſel, which neceſſarily muſt be ſuch as the Chymicall Diſtillars
doe vſe wherewith they extract their oyles, and Aqna-Vitae,
the which indéede are large, and of Braſſe, rather then of
Lead, furniſhed with their refrigeatories (as they terme them)
which being full of water, the ſpirits made thick through cold are
more eaſily and commodiouſly drawen forth: Taking I ſay, that
portion of Fermented Roſes, diſtill them according to the wonted
maner. That done, ſeperate the feces remayning, which ſubſiſt
in the bottome of the Allembic, and put ſo much of the Fermented
Roſes aforeſaid into the ſame veſſell, and power vpon
them the water extracted before, diſtilling altogether againe,
vntill there appeare diuers; thy veſſell as well cloſed as may be
as is ſaid afore.
            Gather againe the dryed feces (the which it thou wilt, thou
maieſt reſerue with the former feces) and put the ſame quantity
of the foreſaide Roſes into the Allembic which thou diddeſt before,
vpon which againe thou ſhalt power all the diſtilled water:
And this thou ſhalt doe ſo often vntill thou haſt diſtilled all the
ſaid fermented Roſes.
            Theſe things orderly done, thou ſhalt take all the diſtilled water,
and ſhalt diſtill onely the twelth part thereof, with a gentle
fire in a veſſell with a long neck or Matrate, or in ſuch a one as
Aqua-Vitae is diſtilled, which is the quantity of all the ſpiritualls
almoſt. As for example, if thou haue twelue pound of water, thou
ſhalt onely extract one pound, which wil be very odoriſerus moſt

ſwéete, and ſpiritual, as ready to take flame, as is that which is
extracted out of wine.
            This water if thou wilt yet make of greater vertue, thou maieſt
rectified againe. But the reſt of the water which ſhal remaine
in the bottome of the Allembic, will be more fragrant, and better
then that which is diſtilled after the cōmon maner: whereinto alſo
thou maiſt conuey his Salt and inſert it, by bringing the foreſaid
feces to calcination, & meſhing the ſame oftentimes through
Hypocrates ſléene or bagge with water, whereby it ſhal more eaſily
draw vnto it and retaine that Salt. After the ſame maner alſo
thou maieſt draw waters of life out of violets and other flowers,
and eſpecially out of them which are hote and odoriferus, as
Roſemary, Sage, Betonie: and ſuch other like, which are better
and more effectuall againſt ſickneſſes, then if they be made according
to the common order. The leaſt quantity hereof will worke
wonderful effects.
            If our Apothecaries would acquaint themſelues with theſe
Concoctions, Fermentations, and Digeſtions, and vnderſtand
them aright, in their workings immitating nature after a certaine
maner, they ſhould be able to effect diuers commendable
and profitable preparations. Yea it is not fitting the Apothecary
alone to know theſe things, but for the Phyſitian alſo the commander
and director of the Apothecarie, if he reſpect his humour
and the health of his patient.
            But theſe things at this day are little regarded, inſomuch
that many Phyſitians either neglect them, or elſe diſdainfully
contemne them, for that they know not what profit ſuch preparations
doe bring with them. And verily I doe not know, what
ſhould be the cauſe of ſuch obſtinate diſdaine & wilful contempt,
but méere ignorance: ſéeing it is well known that nothing is contemned,
but of the ignorant.
            And what wil not theſe mad Ignorants contemne, which
doe alſo deſpiſe the preparations of Medicines? which adminiſter
nothing to their ſicke patients, but thoſe things which
are crude, and full of impurities. They rather chooſe obſtinatly
to goe forware in their error, both to their owne reproach and
dammage of the ſicke, then rightly to followe holeſome admonitions,

leaſt they might be thought not to haue bene wiſe enough
before, and to haue learned more knowledge of others.
            Let them conſider the neceſſitie of our life, that they may
learne that the ſame hath conſtrained vs, to ſéeke the preparations
of our meates, which are neceſſarie for the ſuſtaining of our
bodies: in the preparing whereof, notwithſtanding, there is not
ſo great neceſſitie as there ought to be in the preparing of medicines
for our health.
            Let them beholde the corne which commeth out of the earth,
which is not by and by giuen crude as it is, for food but the chaffe
and the branne being ſeperated, it is brought to flower: which as
yet is not ſo giuen to eate, but being firſt termented or leuened,

                  •
                wel kneaded or wrought, it is baked, that it may be bread fit for
nouriſhment. Conſider well the fermentation, by which bread is
made light, and fit for nouriſhment: the lighter it is, the wholſomer
it is, and the more it is fermented the lighter it wil be. The
leſſe it is fermented, the heauier it is, and the more vnholſome.
If this preparation goe not before, but that we onely make a
mixture of water and flower together, and ſo preſently thruſt
it into the Ouen, in ſtéede of bread, thou ſhalt prepare a
glutinous matter very hurtfull to nature. Doe you not ſée
how paſte a glutinous matter, and ſtarch, alſo are made onely
with flower and water? What then thinkeſt thou will come
to paſſe in thy ſtomach and bowels, eſpecially in thoſe which are
more weake, if ſuch be offered and taken? Surely ſuch as will
procreate matter to bréede the ſtone, and wil be the ſeminary of
many diſeaſes.
            So neceſſarie and profitable is this Fermentation, that
it is very behouefull for an Apothecarie to knowe it: for that
it doth attenuate euery ſubſtance, it looſeneth it from his body,
and terreſtrial impurity, that it may afterwards be made
fit to bring forth the true radical Balſam, and the quickening ſpirit.
            By the benefite of this onely Fermentation, are extracted
waters of life out of all vegetables whatſoeuer. After the ſame
manner, by this Fermentation and Leauen of nature, all 
                  〈◊〉
               
               
humours of or
                  •
                body are made thinne and ſubtiled. You know
how in holy writ it is ſaid, that a little ſowre Leauen doth ferment
the whole maſſe.
            By the way of Fermentation, which conſiſteth in a certaine
Acetoius liquor of nature, our humours are made thinne and diſpoſed
to excretion. And therefore there are certaine tart things
which moue ſweates, albeit the ſame by the opinion of Phyſitians
are cold.
            Doe wée not ſée that women and ordinary Cookes haue attained
this knowledge of Fermentation: and thereby prouide
for ſicke perſons, Iellyes made of fleſh of foules, and ſuch like, to
reſtore and ſtrengthen them in the time of their weakeneſſe?
            And what are theſe but extracts? For the terreſtrial partes
are ſeperated from the more laudable ſubſtance, which is more
conuenient for the ſicke. And why doe not Apothecaries the like
in compounding their medicines?
            The nature of the ſicke man being now weakened, cannot abide
crude and fulſome meate, but doth rather loathe them, and
is more and more weakened by them. How much more will he
be offended and hurt by medicines not rightly prepared nor ſeperated
from their impure ſubſtance? Such impuritie muſt néeds
be a great hurt and hindrance, that the natural force of the Medicine,
cannot encounter with his enemie the ſickneſſe, and ouercome
him.
            What ſhall we ſay then of thoſe Medicines, which haue not
onely cruditie in them, but alſo ſome euil qualitie, and the ſame
not ſeperated, or rightly prepared: or being corrected, may wée
be bold to giue it? They are woont, (with griefe I ſpeake it) too
much and too often, I ſaythey are woont, I meane ſuch decocted,
pouldred, and mixed Medicines, by no manner of other art prepared,
to bring more griefe and paine to the ſicke (that I may ſay
no worſe) than ſollace and helpe.
            Therefore theſe kinde of preparations, concoctions, I ſay
Digeſtions, and Fermentations, are not to bée deſpiſed or neglected.
For if theſe things be done, they are done according to
natures faſhion, which vſeth the ſame operations to the perfect

ripening of fruites, and all things the which it bringeth foorth.
But let vs haſten to conclude this Treatize.
            
               Ariſtotle in his fourth of Meteors, hath appointed thrée Pipſias,
or kindes of concoction. The firſt he calleth Pepamſis, which
is the concoction of humour in moyſt ſéede, made by naturall
heate: And this is the meane of concocting, ripening, and of making
of the ſeedes of Plants, and of other things to grow, and
to bring foorth plentie of fruite: and it is a worke onely belonging
to nature, which vſeth that quickening heate for an Inſtrument,
which heate anſwereth the element of Starres in proportion,
as the ſayd Ariſtotle ſaith. Albeit Arte cannot immitate
this heate, yet it may tread in the ſteppes thereof.
            The ſecond kinde of concoction, he calleth Epſeſis, or Elixation,
which is a concoction made by a moyſt heate of a thing
indifinitely exiſting in a humour.
            The third and laſt is Opteſis, or Aſſation, which is the concoction
of the ſame interminate, made by a dry and ſtraunge
heate.
            Theſe two laſt concoctions, are made eſpecially by Arte, concerning
the moderation of which heates, wée will hereafter
teach the diligent and induſtrious Apethecaries, I ſay induſtrious,
and ſuch as follow the preſcrips of true Phiſitians and
Arte, not Petlars and Sellers of Trifels, which rather deſire
to make retale of Candels, Lanternes, and all Mercerie-wares,
and to fill their ſhoppes with traſh, than to follow the
workes of Art.
            Therefore in ſtéede of liberal perſons, they are miſerable hierlings:
Sowters they are, and not Artificers and louers of
Art, Marchants, and handy-crafts men, ſetting their reſt vpon
pompe, pleaſure, and gaine. I had rather ſée an enemie in the
Cittie, then one of theſe baſe minded fellowes. For Citizens
know how to beware of an open enemie: but how can a man beware
of the falſhood and treacherie of theſe companions which
they bring to paſſe either by ignorance, or by mallice or elſe by
negligence: I ſay who ſhall take héede of theſe, but he which baniſheth
them quite and cleane out of the Cittie.
            
               
I ſpeake of deceiuers, and ſuch as falſly vſurpe the name
and tittle of Apothecaries, profeſſing that, and yet follow the
Trade of Marchandiſe, and not of honeſt and good men, which
are dilligent in their Arte, to whom this our labour pertaineth,
and to whom theſe our ſtudies and admonions are dedicated, for
the health of many, and for their praiſe and profite.
            The auncient Phyſitians and men of the beſt ſort, delt
more warily and prouided better for themſelues, had this arte
in great honor, and therefore in their owne houſes, they prepared
medicines with their owne hands.
            And wée alſo for our owne partes would bee loath that
ſome of our ſecrets, ſhould bee caſt before theſe Hogges, and
therefore wée commonly prouide, that they bée prepared in our
Laboratorie at home by a kilfull workeman, whome wée direct
and appoint for that purpoſe.
            Not that wee might make thereby the greater gaine to our
ſelues, but for the honour and praiſe of the Arte, and to our
friends good, the which all thoſe know, that know vs, and haue
receyued the benefite from vs. But for this time theſe ſhall
ſuffice.
            For the Patterne of Furnaces and glaſſes apt and méete
for Diſtillation, buy Maiſter George Bakers Booke our Countryman.
            And if thou be deſirous to procure glaſſes of all ſortes for
this Arte, thou mayſt haue them at the Marchants hand,
which ſell ſuch in their houſes néere the Poultery in London.
            
            THe winde Furnace, muſt haue a hole beneath, one foote
déepe inwarde, and one foote and a halfe vpward: and
at that height a grate ſhall be layed, wherein the coales
of fire muſt lie. Alſo at that height make another mouth, where
at thou ſhalt put in the ſaide coales of fire: and aboute the ſame
raiſe vp the walles round about ten Inches in height and there
alſo lay two barres of Iron to ſet the Panne vppon, either for
Balneum Mariae, or for a dry fire.
            
               
               To make thy nouriſhing Baln
                     •
                  .
               TAke chopt Hay and water, and put it into an earthen Pan,
then ſet ouer it a Trencher with a hole in the middeſt, to
anſwere the bottome of the glaſſe, which muſt come within
two Inches of the water.
            
            
               Concerning Hermes Seale, and the making of diuers
cloſiers of glaſſes.
               FIrſt thou ſhalt know, that of all faſtnings or cloſing vp of
Glaſſes, that no v
                     •
                  pours nor ſpirits goe foorth, the Seale of
Hermes is moſt noble: which is done in the manner following.
               Firſt, make a little Furnace, with the Inſtruments belonging.
It muſt haue a grate in the bottome to make fire vppon.
In the middſt of the Furnace ſhall be a hole, to put in the ende of
a narrowe necked Glaſſe, ſo that the third part of the glaſſe be
emptie. And if the hole of the Furnace be greater then the glaſſes
necke, cloſe vp the hole with claye on euery ſide, round about,
ſo as the mouth of the glaſſe haue ſome libertie. Let thy
fire be as farre from thy glaſſe as thou canſt: and when thy
coale fire is readie, put the Glaſſe néerer and néerer, by little and
litle, till the mouth of thy glaſſe waxe red, as it were ready to
melt. Then take the red hote tonges, and therewith wring or
nippe the toppe cloſe together: whereby it ſhall be ſo cloſed, as
if it had no vent 
                     〈◊〉
                  , or came ſo cloſed out of the Glaſſe-makers
ſhoppe. But take héed when you haue ſo done, that you
pull it not too ſuddenly out of the fire, leaſt the ſ
                     •
                  dden colde cracke
the glaſſe, and marre all. Therefore abate it by little and little,
and not at once.
               And when thou wilt open the glaſſe, take a thridde dipt in
brimſtone or waxe, and wind it 6. or. 7. times about the necke
of the glaſſe where thou wouldeſt haue it to breake, and ſet it on
fire with a ſmall waxe candle, and when it is burnt, powre a

drop or two of cold water vpon it, and it will crack in the ſa
                     ••
                  
place, that thou maiſt take it off.
            
            
               Concerning the maner of making Lutes, wherewith
to cloſe glaſſes.
               THe ordinary Lutes wherewith to ſtop veſſels of glaſſe againſt
faint vapours, are theſe. Take quick lyme beaten to

                     •
                  oulder as fine as may be, and ſearſed: temper it with the white
of egs. Or elſe mix wheat flower with the white of egges, ſpred
them vpon linnen cloath, and wrap it diuers times about the
mouth or ioynts of the glaſſe.
               Other Lutes, called Lutum Sapientiae, made for the defence of
ſtronger vapours, either to parget and lute the body of the glaſſes,
or to ſtop their mouthes, or looſe their ioynts: which are to be
wrought cleare, ſmooth, and without knots or bladders: in maner
following.
               Take potters earth, with a forth part of ſhorne floxe added to
the ſame: an eigth part of white aſhes, with a forth part of dry
horſe-dung. All theſe wel beaten together with an yron rod.
               This is the right compoſition of Lutum Sapientiae. There be
that doe adde to this compoſition, the poulder of brick, and of the
ſcales beaten from yron, finely ſearſed.
               And for the more conuenient drying of veſſels ſo luted and
fenced, you ſhal bore certaine holes in a wodden forme, into
the which put the neckes of thy glaſſes, that their bottomes and
bodies may be dryed the better.
               Another moſt excellent Lute for the like incloſer is made of
glaſſe and Vermilion, of each like quantitie, pouldred and ſearſed,
then incorporated with verniſh, and a little oyle of Linſéede, and
making the whole like a ſoft poulteſſe which is to be ſpread on a
fine linnen cloath, wrap it about the mouth & ioynts of the glaſſes,
and ſo ſuffer them to dry in the Sunne. Which albeit, it is a
long worke, yet it is moſt ſure. For this will ſerue againſt the
ſtrongeſt vapours that are.
               Alſo to compound a Lute, wherewith to make your Fornace

that it may not riue, or chap, take chalke and potters clay, and a
quantity of ſand, wrought together with wollen 
                     〈◊〉
                   and horſedung,
incorporated as afore.
               Thus courteous Reader, I haue ſhewed thée ſuch ſecrets in
this Art, as neither Querſitanus, Iſacus, Hollandus, nor any other
Phyloſopher, haue before publiſhed in print to my knowledge,
but haue come to my hands in paper and parchment copies.
If thou be induſtruous, & doeſt tread the right Hermetical path,
thou ſhalt by the meanes of theſe helps, ſo plainly ſet before thine
eyes without Hieroglyphicks and Riddels, to do thy ſelfe
and thy countrey good. Thus wiſhing to thée, as
to my ſelfe, good ſucceſſe in all thy godly indeuours,
I commend them and thée,
to the Lord.
            
         
         FINIS.
      
   