
      
         
            
            
            THE ACCOMPLISHMENT OF THE PROPHECIES; OR THE THIRD BOOKE IN defense of the Catholicke faith, contained in the booke of the high & mighty KING IAMES. I. by the grace of God King of Great Brittaine and Ireland.
            AGAINST THE ALLEGATIONS of R. Bellarmine; and F. N. Coëffeteau & other Doctors of the Romish Church: BY PETER DV MOVLIN Minister of the word of God in the Church of Paris.
            Translated into English by I. HEATH, Fellow of New College in Oxford.
            Printed at Oxford by Ioseph Barnes and are to be sold by Iohn Barnes dwelling neere Holborne Conduit. 1613.
         
         
            
            
            THE PREFACE TO the Reader.
            
               I wrote my two first bookes beeing diversly distracted, & my spirit surseized with feare, foresaw the dismal chaunce that is nowe come vpon vs. The seditious sermons, the impairing of a dutifull respect to the king, the cōmon reports that were spred abroad of his death, before his death, the encrease of the Iesuits, & by a consequent the establishment of their maxims, made many to suspect shrewdly, & it was no great praise to bee a prophet. We haue therefore foreseene, & foretold the future calamity that was like to betide vs to our great losse, & spake more true in it, then we could wish to haue done; Vpon the downefall of this so great a Prince many haue powred out

the torrents of their eloquence, and haue bewailed him with so much art, that nature hath no more left to say. And to speak the truth wordes are too weak and feeble signes to expresse such a griefe; light afflictions speak, when the greater are dumbe, and with the vaile of silence cover that which cānot be vttered. O miserable age! The murdering therefore of kings will ere long turne into a custome; and the naturall respect that the French were wont to haue of their Soveraigne bee choaked by superstition. We see it to our great griefe. For whosoever shal hereafter take vpō him to attēpt the life his king, shal be vnderpropt by many examples, &, which is more, shall not want for rules: and if this growing evill be not by time prevented, it wil at last be held a punishment to raigne, & the coronation of our kings, shall be as it were a consecratiō of sacrifices markt out for the slaughter. For howbeit the singular wisedome, and vigilant care of our Queene his Maiesties spowse hath served vs as a prop to sustaine our ruinous estate, yet may wee say that in him Fraunce hath lost the worthyest king it hath had these many yeares, and the manner of whose death is a fatall

example, and a grand caveat to posterity.
            This wound did so smart, that I coulde never get my fingers of from it, nor for a long time togither settle my selfe about finishing the remainder of this work. Griefe which of its owne nature is idle, is then so most especially, when the thing grieved at is past all remedy. Herevnto adde that this third booke, which entreats of the accomplishment of prophecies, togither with the interpretatiō of them, requires a more cō
               posed spirit then the two former did: For as God intending to reveale future events to his prophets, withdrew them aside, and carryed them either to the desert, or els to the sea shore, that so having pluckt them from amidst the presse, he might setle their mindes in a quiet repose; So thinke I, that to diue into their prophecies a man neede be free from all cares, & to partake of their rest, that he may partake of the cleerenesse of their spirit. And, indeed, what by reason of the publike griefe, the greatest part whereof hath fallen vpon vs, and what by reason of many interruptions, I had never dared to haue set vpon this matter, had not the excellent spirit of the King of Great Brittaine enlightened me, and if in the vnfolding

of these prophecies I had not been assisted by experience, which is the cause, that I haue more need of a memory herein, then any extraordinary revelation. God also, whom I here invoke to mine aide, wil by his spirit sharpen the dulnesse of mine, and as hee hath given this property to the sea-cards needle to stand firme in the most violent tempests, so is he able to giue his servants a piercing wit, and a setled minde amidst this confusion. He reveales his secrets to those which feare him, and makes them to vnderstand his will. Now that no man may accuse me of rashnesse herein, as though I did too curiously pry into after ages, or presumptuously gaue mine owne interpretations for rules; the reader shall do well to consider, that it is one thing to prophecy, another thing to speak of the fulfilling of prophecies: the one is done by revelation, the other by experience; for the one we need to be inspired from aboue, for the other we need nothing but a memory togither with some insight in the present times. The Prophets drew their prophecies from the counsell of God, but we finde the accomplishment of their prophecies in histories, by conferring the predictions with

the events; for the predictions after the events become histories, and the promises performances.
            This is the reason why his Maiestie of England saith (and that most truely) that the fathers of the first ages, spake of this matter but only by coniectures, wheras we speake of it by experience; For the prophecies which foretell of an evill to come, may easily be interpreted by those vpon whom it is come. Even as the Iewes being led captiues into Babylon did easily vnderstande the prophecie of Ieremie; so Christians held vnder the second captivity of Babilon, may soone know the meaning of the prophecies in the Revelation, which foretell of it; I would to God we were not the interpreters of our owne miseries, and that we had not learn'd the meaning of these prophecies by experience. Which makes mee to wonder at our adversaries who to intangle this point the more, doe nothing but quote passages out of the fathers, whenas they speake only but by coniecture, or else say such things as our adversaries themselues do deride, & which experience hath confuted. Lactantius in the 25. chap. of his 7. booke saith that the world should not last

aboue 200 yeares more at the most, and yet notwithstanding it is well neere 1300. yeares past since Lactantius wrote. Sulpitius Severus in the second booke of his history tels vs that it was generally thought in his time that Nero was not dead, but that hee vvas cured of the vvounde that vvas given him, and that his wound being cured, he is reserved aliue for the last day, to the end that he may exercise the mysterie of iniquity. S. Austin in the 19. Chap. of the 20. book of the cittie of God, expounding S. Pauls prophecie, in the 2. Chap. of his 2. Epist. to the Thess. speakes thus, I confesse that I vnderstand no thing of all that which hee hath said; only I will relate the divers surmises of men, that I could ever heare of, or read vpon this subiect; Then he alleages divers opinions, which he cals coniectures. Compare the booke of Antichrist fathered vpon S. Austin, with the expositions of Andrew Archbishop of Cesarea, and Bedaes, and S. Ieromes Commentaries vpon Daniell, & you shall see but little agreement between them. Wherefore the Iesuits writing vpon this subiect are often times troubled about confuting the Fathers opinions. If we then speak with more certaintie thē they,

it is not our sufficiency that is the cause thereof, but rather our misfortune to bee reserved till the last daies, that wee might see the execution of the plagues foretold in these prophecies.
            This notwithstanding their praise remaines whole vnto them stil: for he which expoundes prophecies not yet accomplished, ought to be more admired, if amōgst ten false expositions hee hit vpon one or two true, then if after they were fulfilled hee should expound them all truly. Nowe the Fathers doe happily light vpon the true meaning in many of these points, and bring divers expositions, which the experience of succeeding ages hath confirmed, which we will produce in their place.
            But heere before wee venter vpon this matter, the faithfull reader must bee advised to avoid two extreames; the one is, that he tie not himselfe too religiously to these things; the other, that he set not too little by them. As for the former, his Maiestie of England plainely affirmeth, that in this doctrine there are obscure things which he would not vrge as necessarie to salvation for every one. And that with good reason. For I am perswaded that in Christian

religion, there is no one article of faith, which may be necessarie to salvatiō at one time, and yet not necessarie at another. Now all confesse that the vnderstanding of these prophecies was not necessary before they were fulfilled. It followes therefore that even after their accomplishment a man may bee saved without the knowledge of them. And I finde not that the reading of civill and ecclesiasticall histories is recommended vnto vs in the holy Scriptures as necessary to salvation. But so it is that partly out of them, partly out of the present evils, wee draw the meaning of these prophecies. The articles of the doctrine of salvation, are no prophecies, but Commandements, or simple and bare promises; or if it please any one to call the articles of the resurrection of the flesh, and of the life everlasting, by the names of prophecies; yet are they coucht in such cleere tearmes, that they haue no need of any interpretation. For God which hath covered future events with a thick darkenesse, doth propose the things simply necessary to salvation with great perspicuitie.
            The other extremitie, which is the setting too little by these prophecies, hath no

lesse danger. For as when the ruine of Ierusalem by Nabuchadnezar did fulfill the Prophecy of Ieremy: or when the birth of our Saviour, made the prophecies of Iacob, Esay, and Micheas, plaine, & perspicuous; if any one were so obstinate that he would not vnderstand these prophecies, hee had reiected the grace of God. So now adaies when God hath made vs to see the accomplishment of matters foretold by Daniel, S. Paul, and S. Iohn, whosoever shall herevpon close his eies of set purpose, that man doth resist the wisdome of God, and frustrates the holy Ghost of his intēt, making (as much as lies in him) these prophecies to be vnprofitable. For God revealed these things to his Prophets and Apostles to no other end but to profit vs. That so the deliverances, which they foretell of, taking effect, wee might not attribute it to our owne wisdome or force, but to his providence, and determination, which hee declared long before to his Prophets: as also that we might knowe, that these calamities, being foretold of, come not vpon vs by hap hazard, but by his fixt counsell, resolved vpon from everlasting, and to the end that we might keepe our selues from

being amongst the number of those vpon whome he will powre out the vials of his wrath because of their vnbeliefe. For whosoever shall labour to prevent the iudgements of God denounced by his Prophets will never stile the studie of knowing thē, by the name of curiositie. But on the contrarie even as the faithfull which lived a little before the birth of our Saviour, comforted themselues vnder the Roman yoke by meditating vpon the comming of Christ promised by his Prophets which they called, 
                  Luc. 2. 
               the cōsolatiō of Israel, so ought wee vnder this Romish bondage, which tyrannizeth over our consciences, comfort vp our selues by these prophecies, part of which being already finished, assure vs that the rest too shall in their due time bee put in execution. Otherwise the reproach wherewith the Iewes were vpbraided by Ieremie shall also be cast in our teeth, to wit, 
                  Ierem. 8.7 
               that the Storke, the Turtle, the Crane and the Swallow knew their seasons, but the people of God knew not theirs. For hee iustly sends them to the schoole of beastes, that will not be schollars in the house of God. But if these prophecies be not necessary as articles of our faith, yet at the least are

they necessarie as Gods forewarnings to vs ward, which we cannot reiect without hurting our selues, & displeasing him. For is it no fault, trow we, if that after hee hath painted out the sonne of perdition vnto vs long time before his comming, we wil nor knowe him then when he is come, & whē we are within his clumbs? The holy Prophets, should they ever haue foreseen these evils so long time before hand, to the ende that we should not see them when they ariue? And if we demonstrate, that according to the predictions of the Prophets, that man of sinne must needes bee already come; what carelesnesse is it not to harken out his habitation, and not so much as vouchsafe to looke whether it may not be that we our selues serue him without thinking of it. I omit to tell how the vnderstā
               ding of these prophecies, are of great force to giue waight and authoritie to the Gospell. For the mysterie of godlinesse is made more cleere by beeing opposed to the mysterie of iniquitie. Because we are soon induced to beleeue that the Prophets are true in their doctrines, when wee finde by effect that they speake truth in their prophecies. We doe not therfore herein serue

our owne curiositie, but the good of the Church, and the commandement of God. Let others read the events of things to come in the Starres, or study Chiromancy, or Meteoposcopie; the best Prognosticke that a man can haue, is the feare of God, & his word, the best booke of predictions, wherein God speakes, as if hee did stretch out his finger from heauen, and point out the See of Rome vnto vs, saying, behold her here of whō my Prophets spoke, & which I marked out vnto you in my word.
            It remaines that I speake of the subiect of this booke, & of the end that I proposed to my selfe therein. I doe not here dispute who that Antichrist should be, nor whether the Pope should be so called. And I refraine from doing this for two reasons, The one is, because I would not willingly contest about wordes, but rather tie my selfe to the things. For since all the fathers and our adversaries agree with vs in this, that in the 2. Chap. of the 2. to the Thessal. and in the 13. of the Apocal. and other places, Antichrist is pointed out, it shall suffice if we search the meaning of these chapters. For if it be found that they speake of the Pope, the difficultie touching the name

wil be taken away. We will make the propositions, let who so will drawe the conclusion. The other reason is, because this very name doth exasperate the simpler sort who thinking this an odious word, condemne the booke for the titles sake. They thinke that other controversies pricke his Holynesse at the throat, but that this cuts his wind pipe. To whose quaint stomacks, and impatient delicacie I thought good to fit my selfe at this time; being content only to shewe the meaning of these holy prophecies, and to confirme my expositiō with proofes: which I hope to deliver so cleerely, and make them so agreeable, that I am perswaded that hee which is resolved not to beleeue any of them, shall at the least wonder by what chaunce it coulde come to passe, that so many things foretold by Daniel, by S. Paul, & S. Iohn should all meete iointly together in one man. Or how they could draw a picture so like the Pope, and never thinke vpon him.
            Now, this being a difficult point, and a matter of importance, I must of necessitie (to handle it with order and care) speake a great deale more in it then Mounsieur Coeffeteau bindes mee to doe. For seeing hee

doth but florish the matter over superficially being content to cast some light difficulties here and there in the way, it had beene impossible for mee to sound the depth of it in following him. Nevertheles he hath said nothing, to which I doe not answer, as it crosseth my course. God, of his mercy, fil vs with his grace frō aboue, and after the accomplishment of these prophecies which threaten vs, giue vs the accomplishment of his promises.
         
         
            
            A TABLE OF THE MATters contained in this third booke.
            
               A Preface. 
               An exposition of the 4 first verses of the fourth Chapter, of the first Epistle to Timothie. Chap. 1.
               
               An exposition of the second Chapter of the second to the Thessalonians. Chap. 2.
               
               An exposition of the 12 Chapter of the Revelation. Chap. 3.
               
               An exposition of the 13 Chapter of the Revelation. Chap. 4,
               
               An exposition of the 14 Chapter of the Revelation. Chap. 5.
               
               An exposition of the 17 Chapter of the Revelation. Chap. 6.
               
               An exposition of the 18 Chapter of the Revelation. Chap. 7.
               
               An exposition of the 7 Chapter of Daniel. Chap. 8.
               
               
                  An exposition of the 11 Chapter of the Revelation. Chap. 9.
               
               The conclusion with the clozure of the king of Great Brittaines Preface. Cha. 10.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THE THIRD BOOKE OF THE accomplishment of the Prophecies.
            THE PROPHECIE OF THE Apostle S. PAVL in the first to TIMOTHY, and fourth Chapter. CHAP. I.
            
               
                  
                     1 Now the spirit speaketh evidently, that in the latter times some shall depart from the faith, and shall giue heed vnto spirits of error, and doctrines of Devils.
                  
                     2 Which speake lies through hypocrisie, & haue their cōsciences burned with an hot yrō.
                  
                     3 Forbidding to marry, and commaunding to abstaine from meats, which God hath created to be received with giving thankes of them which belieue and know the truth.
                  
                     4 For every creature of God is good, and nothing ought to be refused, if it be received with thankesgiving, &c.
               
            
            
               The accomplishment of this Prophecie.
               THis prediction of the Apostle, being not wrapt in riddles, nor shadowed vnder figuratiue words, need no subtil explication, nor laborious coniectures to be vnderstood, we need not speake by guesse,

when we feele the evill, & I would to God we saw it lesse cleere then we do.
               The Apostle speaks of an evill that must happen in the last times; these last times be gunne from the Apostles times, as he himselfe tels vs in the 10. Chap. of his first epistle to the Corinthians: whēce it followeth that these last times are now much neerer, and that this present age is more the last times, then that was wherein S. Paul lived.
               In these last times therefore he foretels of a departing from the faith, of spirits of errour, which shall teach the doctrine of devils through hypocrisie against their owne conscience.
               This being spoken in generall would haue a thousand faces, and bee subiect to divers interpretations, were it not that the Apostle himselfe did put his finger vpon the evil, and specifie some examples thereof; not the worst but the most sensible, not the most wicked, but the most easie to bee knowne. These are the errors. 1. A forbidding to marry. 2. A commanding to abstaine from meats. Both which are the errors of Papistry, and the ordinances of the church of Rome, more religiously observed then the commandements of God: Wee will

speake of each of them severally.
            
            
               Of the single life of the Clergie, and Monks in the Church of Rome.
               
                  MArriage is an holy bond betweene mā & womā, whereby they are made one body, & one flesh. If antiquitie giue authoritie to things? it was from the beginning of the creation? If the author, God did first institute it; If the place where it began? it was established in Paradise; If the witnesses? Iesus Christ himselfe did authorize it by his presence; If sanctity? God cō
                  pares it to his holy covenant, promising in 
                     Hosea. 2.19.20. 
                  O see, that he will marry vs vnto himselfe for ever in righteousnesse and mercy; It is an assistance given vnto man; a lenitiue of all afflictions, a remedy against in cōtinency; and amongst faithfull persons it is a spirituall harmonie, to ioine their praiers, to comfort them vp in their miseries, to encourage them on to good workes, and in slipperie places to reach out their helping hands to each other. This is that which preserues mankind from perishing, it is the seed-plot of the Church, the fountaine and originall of al kinred and affinitie that

is in the world; without this men would liue dispersed like savage beastes, without making vp families, which are the first and principall parts of a Common wealth.
               Where is the man this day living, whose virginitie may be compared with Abrahams marriage, in whome all the nations of the world were blest? Wherevpon 
                     Lib. de bono coniugali cap. 21. 
                  S. Austin also opposeth it to the virginity of S. Iohn. But there is nothing that doth add more authoritie vnto marriage, then that comparison so often 
                     Ephes. 5. Psal. 45. Rev. 19. reiterated in the holy Scripture, whereby the vnion of Iesus Christ with his Church is compared vnto marriage. The bond whereof is the holy Ghost, the contract the Gospell, the Apostles were the Registers of this contract, and Iesus Christ himselfe sealed it with his bloud: the betrothing is here below in the Church, but the wedding it selfe shall bee solemnized in heaven. God clothing this spiritual vnion with these borrowed terms to the end that no man might condemne marriage, but he should withal despise his covenant. The Prophets, Levits, yea and the High Priests entered this holy course of life, which before the division made by David, were to serue every day at morning

and evening sacrifice. But if God had thought that there had beene any pollution in marriage, hee would haue found some other meanes to continue the succession of his Priests, then by the hereditary succession of childrē after their fathers. Especially seeing that then in outward things, and bodily cleannesse, God required a great deale more puritie vnder the law then he doth now adaies. The Apostles also were married: for in the first of S. Mark there is mention made of the mother of S. Peters wife. And S. Ambrose vpō the 11. Chap. of the 2. to the Corinthians, All the Apostles, saith hee, except Iohn and Paule had wiues. Ignatius in his Epistle to the Philadelphians, doth not except Saint Paul; but saith, that Peter and Paule, & the other Apostles were married. And Clemens Alexandrinus in the 3. booke of his Stromes, after a long reprehension of those which despise marriage vnder the shew of a more strict sanctititie, addeth. Doe they reiect the Apostles? For Peter and Philip begat children. Philip married his daughters to husbandes, and Paule sticks not to speake vnto his wife in one of his Epistles. Now it is to be noted that in these places,

the Fathers speak of marriage as it is a remedy against incontinencie, and as it was thought by some to be lesse holy then virginitie; to the end that none should thinke that they thought the Apostles had wiues, but never lay with them. They tell Christ truly in the 9. Chap. of S. Matthew, Behold we haue forsaken all and followed thee, And Iesus answers them; Whosoever shall forsake houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my names sake, hee shall receiue an hundreth fold more, and shall inherit everlasting life. But we must knowe that this promise is made vnto all the faithfull, and not only to the Pastours of the Church. For he saith Whosoever shal leaue &c. and yet neuerthelesse no man would infer out of this place that all the faithfull must abstaine from their wiues, or forsake their children for Christs sake; only our Saviour would that all the faithful should leaue all that is most neare and deare vnto them, when it shall hinder them from following him, & when it cannot stand together with the profession of the Gospell. Moreover Christ here placeth the wife, and the children, & the lands, and the houses in the same rank.

If a Bishop therefore may bee suffered to enioy his lands, or houses, in the same fashion that hee did enioy them before hee was a Bishop or Priest, what reason is there but that he should enioy his wife in the same manner that hee did before hee was a Priest? And if a father that is afterwards made a Priest shal not for all this be less a father thē he was before, why should hee become lesse an husband? Especially seeing that there is an expresse commaundement of our Lord in the 19. of S. Matt. which doth not permit a man to leaue his wife for any other cause but adulterie. And which saieth, that they are no more two but one flesh, Let no man therefore put that asunder which God hath coupled together; Now it is manifest that the separation which he speakes of, is a separation of the bed, seeing that he opposeth it against that coniunction by which man and woman are made one body.
               
               This doctrine being sound divinity, and built vpon the worde of God, as we will shew it yet more manifestly; it is not without iust cause that the contrary doctrine is called the doctrine of Devils. The first that ever spake against marriage were the Tatians,

Marcionites, & Manichees, after whō Papistrie succeeded, a religion patched vp togither out of the divers shrids of ancient heresies. For the Popes haue set themselues directly to contradict the Apostles St 
                  1. Tim. 3.2.4. 
                  Paul who saith, that a Bishop should be vnreprouable, the husbād of one wife, having his children vnder obedience with all honesty. On the cōtrary Pope Pelagius in the 61. Distinction commandes, that there should be no bishop chosen, but such a one that hath neither wife, nor children, nor any other crime contrary to the canons. There is nothing more opposite. But yet in this contrariety there is no question to be made, but of the two the Pope must rather bee believed, since that in his 
                     Tit. 80 de concessione praebendarū.
                   
                  Canons he vaunts that hee can dispense aboue the law. And that the glosses of the Church of Rome tel vs herevpon, that he can dispense against the Apostle, & that he doth dispense with the gospell in giving it what interpretation he please, and that the Apostle had nothing else but certaine Revelations; marry his holinesse 
                  
                     Can. licet Tit. 2. de cō
                        stit. in Sexto.
                   brags that hee hath all the law close lockt vp within the clozet of his brest. We haue therefore plainely seene the accomplishment of this prophecie.
               
                  It is true that our adversaries to obscure this truth, say that S. Paul speakes of heretickes which forbad marriage not onlie to Clarckes and Ministers, but to the lay people too, and that as a wicked and vncleane thing in its owne nature; That the Church of Rome forbids marriage only to Clarckes, and Monkes, and such as haue made a vow of continency, and forbids it them not as an vncleane thing, but as a coū
                     sell of perfection, and as a more strict & sanctified profession.
               1 I answere that they delude themselues in seeking to delude vs. For the Apostle calleth those false teachers in general that forbid marriage without specifying anie cause for which they forbid it: the rule being general, it is not for vs to put in I know not what exceptions which the worde of God shall not put in. By diverse lines wee may well come to the same point, and by diverse waies runne to the same precipice. The selfe same errour is formed in the spirit of men by diverse reasons, yet all the causes of error, and contrary to the holie Scriptures.
               2 Besides I say that they deceiue themselues if they think that the Manichees for

bad marriage vnto all, they forbad it them only whom they called their chosen or elect; For so did they name their pastours, & such as made profession of a more exact & sanctified kinde of life amongst them. S. Austin is a witnesse fit to bee believed for this, because himselfe was a Manichee at first for a long time: who in the second book, of the manners of the Church, and the Manichees, & 18. Chapt. brings in the Manichees speaking as our adversaries doe at this day. Here, saith he, I knowe that you wil exclaime for to make vs odious, that you doe not forbid marriage at all, since that is not forbidden to your hearers (which are in the 2 rancke amongst you) to marry, and to haue wiues. And in his 74. Epist. They which are called the hearers amongst them, eate flesh, plough their fields, and haue wiues too if they will, none of which are done by those whome they call their elect. Whence it also appears that they did not take marriage to be simply bad, since they did permit it to their people. No more true is that which our aduersaries say that the Church of Rome doth not maintain that marriage is a wicked and vncleane thing in its own nature. For see how the Popes speake of it. Pope

Innocent in his 82. Distinction, doth forbid 
                  
                     Can. Proposuit.
                   
                  that they which dwell with their wiues should be receaued to any holy charge, because it is written, Be yee holy as I am holy, saith the Lord. This Pope it seems thought that marriage could not stand together with sanctity. And by consequence that it was a prophane thing. And note the abuse; For when God saith, Be yee holy, hee speakes to all men: but if by this commandement God did require that men should abstaine from their wiues, what remaines there more but that there should no man bee married? To the same purpose doth he produce the passage of the Apostle to Titus Chap. 1. Vnto the pure al things are pure, but to them that are defiled and vnbeleeuing, is nothing pure. Vpon this place doth hee ground the single life of Priests to the end they may bee pure, otherwise hee thinkes them defiled and vnbeleiuing. Also wickedly wresting that saying of the Apostle Rom. 8. v 8.9. against married persons. Hee speakes thus to the Clarks. They which are in the flesh cannot please God; Now yee are not in the flesh but in the spirit. Could hee more disgrace married men then to saie they cannot please God. For note that the

Apostle in this place speaks to al the faithfull in generall.
               
                  Pope Syricius in the same Distinction speakes yet more disgracefully of marriage; for first he ranckes the Priestes which beget children vpon their owne wiues, with those that commit adulterie. We haue vnderstood, saith he, that many Priests and Deacons, haue a long time after their consecration, gotten children both in marriage, as also by fornicatiō
                  ; A little after he speaks vnto them both equally; Let them which are giuen to fornicatiō, & which teach these sinnes tel me &c. And we haue heard aboue how Pope Pelagius accounts the marriage of Clarkes for a sinne. So in the 31. Cause, 1. Quest. Canon. Hac ratione, the Romish decree saith, that howbeit the Apostle S. Paul haue commanded second marriages, yet according to truth, and in reason it is fornication. And the vow of single life is by them called the vow of chastity, as though there were no chastitie in marriage. Bellarmine in his 34. Ch. of the book of Monkes, stiles the marriage of Clarkes and Monkes by the name of sacrilege, and affirmes that they sinne lesse which cōmit fornicatiō, after they haue once taken a vow, then they doe

which marry. And in the 19. Chap. of the 1. booke of Clarkes, he saith that the marriage of Saints is not without some pollution & vncleanesse. And indeed should this people hold their peace, yet experience would tel as much. For who is there but knows, that to see a Priest keepe a pretty wench in his house, or to goe into a Stewes, is thought but a laughing matter, and held to be a veniall slip? But if a Priest should be married in the sight of the Church, this would bee held for a prodigie; They would say that this were the cause of the plague or the dearth that lay vpon them; that the eclipse of the sunne did prognosticate this: & out of question it should bee recorded in their Chronicles. The former is but simple fornication, but the other is sacrilege. For 500. publicke brothell▪ houses to be in the citty of Rome is thought nothing so hainous a crime, as that one of the Cordiliers should be seene to be married. Moyses, Samuel, the Prophet Esay, and the Apostle S. Peter, which were all married, would be thought monsters now a daies; & a man might get mony by leading them about to bee seene for strange sightes. By this therefore wee see that this prophecy is fulfilled every

kinde of way.
               They excuse it by their vow, and say that the marriage of clarks and monks is therefore sacrilege because in beeing married they breake their vow. To which I answere that if the marriage of clarcks were therfore only to be condēned, they should call it by the name of faithlesnesse only, or infidelitie, and not of pollution as Pope Syricius doth; nor yet of sacrilege as Bellarmine. And in trueth why is it that before they receiue any to be clarckes they exact this vow of them so severely without anie exception, but that they thinke that marriage in it selfe is not lawfull for them although they tooke no vow.
               As for the necessity of keeping vowes, I say, that the first vowes whē they are good and necessarie, may not be brokē by those we take after, & I am perswaded they will grant me this. But a clarcke before ever he were a clarcke did he not make a vow and promise to God to keepe his commaundements? This is that which we all promise at our first entrance into the Church, and although we did not promise it, yet for all that were we bound to keepe it. Now amongst the commandements of God this

is one.
                     Hieron. ad Eustochium.
                   
                  To avoid fornication, let every man haue his wife, & every woman her husband. If therefore any Monke be lustfull, and it fare with him as it did with S. Ierome, who after all his prayers and fastings, did yet still dreame of women and burne with incontinencie, I demand to which vow he is most bound, either to that which hee made to obay God, who commands all such to marry, or to that which he made to the Church that hee would never marry? Can they without impietie affirme that he must rather keepe the vowe made to the Church wherevnto he is not tied by God, then that which he made to God, & which he were bound to keepe although hee had not made it? Especially seeing that 
                     Tho. in 22. qu. 88. art. 2. 
                  Tho. Aquinas, and Cardinal 
                  
                     Bell. lib. de Clericis. c. 18 
                  Bellarmine confesse that the single life of Priests is but by the law of man, but to abstaine from fornication, is inioined by the lawe of God, why then is the law of man observed more religiously then the law of God? Why are humane institutions more strictly kept thē Gods commandements? insomuch that a Priest which shall commit fornication against the law of God, is thought to haue sinned a great deale lesse then if hee were

married against the promise made to the Church without the commaundement of God? the one being called but fornicatiō, but the other held to be sacrilege. To abstaine from fornication is nothing but to obay the law of God, but never to marry is a counsell of perfection, and a worke of supererogation
                  ▪ which sets the Monkes in Paradice in a far higher degree of glory, then Abraham, Moses, and all the Prophets that were married could euer attaine vnto.
               But I would yet further be informed, if when a man take vpon him to be a Monk and promise to liue chastly, whether by this promise he doe not withall promise to abstain from fornicatiō: they would blush to deny this. It followes therefore that hee sinnes far more in committing fornication then in marrying, seeing that by fornication (besides the violating of the generall vow which all men are bound to make to God, he also breaketh his very monasticall vow which hee tooke vpon him over and aboue the commandement of God. To all these things our adversaries never answer directly, nor speak they ought to the purpose. They make digressions in the praise of Virginitie; But this concernes not vs,

who acknowledge that virginitie is the most cōmodious state of life to serue God in without straying, that marriage hath its discommodities, and as the Apostle saith, 1. Cor. 7. troubles in the flesh, especially in time of persecutiō. But these praises agree only to chast virginitie, which doth not consist only in keeping the body from vncleannesse, but in withholding the minde too from lust. Whosoever hath this perfection, & besides hath discretion enough to guid his familie, that man doth wisely to liue single. But if he be set vpon by wicked desires, and yet notwithstanding doth still affect a single life, he provoketh God, exposeth himselfe to temptatiōs, ensnares his conscience, and digs a pit for himselfe to fall in. Chast marriage will never be liable to so many discommodities as incontinent virginitie, for what doe they which liue in this state, but chew the bit it secret, thinking that condition of life most sweet and happy which they are denyed to liue, desiring that which they fly, hauing their thoughts defiled with vnchast imaginations, and yet notwithstanding all this resolued not to follow the counsell of God, and to abstaine from vsing the remedies

which hee hath prescribed. This is a vice for which Philosophie could never finde a name, to burne with lust, and whilst wee are in this taking, to vow to God that wee will flie from the remedies that hee hath ordained against it; which is all one as if a man were sicke, and should promise God that he would take no Phisicke, there is rashnesse in this mixed together with obdurat superstition.
               To vrge this yet further we aske if this continent virginitie be the gift of God, or whether it be in our owne power, Bellarmine answers that it is truely the gift of God and yet neverthelesse that it is in our owne power.
                  
                     Lib. 2. de Mon. cap. 31 Which is a plaine contradiction; for if God giue it vs then is it not in our power, seeing that wee doe not carry the key of his gifts, and that his goods are not at our disposall. It is true indeed that wee aske the grace of God freely; & vse it with out constraint, but it is God that maketh vs disposed to aske it, and giues vs the will to vse it.
                     Phil. 2.13. 
                  It is hee which worketh both the will and deed in vs, even of his good pleasure. Seeing then it is the gift of God, when any man doth aske the gift of continuing in a single life without desire of marying, doth

God stil heare him? And where is then the promise that God will heare him as concerning this. For cōfidence of prayer must bee grounded on some promise of God. Bellarmine cannot produce any promise, only he brings vs, as his fashion is, a ridiculous distinctiō; 
                     Cap. 34. lib. 2. de Mon.
                   saying, that God giues all men a possibility of containing themselues, but that hee giues not vnto all men actually to containe themselues, but only to such as he thinkes good. As who should say, that God gaue one power to be an Emperor, but yet did not grant that he should be an Emperour; that God gaue a man power to bee wise, but yet did not graunt that he should be wise. But to what ende serues that power, that is neuer reduced in to act? For our question was not, whether God gaue the power or the act; but whether he gaue the act of being continent to all men? Hee confesseth therefore that hee giues not this but to some particulars; and that to be actually continent is a guift of god that is not given to all. If then there be a Monke, to whom God hath not givē the gift of continency, and which burnes with inward lust, who shall tell you himselfe, that after so many Pater Nosters said,

and often fastings, hee is yet still tempted with the spirit of fornication; I woulde knowe whether such a one bee to followe the Apostles counsell, that is to marry, or else to continue in his former incontinencie? But it ill befits these fellowes to talke of such things. For as it ill beseems a slaue to discourse of liberty, or a man with his belly ful to preach fasting & pennance: so also is it ill beseeming these squires that liue so vnchastly, to dispute of chastitie. For their liues speak against them, & their rules are refuted by their actions. Hardly would a man beleeue them since they doe not beleeue themselues, and since they make a vow of chastity, that so they may liue the more dissolutely. They speake against nature, whilst they are most giuen to nature; (to say nothing of their pleasures contrary to nature.) Let them therefore first learne to liue, before they goe about to dispute; and let the Covent go no more to the Stewes, nor the Stewes bee kept any more in the Covēt, if they would not haue vs beleeue that continency is a gift, which God giues not to such as correct his word. Or if every one may haue it that will, the more to blame they for refusing

it, since it was in their power to haue had it.
               Nor let them speake any more to vs of these vowes, which are a yoke of yron, and a snare to intangle weake soules. For they omit the first point, which is, that they should knowe before they take any vowe, whether it be good and lawful; seeing that if it be not lawfull to make, it is vnlawfull to keep. Things which are bad to promise, are worse yet to performe. Virginity is a good thing, & honest, but for a man to tie himselfe thereto, is a token of rashnesse & ignorance of his owne infirmity.
               For vowes are thē good whē they haue these 3 conditions, 1. If the things vowed be good. 2. If they bee such as we know to be in our owne power. 3. If we vow them willingly and wittingly. None of al which are found in the vowes of chastity which the Monckes and Clarckes take; For to liue single is good, but not for all, but only for such as haue the gift of continency: it is good, but not in that degree of goodnes as they would haue it, making it a kinde of perfection aboue the law, and a worke of supererogation whereby we render God more then we owe him. It is hard that that

which is the occasion of so much vncleannesse should be a work of more worth thē to loue God with all our hearts. Or that that should be a worke of supererogation, which if every one kept, the church would ere long bee abolisht from the face of the earth, 2. That it is not in our power we haue shewed already, & their liues which make this vow, shew their vnablenesse to perform it. 3. The monastical vow is not alwaies made wittingly, and willingly. Many there be that enter into it through choler, some through despaire, and others out of ignorance, and in their tender age when they doe not knowe what the motions of lust meane. A father will say, how shall I marry all my daughters, how shal I devide my goods amongst so many sonnes? I must needs place my lame sonne in a monastery, & since he is fit for no other calling, make him a man of the church. It is a rare thing and seldome seene to offer a lamb without spot to God. And these poore children being come to yeares they finde themselues taken in the net, into which they entred at first as it were reioicing, but liue therein sorrowing, seeing themselues caught, with out all hope of ever being set at liberty.
               
                  Seeing then it is better for the governement of our life to follow sacred and sure rules, then rash and indiscreet vowes; and not so much to keepe that to which wee haue bound our selues, as that to which we are bound by God, we will conclude this discourse, with the rule of the Apostle. 1. Tim. chap. 3. Let a bishop therefore be vnreproueable, the husband of one wife, ruling his owne house honestly, having his children vnder obedience with all reverence.
               
               The common evasion is, that S. Paule meanes only that a Bishop must not haue had but one wife before his election into that charge, but that after his election he is to haue none. Hierome a professed enemie of marriage vnderstandes it thus. They interpret these words therefore, Let a Bishop be, by these, Let a Bishop haue beene. By their reckoning the Apostle should speak thus. Let such a one be chosen to bee a Bishop that hath beene irreproueable, the husbvnde of one wife, watching, temperate, modest; or, but let him now be so no longer; so doe they make the Apostle the teacher of vices, and the entrance into a Bishoprick to be a ceasing from vertue. But though it were harde for S. Paul to foresee that any should wrest

his words so strangely, yet, as it seemes, he meant purposely to put the matter out of controversie, by that which he annexeth in the 12 verse. Let the deacons be the husbāds of one wife, and such as can rule their childrē well, and their owne housholds; where these words Let them be, go immediatly before, and are ioined only to the word, husbands. And, which is more, in the 11. verse, he ordaineth that their wiues be honest, not evill speakers, but sober, and faithfull in al things. Who would thinke that S. Paule did instruct the women that had been the wiues of Bishops, but not such as were▪ His meaning therefore is that Bishops, and Deacons should not be Digamists, & that they should neither in former times haue had, nor at the present haue but one wife at once; because then it was the custome that man and wife were often separated by divorce for other causes besides adulterie, & vpon light occasions, and afterward marryed againe as they thought best, which the Apostle S. Paule doth forbid, not onlie to Bishops and Deacons, but to such 1. Tim. 5 9 
                  widdowes also as served in the church, to the end no man might say that they had two husbands, the one with them, and the other

divorced.
               Wherein the truth is so cleere, and the liberty of expounding being, by having beene, so intolerable, that Bellarmine himselfe, (howsoever he threaten as though he would contest) is faine to yeeld vnto it, in the 21. chap. of his 1. booke of Clerckes, in these words, Chrysostome and the other fathers vpon this place teach that Paule made no law that bishops should haue wiues, but only that they should not haue, nor haue had but one. Agreeable to Pope Leos expositiō in his 85. Epistle. The Apostle bids vs t
                        •
                      choose a bishop that is knowne to haue beene marryed, or to be marryed but to one wife.
               
               This so manifest a truth, and so forcible an evidence, hath by force extorted confessions frō our adversaries which are inserted in the Romish decrees. In the 23. Distinction about the governement of Clerckes, it is said, Let them labour to preserue the chastitie of their bodies inviolable, or at the most let them marry but once; and in the 26. cause quaest. 2. The marriage of Priests, and of cousens, is forbidden neither by the Legall, nor Evangelical, nor Apostocall authority, neverthelesse it is absolutelie forbidden by the authority of the Church.
                  
Where by the Church he vnderstands the Romish church. For in the Aethiopian Church, which containes 17. realmes, the Monckes are married, and are labouring and handy crafts men; and in the Greeke Church the Priests and Deacons are married once. Witnesse the Canon Aliter in the 32. Distinction. The tradition of the East church is divers frō this of the church of Rome. For their Priests, Deacons, and Subdeacōs are marryed: But in this church no priest frō a subdeacon to a bishop hath any liberty to marry. In the very same Distinction is the iudgement of the councell of Nice set downe in these words, concerning the resistance made by Paphnutius bishop of Thebais. Now Paphnutius the confessor withstood this, shewing that marriage was honorable, and saying that it was chastitie for a man to liue with his owne wife. Wherfore hee advised the councell not to establish such a law; affirming that it was a matter of importance, and that it would bee an occasion either to them or their wiues of fornication. And this was Paphnutius his opinion although himselfe were not married, whose advise was approved of by the Synod. The like is reported by Socrates in his 1. booke

and 8. Chap. & by Sozomene in his 1. book 23. Chap. & by Nicephorus Callistus in the 8. book of his history, Chap. 19. and by the actes of the councell of Nice written by Gelasius Cysicensus, all which do not onlie speake of suffering Priests to haue wiues, but graunt them the enioining of the marriage bed, as honest and lawfull. Which I haue therefore the longer insisted vpon, because there be some that haue mard this history, and that tell it otherwise. In the 56. Distinction, in the Canon Osius, there is a greate bedroll of bishops reckoned vp, which were the sonnes of bishops, Priests, or Deacons; And least a man should think that they were begotten before their fathers had taken holy orders, a little after in the same Distinction, the exposition is annexed in these wordes. When we reade aboue that Priests children haue beene made Popes, we must not thinke that they were begot by fornication, but by lawfull marriage, which, before this prohibition, was permitted vnto all, and is at this day (as all know) suffered in the East Church.
               
               Hence come these Canons of the auncient Councels. The 4 Canon of the counsell of Gangres is this. If any one shall put a

difference betweene a Priest that is married, as though it were not lawfull to receaue the sacrament at his hands when he shal serue it, Let him be an Anathema. A Canon which Bellarmine hath falsified in the 21. Chap. of his first book of Clerkes, having turned 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , by Qui vxorem habuit, which had a wife, whereas it signifieth, Qui vxorem duxit, which hath married a wife, that is as much to say, which is marryed. Witnesse the vulgar translation allowed of by the Councell of Trent, which translates the 10. verse of the 7. Chap. of the 1 to the Corinthians; 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , ijs autem qui matrionio iuncti sunt, to those which are marryed, and not as Bellarmine, Iis qui vxorem habuerunt, to those which haue beene marryed.
               The 6. Generall councell assembled at Trulla to make Canons hath an expresse ordinaunce herevpon in the 13. Canon in these words. For as much as we haue vnderstood, that it hath beene ordained for a rule in the Church of Rome, that whosoever will bee a Deacon or Priect, must first protest that he will never any more after that haue to doe with his wife: we, following the Apostolicall order & discipline, will that the lawfull marriages

of Clergy men be for ever availeable, by no means separating them frō their wiues, nor forbidding them to come togither at convenient times. Wherefore if any one shall be thought worthy to be chosen a subdeacon, deacon, or a Priest, let him not be hindred from mounting to this degree because he dwels togither with his lawfull wife, and let it not bee exacted of him in the day of his election to renounce the cōpany of his lawfull spowse. Least by this we be constrained to disgrace marriage, which was first instituted by God, and blessed by his presence, seeing that the Gospel cries out that no man shoulde separate that which God hath ioined togither; This, vnder the paine of excommunication & deposition: and all against the Church of Rome, expresly named in the Canon. It is true indeede that Bellarmine incensed against the Councel, cals it profane, in his 1. booke of Clarkes 19. Chap. so defaming and disgracing these ancient coūcels as often as they shall speake against the Church of Rome. But he did not marke how withall he condemned Pope Adrian, which allowes of this 6. Councell togither with all the Canons thereof: which approbation is inserted in the Decretals in the third Distinction

of Consecration.
               To this councell doth Iustinians constitutiō agree in the Code, & 2. law De Episcopis & Clericis: the wordes whereof are these. Let not clergie men be cōpelled to finde post horses, nor carts for common carriages, and let not their goods and substance be taxed for this purpose. Let all Clarcks enioy this priviledge, so that neither their wiues nor their children be subiect to this burden.
               
               Wee haue heard a multitude of ancient authors herevpon, which teach that the Apostles were marryed. If we beleeue Platina in the life of Cletus the 1. S. Luke was marryed, and had his wife in Bythynia. Athanasius towards the end of his epistle to Dracōtius, shews the custome in his daies. Many bishops, saith he, are not marryed, on the contrary there bee Monckes that are the fathers of childrē; as on the other side we haue knowne bishops that haue had children, and Moncks that haue had none: as who should say, that in this there was no law nor necessitie imposed.
               
                  Socrates in the 22. chap. of his 5. booke. Many (saith hee) whilst they were bishops haue had children of their lawfull wiues. St. Gregorie of Nysse, brother to Basilius, was

married; of whom Nicephorus speaks thus in the 11. Chap. of his 11. booke. Although he had a wife, in other things he was not inferiour to his brother. Sozomene in the 11. Chap. of his 1. booke speakes thus of Saint Spiridion. Hee was a plaine man hauing wife and children, but this made him never the worse for his divine function. Mantuan speakes after this manner of S. Hilarie in the first booke of his Fasti.
               
               
                  Non nocuit tibi progenies, non obstitit vxor
                  Legitimo coniuncta thoro, non horruit illa
                  Tempestate Deus thalamos, cunabula, taedas
                  Thy children did not marre thy course of life,
                  Nor wast thou made the worser for thy wife,
                  God likt the marriage bed well till of late,
                  But what he thē did like, he now doth hate
               
               And Synesius Bishop of Cyrene, was admitted Bishop, although hee tolde them plainely that hee would not therefore depart from his wife, and would haue as many children by her as he could. S. Hierome himselfe a mortall enimie of marriage, yet neverthelesse (when hee is out of coller against Iovinian) allowes of the marriage of Bishops. For in his Epistle to Oceanus,
                  
he defendes Carterius a Bishop of Spaine which had a second wife, against a certain lewd fellowe, which being a fornicator spoke il of Carterius his marriage. He saith therefore. Carterius hath desired to haue children by his wife; but thou by giuing thy body to a queane hast destroyed thy race. He hid himselfe in the secret corners of his chā
                     ber, whilst he served nature, and the blessing of God, saying, encrease and multiply, & fill the earth; but thou serving thy beastly lust in open places wert detested by the beholders. Hee concealed a lawfull action by an honest modesty; but thou hast exposed thy vnlawfull actions to the sight of all men. For him it is written, that marriage is honorable, and the bed vndefiled; but for thee, that God shall iudge fornicators and adulterers. And the same Hierome against Iovinian, where hee speaketh so disgracefully of marriage, doth yet acknowledge that in his time Priestes were married. If it be said (saith he) that Samuel, which was brought vp at the Tabernacle, had a wife, how doth this preiudice virginitie? As if there were not at this day many Priests that are married: seeing that the Apostle describes a Bishop to be the husband of one wife, &c. Leo the 1. Bishop of Rome in

his 85. Epistle speaking of the Apostles Commandement of choosing a Bishop, which either is, or hath beene the husband but of one wife, saith that this Commandemēt was alwaies observed so religiously that the same condition was held fit to bee kept in choosing the wife of a Priest.
               
               Yet (notwithstanding al this) I doe not deny, but that many holy men in times past, haue devoted themselues to a single life; thinking marriage a state of life not so agreeable with a Bishops calling as virginity. Wee may see many examples for this in Chrysostome, Epiphanius, Hierome, and Ambrose. And which is more, Origen that hee might liue chastly did vtterly disable himselfe for being fit for the act of generation; whether it were that he did geld himselfe, or vse some other means to mortifie his members. And indeed, as the Coū
                  cels before mentioned doe permit a Priest to take a wife, and to enioy her as hee did before he was a Priest; so I confesse it was the most vsual custome for Priests to marry before they tooke orders, it being the common fashion at this day in Greece for their Priests to take wiues some few daies before their ordination, and those once

dead, never to marry againe; but to bee married after their ordination this was vnvsuall. Vntill at last the Councell of Neocaesarea which is but provinciall, did in the 1. Canon forbid Priests ever to marry after their admission. These were yet but the seeds of error; to which, that they might not encrease, the Councels held in the East, haue made Canons cleane contrary. But in the West, that is to say, in the Latin Church, which is called the Roman, the Romish Bishops hauing found by experience, that virginitie was the fittest state for the preserving of Church goods, & of maintaining their authority ouer the Clergie, did willingly admit of it, and by all meanes seeke to vphold it. And this evill, being increast amongst the Gaules, Salvian a Bishop of Marsilia, which lived in the time of Clowis as then an heathen, cō
                  plaineth much of it, towards the later ende of his 5. booke of providence; where hee speakes after this wise vnto such as did refraine from marriage that they might enter into some holy order of religion. This is a new kinde of change. They doe not that which they may, and doe that which they may not. They abstaine from marrying, but doe

not abstaine from rapine. O foolish perswasiō! what dost thou? God hath forbidden sinnes, & not marriages.
               
               
                  Gregory the 1. bishop of Rome did maintaine this errour to the vtmost of his power, about the yeare of our Lord, 600. and yet notwithstanding in Boniface his questions, and 4 booke of dialogues, 11. chap. he speakes of Priests wiues whom hee calleth Presbyteras, and makes mention of a Priest of Narsia, that did abstaine from lying with his wife, For (saith Gregory) holie men haue this property, sometimes to abstaine from lawfull things, that so they may alwaies estrange themselues from the things that are vnlawfull. In his iudgement therefore, if this priest had dwelt with his wife, hee had done no more then what he might do lawfully.
               To be short, what care and diligence so ever the bishops of Rome and their substitutes did vse, they coulde not effect what they intended, but slowly: there being not as yet aboue 500. yeares past, since that Priests were married in France, England & Germanie. For the proofe whereof I could produce many good witnesses, which report of the great oppositiōs that the Popes

haue had in this matter, and the generall outcries of the whole clergie.
               It remaines that wee make good this clause of the Apostles prophecy, wherein hee foretelleth vs that lying spirites shall teach this errour through hypocrisie, having cauterized consciences, that is to say, having lost all sense and feeling of conscience, as a tooth or other part of the bodie that is seared with an hot yron to dead it.
               Nowe that this doctrine was first planted by the Doctours of the Romish church even against their owne consciences it is easie to prooue by vnanswerable arguments.
               1 For they call marriage a sacrament, and yet they say that in Monks & Priests it is sacriledge. Can they possibly imagine that one and the selfesame action shoulde be a sacrament in one, and sacriledge in an other? Or that any one may be said to commit sacriledge in vsing a sacrament?
               2 Againe, this is against their conscience, when they faine that they establish this decree of virginity for no other ende but that Clerkes should be the more holy, when the true cause thereof indeede, is the preservation of church goods, for feare a

bishop or Priest should pare awaie some thing from them, and imploy it to the vse of his wife and children; as Pope Gregorie witnesseth in the 28. Distinction, & Canon De Syracusanis, where he saith that the reason why he did refuse to admit of a certain bishop, was, because he had a wife, & children, by whom the church goods doe vse to be endangered. And yet notwithstanding, at the vrgent request of the people of Syracusa he did receiue him, on condition that his wife and children should not meddle at all with the church revenewes.
               3 It is also against their owne conscience, that having once confessed, that the single life of priests and monkes, is not by the commandement of God, but only by the law of man; yet they labour to proue it out of the scripture. For if their proofes be good, then is it by the law of God.
               4 It is likewise against their conscience, that after they haue acknowledged that fornication is vnlawfull by the law of God, and that the single life of priests is established only by the law of man, yet notwithstanding they mainetaine that it is a lesse sinne for a Priest to commit fornication, then to marry.
               
                  5 It is not with a good cōscience that whilest they exact a vowe of chastitie of their priests, they should in the mean space excuse their lasciviousnesse, as the * Canonists do, which haue made this glosse on the Decree in the 11. cause quest. 3. But if a priest embrace a woman, it is to bee presumed that hee doth it to no other end, but to giue her a fatherly benediction.
               
               6 They goe against their conscience, when they say, that they doe not forbidde marriage, and yet will not suffer a priest, that is a knowne fornicatour, to bee married.
               7 They speake against their conscience, when they say that they are no enemies of such marriages as are approved of in the Scripture, and yet never the lesse in their Decrees (which are the lawes of the church of Rome) they suffer 
                     Can. hac ratione caus. 31. quaest. 1a. Canons to be, which say that S. Paule commaunding such as are widdowes to marry againe, spake against truth and reason, seeing that such marriage is fornication.
               8 With the like dissimulation they speak of chastity, and yet for all this, suffer vnchast laws and Canons in their decrees. As in the Canon. Is qui, in the 34. Distinction.

Where of behold the inscription. He that hath no wife, let him in steede of a wife haue a concubine. The Canon following is not much better. It is not lawful for a Christian to haue. I do not say many wiues, but not so much as two wiues, but only one wife, or in defect therof a Cōcubine. Likewise the Canō, Dilectissimis in the 12. cause, & 1 quest. which doth commend and approue Platoes opinion the wisest amongst the Greekes▪ which saith that all things should be common amongst friends, now vnder this name of all things (saith this Canon) questionlesse mens, wiues too are comprehended.
               
               9 It cannot bee with a good conscience that they exact the vow of continency, and yet take away the remedy against incontinency: that they tie men to chastity and yet wincke at fornication: forbidding marriage, and opening the Stewes: whereby they say that they avoid a greater evil, contrary to the rule of the 
                     Rom. 1. Apostle, whoe bids vs that we should not doe evill that good may come thereby. And yet let a man but note how this is a remedy against other evils. For there are many towns where true religion is established, where there are no Stewes, and yet fornication is not frequētly

practised, nor the name of Sodomie scarse knowne. But the Pope by establishing Stews in Rome, hath he thereby extinguished the sinne of Sodomie, or diminished the number of adulterers?
               10 This is also against their conscience that confessing many of the Apostles to haue beene married, they do yet call the forbidding of marriage an Apostolicall tradition.
               11 Finally to know what subtile devises the Pope hath vsed in these matters of marriage, we are to vnderstand that he hath remoued all causes concerning matrimonie from the secular Courts of Princes, and taken order for them to bee decided at Rome. Nowe to the ende that hee might hereby tyrannize over mens consciences, he hath invēte
                     •
                   a thousand scruples. He hath found o
                     ••
                   newe degrees of spiritual kindred: forbidding marriage betweene Godfathers, and Godmothers, or their children. Also, the 
                     Lev. 18.20 word of God not forbidding marriage any further then betweene the Vnckle and the neece, or the Nephew and the Aunt, which are in the first or secōd degree, the Pope going lower hath forbidden it betweene Cosen germans,

and their children, and those which are remote even to the fourth degree. Hee hath likewise made it vnlawfull to marry in Lent. For looke howe many the more prohibitions there are, so many the more dispensations must there bee, which are bought at a deare rate, and by so much the more is he repaired vnto. And note that he doth not only dispense with prohibitions of his owne making, but with those which God hath made too; suffering Vnkles to marry their Neeces, especially in the families of Princes: to the end that the childrē borne of such that are thus married, should for their owne ease bee glad to vphold his authoritie. The counting booke of the fees belonging to the Romish court of Chauncerie, imprinted at Paris by Tousains Denis, in S. Iames his street, neere S. Yuoes. in the yeare 1520. hath these words. The penitentiarie may dispense with the first degree of affinity in the Court of conscience, & such a dispensation is sold for 9 Ducats and six groats. That is to say, that the Pope may giue permission to a woman to marry the brother of her dead husband, or to a man to marry his dead wiues sister, a thing forbidden by the word of God. Levit. 18.

16. and 20.21.
               Wee haue therefore in this point also plainely seene the Apostles prophecie fulfilled.
            
            
               The second part of this prophecie, concerning the forbidding of meates.
               THe Apostle S. Peter commaunding vs to watch, and be sober presupposeth that sobriety is a helpe to vigilancie. For it is hard to watch with a full belly: one that is drunke is no fit mā to be a sentinell. This watchfulnesse is requisite to foresee the assaults of Satan, and to avoide his temptations, and to make vs lift vp our harts directly vnto God. For as a man cannot well study in the kitchin, so neither can one easilie meditate of heavenly things whilst his delight is set vpon meat. The belly must hold his peace, when the spirit speakes to God, and the desire of eating be as it were mortified by this spirituall hunger, wherof our Saviour speakes in the 4. of Iohn, saying, My meate is to do the will of my father that sent me; hardly can the loue of God liue togither with the pāpring of the body. Hardly can a mā ever imprint any mark of godlines

in his hart, whose palate is more skilfull then his vnderstanding: or which enthralleth his minde to his belly, nourishing this not so much for necessity, as curiosity: but if this evill be pernicious at all times, it followes that sobriety is alwaies necessary, and that a Christians life ought to be a continuall fast; yea, I dare affirme, that in this, piety may learne of superstition: For if the superstitious do fast the evēs of holy daies, why should not wee fast all our life long, since it is nothing els but the vigill of that great holyday which is the everlasting sabbaoth?
               Fasting therefore is an holy exercise, & in the worde of God ordinarily ioined togither with praier. So our Lord Iesus in the 17. chap. of S. Matthew and 21 verse, speakes of certaine stubborne spirits, that could not be cast out but by praier & fasting. And S. Paul in the 1. to the Corinthians, & 7. chap. Defraud not one an other, except it be with consent for a time, that yee may giue your selues to fasting and praier. For they knew that there was a mutuall accord between praier and fasting. Fasting enflames praier, and praier sanctifies fasting; Fasting remoues negligence from praier, and praier

remoues pride and superstition from fasting. For as prayer without fasting is but slow, so fasting without praier is but a bodily diet, and no spirituall exercise. God is more angry then pleased with this service, if that whilst a mā hath an empty stomack, he be drūken with wrath, or glutted with lewd lusts. For he reckons of both alike, both of the surfets of the wicked, and the fasts of hypocrits, which change vertue into foolery, and christian sobriety into a distinction of meats, and into scrupulous observations, with (I know not) what opinion of merit, and satisfaction. As though fasting could satisfie God, or as though hee were bounde more to pleasure him which hath lost his dinner. For true fasting is to make vs more fit for to serue God, but not for to merit any thing at his hands, or for to lay downe a payment for our sinnes, for which Iesus Christ hath already fully satisfied.
               But it is not so now a daies; so hath superstition overrun true devotion, and marred this holy exercise. This abuse began in the Apostles time; and is reprehended by the Apostle S. Paul in the 2. chap. of his Epistle to the Colossians, where he rebukes

those which said, tast not, touch not, handle not, doing this, not because they thought any kinde of meate more vncleane then other, but (saith he) by a voluntary religion, and humblenes of minde, that they might not spare their bodies, nor haue any regard to pampring of their flesh. Some 150 years after came the Tatians and Montanists, thē the Manichees, and after them Eustacius bishop of Sebastia (whom Sozomen takes to be the author of the Asceticks of Basil) taught certaine superstitious fasts and distinctions of meates; all which were condemned for hereticall by the ancient Church.
               Last of all came the Church of Rome, which now is so far transported with this errour, that the greatest part of their religion consisteth in these petty observatiōs of daies, and distinctions of meats, which are so many in number, that the bondage of the legall Ceremonies might be called liberty in respect of these; For whosoever will reckon vp all their fasting daies in a yeare, shall finde that they come to more then 5 months yearely. In some of these daies flesh only is forbidden; in others butter also and egges. In Spaine they are suffered

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
on fasting daies to eate the inwardes of calues, and sheepe, which they call morsillos and menudillos. A good and religious christian is now a daies discerned by this, to wit, if he keepe Lent, and the fowre Ember weeks, and the vigils of Festival daies; that which was craftily imposed at first. For in taking away the holy scripture frō the people, and giving them divine service in an vnknowne tongue, he must needes thinke on some think to busie their bodies withall, whilst he did blind their minds, & giue them some corporall exercise, whilst hee robbed them of spirituall instruction. Hence comes it that the poore people doe to a day know all the fasting daies exactly, and how many holy day evens there be to be fasted; but knowe nothing at all in the scripture. Hence also comes it that the priest in confession doth carefully enquire of the sinner, whether he hath kept Lent or no, and the 4 fasts: but never asketh if hee haue confirmed his faith in the promises of the gospell, if he be instructed in the holie scripture, if he vnderstand the misteries of our redemption: if he loue God with all his hart, and his neighbor as himselfe: But if it be found that the sinner haue broken

the ordinance of the Church by eating flesh in Lent, especially in the week which they call, the holy weeke; the Priest then hath no power to absolue him, but sendes him to the penitentiarie. As for murder, & adulterie, and other lesse sinnes which are but against the law of God, the Priest can easily absolue him from such crimes; On the contrary, if hee haue fulfilled the commandement of the Church, and fasted according to the lawes thereof, why, this is a meritorious worke, not only for his sins that shall thus haue fasted, but for the sins of others too. And this fasting is not measured by the quātitie of meat, but he is said to keepe Lent, that eateth no flesh, nor egges, although hee drinke that which is better, and feed on the best fish that can be got: for as for their after-suppers of comfits, and drie suckats, they are not reckoned, because they take these as Physick, & for to follow the Apostles counsell whoe advised Timothie to comforte himselfe by drinking wine against the weaknes of the stomacke. So haue they beene more carefull to fulfill the Apostles prophecie then the commandement of God.
               Their ordinarie excuse is, that S. Paule
                  
in this prophecie speaketh of the Montanists and Manichees, which held some meats to be vncleane & profane: But that the Church of Rome thinkes no meat vncleane, but only forbids certaine kindes thereof for some few daies, to take downe the flesh by using it the more coursly, and by withholding such meates from the body, as doe most provoke lust.
               1 But against this, wee haue seene aboue, how the Apostle S. Paule in his Epistle to the Colosians, condemneth those by name which by refraining from set kindes of meate (being led therevnto by a voluntary religion and humblenesse of minde, thought to vse their bodies hardly, & had no regard to the pampring of their flesh. And hee speakes not to the Iewes, for the Iewes did not abstain from certaine kinds of meats for to subdue their bodies, but to obay Moyses law. Besides S. Paul calleth these observations the commandements of men, but the Iewes kept theirs as the commandements of God. Herevnto adde that the Apostle speaketh of such who besides the errour of distinguishing of meats did worship Angels withall. An errour wherewith as then the Iewes were not branded.
               
                  2 Moreover the Apostle speakes generally, and reckons the forbidding of meat, amongst the errors and doctrines of Devils, without specifying any reason for which it is done; The Church of Rome doth doe that which heretickes doe, although it be for another reason.
               3 But what matter is it whether wee knowe for what cause they of the Church of Rome do abstaine from certaine meats, since in effect they make a conscience to eate of them, & that the Apostle doth forbid vs to make a conscience of this; For behold his words in the 10. of the 1. to the Corinthians. If any of them which belieue not, call you to a feast, and if you will goe, what soever is set before you, eate, asking no question for conscience sake. This rule likes not the Church of Rome, the people whereof are instructed, when they shall bee invited by such as they call hereticks and infidels, to make a conscience of not eating all things indifferently that are set before thē. Behold therefore a forbidding of meates condemned by the Apostle, and by consequence the fulfilling of this prophecie.
               But what if wee shewe that the Church of Rome doth count flesh and the like

meats to be vncleane in their own nature? For if it forbid the eating of flesh for no other reason but onely because it provokes to lust, it should far rather haue forbidden, wine, and sauce, and sweet meates, which enflame the bloud, and doe far more provoke lust then any thing else whatsoever. 2 But what meanes that custome of carrying their meat after Lent to the Priest for him to say his exorcismes over it, and blesse it, if they did not thinke that some wicked spirits lay lurking in it al the Lent long, and that it had some pollutiō whereof it had need to be purged? For if it were otherwise, and if that the intent of the Priest were only to blesse the meate, as we doe ours vsually at meales before we feede vpon it, this blessing would bee as good at any other times, as after Lent, and there would need no coniuration. This is likewise confirmed by this, that the religious which make profession of a greater sanctitie then others, as the Benedictins, and Chartrians, doe altogether abstaine from flesh all their life long, and eschewe the touching or tasting of it, as of a profane thing: Doing in this worse then they whō the Apostle condemnes in the 2. to the

                  Colosians which say, tast not, touch not, being moued therevnto onely with a voluntarie religion, for to humble themselues & bring downe the flesh. But if you read the disputations of our schoole Doctors, as of Durandus, and Alensis, & others, you shall find that the reasons which they giue, why flesh is forbidden and not fish, do presuppose some vncleannesse in flesh. For there be some of them say, that the reason is, because the creatures of flesh were curst and drowned in the generall deluge, & not the fish: by which reason it should follow, that neither duckes, nor any other water fowle should be forbidden to bee eaten in Lent. Others of them there be that say that the reason is, because Iesus Christ never did eate any thing but fish after his resurrection. They cannot deny but that he did eate his part of the paschall lambe the last week in Lent before Easter: but I imagine these Masters will presuppose that he did dispēse with his owne sanctitie in this. Finally if of two impure actions committed by any one, the one be more grievously punished then the other, is it not because it is more impure? When therefore the Church of Rome doth inflict a greater punishment

on him that doth eate flesh in Lent, then on him that hath committed fornication; doth it not thereby shew that it takes flesh in Lent to bee more vncleane then fornication?
               Neverthelesse, for to pleasure them, let vs suppose that the forbidding of certaine meats in the Church of Rome, be not built vpon any impuritie conceited to be in the meat; and hauing granted them this, let vs see, if herein our adversaries differ frō ancient hereticks. Sozomene in his 3. booke, and 31. Chapter. witnesseth that Eustacius Bishop of Sebastia in Armenia, was the first that ever brought the monastical profession into Armenia, Pontus, and Paphlagonia, putting a difference between meats, and inventing a strange kinde of habits, & other absurd things contrary to the ordinance of the Church. Hee tels vs also how that many women being ruled by the Disciples of that sect, shaved their heades vnder the shewe of religion: that the Councell of Gangres declared them to be cut of from the Church, if they did not renounce their opinions. In this Councell Sozomene saith that Eustacius protested how hee did not bring vp this as a necessary doctrine,

but only for discipline sake, or as a devout exercise and acceptable vnto God. This at that time was the excuse of heretickes, whereby they did excuse their forbidding of meats, iust after the same manner that the Church of Rome doth now adaies.
               The Montanists likewise were generally condemned by the auncient church because they forbad flesh to be eaten. Whether they did this out of an opinion they had, that flesh was defiled and polluted, or for exercise sake, to beate downe the flesh, and curbe in their lust, no man can better resolue vs then Tertullian, the captaine of that band; who himselfe was stained with this heresie, and hath purposely written a booke of this matter, intituled, Adversus Psychicos, against fleshly men: For so is it his pleasure to stile the catholicks. Whose obiections against the Montanists, he produceth in the second chapter, which are al one with ours against the church of Rome. For in the 2. chap. the Catholickes tell the Montanists. That the lawe and the prophets lasted but till Iohn, after what time mē fasted as they thought best, not for that they were so commanded by the imposition of a new discipline, but accordingly as every man saw his

occasion. That the Apostles vsed to do thus, imposing no other burden of solemne and set fasts. They do yet farther alleadge the saying of the Apostle rebuking the 
                     Gal 4. v. 10 
                  Galathians, because they observed daies and moneths. They do also obiect that God himselfe in the 58 of Esay approues not of that fast that is an abstaining from meate, but of that which is an exercise of the workes of righteousnes. And that Iesus Christ hath in a worde answered all these scrupulous observations of eating and drinking, by saying, That which goeth into the mouth defileth not the man,
                  
                     Mat. 15. v. 11 
                  but that which commeth out of the mouth, that defileth the mā. Wherfore he himselfe made no scruple to eate & drinke, till at last hee was reprehended for it, and called a glutton. That the Apostle teacheth that it is not meate that maketh vs the more acceptable vnto God, &c. To be briefe, the faithfull in times past did dispute against the Montanists as we do now a daies against the church of Rome, & the Montanists likewise did defend themselus by the same shiftes and excuses that the Church of Rome now doth. For see how they answere in the 15. chap. of the same booke. The Apostle, say they, condemneth

such, as did commaunde men to refraine from meate; But the holy Ghost by his prescience, condemned such hereticks, before they came, as should enioine a perpetuall fast, for to destroy and vilifie the workes of the Creatour. Herevnto adde, that this errour of refusing Gods creatures, may wel be foūd amongst the Marcionits, Talians, and Pythagoreans but not in the schoole of Montanus, which he calleth the Paraclet. And a little after; we abstaine from meates, which we do not reiect, but only forbeare to vse them for a time. And a few lines aboue. The Apostles intent was, to reprehend such as did abstaine from meate, out of a kinde of loathing disdainefulnesse, and not out of duty, that is to say, out of a voluntary devotion. So did these hereticks excuse themselues, whose forbearing of meate; was not yet left vnreckoned amongst their heresies, what protestations soever they made, that they did not thinke them to bee vncleane or vnlawfull in their owne nature. Whence it also appeares that 
                     Ep. 1. Her.
                   
                  Epiphanius knewe not their tenent, when he accuseth them for mainetaining, that certaine meates were vncleane and profane.
               Now although the ancient church beganne

to encrease the number of fasts, yet were they nothing like those which are nowe a daies practised in the church of Rome. For they did abstaine not only from flesh, but also from wine, and all other delicacies. Witnesse S. Austin in the 1. booke of the customes of the church 33. chap. Let those that can, abstaine from flesh and wine for two causes, either because of the weaknes of their brethren, or else for their owne liberties sake herein. And in the booke of Faith to Peter the Deacon. 42. chap. Hold this for certaine, that the servants of God, which abstaine from flesh and wine, do not reiect thē as vncleane things, but they refraine from stronger meats & drinks for to chastise their bodies. Chrysostome in the 4. of his Homilies made at Antioch vpon the breaking downe of the Emperours statues. There bee some (saith he) that go two whole daies without eating a bit, and againe there bee some, which cutting of not only wine and oile from their table, but all sort of flesh & fish too, feed all the Lent vpon nothing but bread and water.
               
               
                  Basill in his 1. sermon of fasting, would that in fasting there be nether flesh nor wine vsed, nor any thing else that they like, which

serue their bellies; and that we should feede on nothing but bread only. And a little after. Thou dost eate no flesh, but thou dost eate thy brother; thou dost abstaine from wine but thou dost not abstain from doing outrage, and bearing thy selfe insolently, thou stayest for thy meate till night, but thou art all daie wrangling at the bar; Wo be vnto those that are drunke, but not with wine.
               
               Also the Fastes of the Auncient, were made partly by the wil of some particulars which fasted more or lesse, as they thought best: & partly by the directions of Bishops, and Pastours of every church, and not by the ordinance of the Bish: of Rome, which had no power in prescribing rules in these matters out of the precincts of his own bishopricke. This appeares by the divers customes in the Church. In the time of S. Ambrose they fasted at Rome vpon Saturdaie, but at Millan they did not fast then, as S. Austin witnesseth in his 118. epist. to Ianuaries. The church of Millan herein did follow the custome of the Gre
                     •
                  ke church, which fasted neither saturday, nor sūday in Lent; and did for this very cause excommunicate the church of Rome, and denounce it Anathema in the 6. general coū
                  cell,

and the 55. Canon, in these words. Because we haue vnderstood that in the cittie of Rome they vse to fast on the Saturdaies in Lent, against the custome left to the Church: This holy Synod hath therefore decreed, that they shall likewise in the church of Rome keep that Canon, which saith; If a Clarke be found to fast on saturday or sunday, let him bee degraded; if a lay man, let him bee excommunicated. But this fell out a long time after, this Councell being not assembled before the 674. yeare of our Lord. But at the first these things were more free, and the rules for them, lesse strict. S. Austin in his 86. Epistle, saith, I see well, that fasting is commā
                     ded, in the Evangelicall, & Apostolicall writings, and throughout all the new Testament, but vpō what daies we should fast or not fast, I see no commandement for this, neither of Christ, nor his Apostles: and a little before hee said that the diverse observations of Fasts, did not trouble the truth of Faith: & that these things are the plaits of the kings daughters Robe. So did hee call the different customes of the Church.
               
                  Eusebius in the 5. booke of his historie, recites an Epistles of Ireneus, to Victor Bishop of Rome, wherein hee speakes of

the diverse manners of fastings before Easter. There be some, saith he, which think they must not fast but one day, others there be that fast 2, & some that fast more, some measure their fasting daies by 40. houres, day and night. And this diversitie betweene the observers of the Easter fast, began not from our time, but long before, from their time (as it is credible) which governing the Church without observing any exact rule, did, a little after, turne that into a custome, which was done in simplicitie, and by particular observation. Neverthelesse they had all peace amongst themselues, and we yet liue in peace together, Agreeably to this in the passage of Tertullian aboue alleaged, the Catholike Church maintaineth against the Montanists, that since Iohn Baptists time, fasts haue beene free, and that there is no rule which binds vs to certaine fasts that wee must keepe in common. S. Basil in his two sermons of fasting, speaking of the fast before Easter, tels vs, I knowe not how often, that this Fast lasted not aboue 5 daies. Let the belly, (saith he in his first Sermon) giue vs some time of truce, and let that, which is ever a craving, bee at peace with vs for fiue daies. And towarde the ende of the homily, hee

sharply rebukes such, as did vse before the fiue daies came, to stuffe their guts with meate and wine, to the ende they might fast the more easilie, and haue their bellies filled with provision. And in the second Sermon. This is an ill mind, because we hear of a fast to come of 5 daies, therefore to make our selues drunke before hand.
               
               We may not omit the history of Alcibiades, recited by Eusebius in the 3. chapt. and 5. booke of his historie. This Alcibiades did macerate his body by fasting, living onely vpon bread and water, even whilst he was in the prison: But it was told the Martyr Attalus by revelation, that Alcibiades did ill in abstaining frō Gods creatures, and did thereby scandalize his brethren; Alcibiades being told hereof, belieued it, and did ever after that time eate of all meats indifferently, and without feare, and gaue God thanks for it.
               The historie of Spiridion, related by Sozomen, in the 1. booke, 11. chap. witneseth that S. Spiridion, and his houshold, did eate no bread vpon fasting daies, and that commanding his daughter to cover the table for a stranger, which came suddenly vpon him, shee answered him that

there was no bread in the house, for (it being as then a time of fast) it would haue beene superfluous. Notwithstanding all this Spiridion made her serue in a peece of porcke that he had left. But the stranger (brought vp belike in some superstitious place) told him that hee would not eate of it, because he was a Christian. Then Spiridion replied, But for this very reason thou shouldst the rather eate of it, for God saith, al things are cleane to the cleane, and did eate thereof himselfe. He did not say, eate of it, for I haue nothing else in the house, necessity may excuse thee; But hee alleages the Apostles rule, which had not beene lesse true, although hee had had never▪ so much varietie of meate in the house: and he himselfe in eating thereof without any necessity, & only to giue him an example, shewes that there was no necessitie in this kinde of abstinencie.
               
                  S. Austin in his 33. chap. of the 1. booke of the customs of the Church (speaking of the fasts of Romish and Easterne Monkes. which were all artizans, every one getting his living by his trade) saith that none amongst them were put to any hard thing that they were not able to beare: There is

no man which putteth a burden vpon any one that he shall refuse to carry; and he is not cō
                     demned by others because he confesseth himselfe too weake to follow them, for they haue not forgot, how that all things are cleane to the cleane, &c. And the whole Chapter is spent about this, to shewe that when a faithfull man well informed, doth refraine from certaine meats, hee doth doe this for feare of offending the weake, although he knowe well enough that it is a thing lawfull and indifferent in it selfe.
               This diversity of customes in diverse countries, grounded vpon Christian libertie, is set downe at large by Socrates in the 22. chap. of the 5 booke of his history. Hee saith that they did not fast at Rome but 3 weekes before Easter excepting Saturday and Sunday. That in Sclavonia, and Greece and Alexandria, they fasted 6. that in other places they fasted 3 times 5 daies, at 3 severall times, and yet that neverthelesse they did cal this Lent, every one alleaging a diverse reason. That there was the like differēce in their fasting from meat. Some of them abstaining from all living creatures, others feeding vpon fish only, others eating fowle together with fish, as which

(according to Moses testimonie) were made out of the water. There bee some (saith he) which abstaine from the fruits of trees, and from egges. And there bee some that tie rhemselues to eate nothing but bread. And againe, there be some, that eate no bread at all. Whence hee collects, that since no man can shew any expresse commandement as concerning this, it is evident that the Apostles did remit it to everie mans will and pleasure, to the end every one might doe good, but not through feare, or by constraint. Neither can it be said, that this which hee saith of Rome, is contrary to S. Austin. in his 86. and 11. Epistles. where he saith, that they fast at Rome vpon Saturday. For Austin speakes of the Saturdaies all the yeare long, but Sozomene speakes only of the 3 last Saterdaies before Easter. And, say hee were mistaken in this, yet is it not likely, but that hee told the truth of other Churches, which he himselfe saw. Especially seeing that his testimonie is agreeable to so many witnesses aboue cited. To whom we will ioine S. Ambrose, in his 34. Sermon, saying that in his time there were some which made their Lent to last 20 daies, others 30. by interchangeable weeks. Now

as touching the fast before Easter, the ancients doe not ranck it in the same degree, as they do the other fasts of the yeare. For the Catholicke Church disputing against the Montanists in the 10. Chapter of Tertullians booke of Fasts, saith, that those daies in the Gospell are markt out for fasting, in which the bridegroome was takē away, that is to say, the daies in which Iesus Christ suffered, and was in his graue; that all other daies are in a mans owne liberty. And S. Austin giues the selfesame reason for it in his 86. Epistle to Casulan. Because Iesus Christ said in the 9. of Saint Matthew, that the day would come wherein the bridegroome should be taken away, and then they should fast. This reason (ioined togither with the ancient custome, witnessed by Irenaeus concerning this, to wit, that many did fast 40 continuall howres before Easter) doth discover the very head spring and first beginning of Lent. That is, that they thought themselues bound to fast 40 howres, because Iesus Christ was for so long togither kept vnder death, and that this was the time wherin the bridegroome was wanting. Which is likewise confirmed, by that ancient custome of forbidding

them to fast after Easter, till whitsontide were past: because this was the time wherein the bridegroome was restored, & did converse here on earth after his resurrection. But by little and little this fast began to be enlarged, & men vsed to fast many daies before Easter, some more, some lesse. Till at last those 40 howres, were turned into 40 daies.
               During this diversity of customes in divers countries, wee never read that the bishop of Rome did take vpō him to correct other churches, or ever laboured to bring the Greeke Church, or that of Millan, to the fashions of the church of Rome.
               But I cannot deny but that some of the ancient were excessiue in the praise of fasting. As Ambrose and Basill, which killed himselfe with fasting, making his body, for a long time, feeble, and vnfit for his vocation by emulating Xerophagies a Monke of the desert. In their Homilies of Fasts, they say that Adam fell because he did not fast. That it was fasting that hardned the bodies of the three children throwne into the fornace, and made them not to bee burnt. That fasting gaue Daniels body a temper of steele so that the teeth of the Lyons

could not bite him.
               And in S. Austins time these and such like scrupulous observations taking place, this good servaunt of God complained of it. Behold what he saith in his 119. Epistle. That which is brought vp besides the commō custome, as though it were the observation of some sacrament, I cannot approue of it, although I dare not freely to reprehend it, for feare of offending some persons; either holy, or turbulent. But I am much grieved at this that we set little by many wholsome doctrines contained in holy writ, and all things are so full of presumption, that he shall be more grievously reprehēded, which during the Octaues shall touch the earth with his bare foote, then hee that shall haue buried his vnderstanding in drunkennesse. And a little after speaking of such as did charge the church, with many were observations, & particularly with that of abstaining from flesh, he saith. Although it cannot bee found that these things are contrary to the faith, neverthelesse they lade religion with servile burdens (which God would haue to be free, he himselfe laying nothing vpon it, but the observations of the Sacraments, which are but few, neither yet obscure) in such sort, that the condition of

the Iewes is more tollerable. For although they knewe not the time of libertie, so it is, that they were subiect onely to the burdens of the law, and not to humane inv
                        •
                     ntions. But the Church of God, mingled with much chaff and many tares, suffereth many things. But she approues not of that which is against the faith, or a good life, neither doth she conceale it, nor yet doe it. Wherefore, that which thou wrotest vnto mee, that there bee some which doe abstaine from flesh, thinking those to bee vncleane which eate of it, is manifestly against the faith, and sound doctrine. So did this good servant of God, suffer that with griefe, which hee coulde not amend. Although the slaverie and burdens of which he complaineth, were nothing in respect of ours now adaies. He himselfe in the 118 Epistle, telleth vs that hee followeth the counsel of Ambrose, as of an oracle, which is this. When I am at Rome I fast the saturday, when I am here, I doe not fast. So thou, to what Church soever thou shalt come by chance, conforme thy selfe to the customes thereof, if thou wilt not bee a scandall to any body, nor haue any one to bee a scandall vnto thee.
               
               The abuses which followe, are more

grosse yet, and farther remote from the ancient simplicitie. For the Ancients did not thinke that their fasts were payments to God, to satisfie for the paine due to our sinnes. This is a strange kind of fashion, for a man to pay his debts with fasting, as if a creditour should abate his debtour 10 crownes for every day he should fast. Hee that thinkes that God is contented with this, dreames of an easie composition, and payes him but in light mony. I cōfesse that God hath wrought many deliuerances for them that haue fasted: but our adversaries doe wrong to attribute that to the vertue of fasting, which was meant by God to faith and prayer, that doe sanctifie fasting. And they may doe well to remember the 
                     Luk. 11. Pharisee, who was sent away, although he fasted twice a weeke, and gaue God to vnderstand of his workes of supererogation.
               Aboue all, they haue a good grace, to make one man fast for another, and they would haue me belieue, that God wil pardon my sinnes, because my neighbor hath fasted for me. There is no iudge so foolishly connivent, that will pardon a crime to any one, in consideration that his brother

hath not dined. But that which we would iudge an intolerable sottishnesse in a man, shall we thinke this fitting for God? For the Pope would haue him to rest contented with this. And they that are not in the humour of fasting, loue rather to borrowe it of others, & to change their bodily fast, into a pecuniarie mulct. They wil say therefore to some religious person, fast for mee, and I will content thee. And that which is thus given to Monkes shall bee called an almes, although they be never so rich. This pretty doctrine is taught in the Canon, Presbyter, in the 82 distinction. He may redeeme the moonday fast, if need be, by singing a Psalme, or giuing a penny to the poore. And the glosse of the Doctors herevpon. Hee may free himselfe from fast by giving a peny; wherefore by a greater reason he may bee freed by others fasting for him. Because also that the fasting of the living is availeable for the dead. Agreeable to the Canon. Animae, in the 13. Cause, & 2. Question. The soules of the dead are delivered by 4 means; either by the oblation of Priestes, or by the praiers of the Saints, or by the almes of their friends, or else by the fastings of their kindred and allies. It is Pope Gregorie which

speakes this, who belieued that the soules were in Purgatory, some in hot houses, others vnder the leaues of trees, others in rivers, and hee was much troubled how to get them out thence. Now I say that if the fasting of the living doe refresh them, their feasting also must burne and torment thē. Track mee but any footing of al these opinions in the 3 or 4 first ages.
               Or else of that proper custome, whereby the Prelates that enioine fasts doe dispense with them, giuing these dispensations not to the poore but to their friends, and such as are gracious with them. At Rome yee shall get letters of a perpetuall dispensation. In the booke of the Taxation of the Romish Chancerie, formerly alleaged, this article is found in the 6. leafe. For that a lay man is not tyed to fast on the daies which are enioyned him by the Church, and may eate cheese, this letter costs twentie groats. If a poore man pay it, he shall for al that fast after he hath payd it.
               This being so, it is no wonder; if hee which giues dispensations to others, doe take one for himselfe, and if the Pope and Cardinals doe often dispense with themselues in these matters. For we are to know

that in the 25 cause, 1. quest. in the Canon Ideo. vpon a question which some made, whether the Church of Rome were subiect to the Statuts of Councells, Pope Leo the fourth, makes this answere. The holy Church of Rome giues all power, and authoritie to the holy Canons, but shee for her owne part is not bound, nor tied to keepe them. And a little after hee saith that as Iesus did submit himselfe vnto the lawe, and sometimes withstand it, to shewe that hee was master of the law. So, saith he, the Bishops of the chiefe see, respect the Canons made by themselues, or others vnder their authoritie, and do yeeld to keepe them, that they might make them to be kept of others; but sometimes too, either in commanding or decreeing, or by oppugning them, they shew that they are Lords over the decrees, and the makers of them. And a little after he saith, that the Church of Rome giveth it selfe speciall privileges, against generall decrees.
               
               Herevnto adde the custome, of making the people to go in procession to our Lady in the beginning of Lent, that they may haue leaue to eate butter. As also the trick, whereby they delude the ancient custome, of eating nothing in Lent before evening.

For now a daies they make the evening service to bee song before noone, and afterwards eat, saying, that evening is past: And a thousand such like shifts, which betraie not only abuse, but mockery too; to the ende that the prophecy of the Apostle might be fulfilled, when he saith, that this error shall be taught thorough hypocrisie, and by such as haue their consciences seared with an hot yron. And doubt not, but, if that we had not opposed our selues against the tyranny of the Pope, which did daily encrease like a swelling torrent, there had beene worse things seene. After that he had once got the kitchins and shambles vnder his dominion; he tooke vpon him to make other lawes for attire, and houshold stuffe, so that a man might not lie vpon a matteresse, nor weare silke, nor presume to bath himselfe without some speciall dispē
                  sation. And their booke of dispensation fees, made a hundred yeares since, doth sufficiently shew, that they did even then begin to encroach vpon these things. For as then, letters of dispensatiō for a Nunne to bath her selfe, were prized at a certain rate And letters of dispensation for a lay man, to study in the schooles; and letters of dispensation

for to bury a body in two sepulchres: and letters of dispensation for a mā to keep that which he had got vniustly. To conclude, they amongst this people which do most hate vs, may know, that they are bound to vs, for that little liberty which they do yet enioy.
            
         
         
            THE SECOND PROPHEcie contained in the 2. Epistle of S. Paul to the Thessalonians. CHAP. 2.
            
               
                  
                     3 Let no man deceiue you by any means: for that day shall not come, except there come a departing first, and that the man of sinne be disclosed, even the sonne of perdition.
                  
                     4 Which is an adversary, and exalteth himselfe against all that is called God, or that is worshipped: so that hee doth sit as God in the temple of God.
                  
                     5 Remember yee not, that when I was yet with you, I told you these things?
                  
                     6 And now yee know what withholdeth, that he might be revealed in his time.
                  
                     7 For the mysterie of iniquity doth already

worke, only he which now withholdeth, shall let till he be taken out of the way.
                  
                     8 And then shal that wicked man be revealed, whom the Lorde shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, and shall abolish with the brightnesse of his comming.
                  
                     9 Euen him whose comming is by the effectuall working of Satan, with all power, and signes, and lying wonders.
                  
                     10 And in all deceiueablenesse of vnrighteousnesse among them that perish, because they received not the loue of the truth, that they might be saved.
                  
                     11 And therefore God shall send them strong delusions, that they should belieue lies.
               
            
            
               The vnfolding of this prophecy in manner of a Paraphrase.
               3 LET no man by any meanes seduce you, by seeking to perswade you that the day of iudgment is neere at han
                     •
                  . For this day shall not come, till there be a generall backsliding, whereby men shal fal from the true doctrine; & that man of sin, which is markt out to perdition, to wit, the bishop of Rome, be disclosed.
               4 Whō ye shall know by these marks

He shall oppose himselfe against all that is called God, and which is worshipped; to wit against the true and highest God, and against Emperours, and Kings, and Magistrates, whom the holy scripture calleth Gods. Nay, which is more, he shall exalt himselfe aboue God, and especially aboue that which is called God by Idolators, till he shall haue got to be absolute commander over the church, and be called the head thereof, vsurping both the name and authority of God.
               5 Remember you not, that when I was yet with you, I told you these things?
               6 And now yee know what it is that staieth his comming, which shall come to passe, at the time appointed, & foreordained by God.
               7 For the foundations of this son of perditions dominion are already laid. And Satan doth evē now draw out the threeds, and spinne the beginnings of his doctrine, which shall be woven togither by an abominable art, and ful of wicked craft. There is nothing but one that hinders the disclosing hereof: that is, the Romane Empire (which doeth nowe oversway the whole world) must remaine yet for a time, and afterwards

be abolished.
               8 And when this Roman Empire shal be destroyed, then shall this bishop be fully disclosed, and the Papall See shal be exalted by the ruines of the Empire; which bishop, God shall beat down, and weaken by the preaching of his word, but shal not destroy him vtterly til the last day of iudgement, then when Iesus Christ shal come in glorie.
               9 Which Pope shall come fortified with the might and efficacie of Satan, with power, and signes, and false miracles, serving to establish lyes.
               10 Whereby such as are markt out to perdition, shal be lewdly seduced, because they haue not loved the truth of the Gospell, which might haue saved them.
               11 And therefore God will suffer thē to be seduced, and to be driven into strong delusions, and that they may beleeue lies.
            
            
               The proofe of this exposition.
               He that in the texture of this whole discourse shall not see the Popes image, & his doctrine, and the meanes of his rising, all set out in their true colours, doth willingly

erre, and is blind at noone daie. For we bring no bold coniectures; and our explications are not violent or forced, but naturall, and such as do of their owne accord offer themselues to our hands: such as doe not depart from the words of the Apostle, and are taught vs by experience. Whosoever wil cōtest about some particulars, shal not thereby endammage the whole bodie of this Prophecie. For though hee moue some difficulties vpō certain verses here & there, yet it is enough to stagger the most strongly opinionated, when they shall see that all the peeces of this so long a Prophecie doe agree vpon one only man, and that there is so good a correspondency betweene all the parts thereof: which shall appeare yet more manifestly by the proofs and by the difficulties which our adversaries moue to the contrary; let vs therefore once more againe run over this Prophecy from the beginning, and examine every particular thereof.
            
            
               The first part of this Prophecie.
               
                  3 LEt no man deceaue you by any meanes; for that day shall not come except there

be a departing first, and that the man of sin
                     ••
                   be disclosed, even the sonne of perdition.
            
            
               The Exposition.
               
                  3 LEt no man by any meanes seduce you, by seeking to perswade you that the day of iudgement is neere at hād. For this day shall not come till there bee a generall departing, whereby men shall fall from the true doctrine, and that man of sinne which is markt out to perdition, to wit, the Bishop of Rome, be disclosed.
            
            
               The proofe of this Exposition.
               MAny, being either led by curiosity, or spurred on by impatience, affirmed that the day of the Lord was hard at hand. Whose over rash and headlong forwardnes, is here staied by the Apostle, telling them that this day shall not come till there be a falling away. What manner of falling away this is, he himselfe telleth vs in that 1. Tim. 4.1. Prophecy of his, which wee haue formerly touched; telling vs before hand, that in the latter time many shall fall away from the faith. And so did some of the Ancient

vnderstand it; Primasius, Chrysostome and Theodoret, whom, his Maiestie of England, followes. There be some that vnderstand it, of the peoples falling away, from vnder the Roman Empire. And so do some of the Ancient: which also agreeth with the event. For we shall see anon how that the papacy increased by the decreasing of the Empire, and that the greatnesse thereof was built vpon the ruines of the Empire.
               The head and chiefe cause of this falling away from the faith, is by the Apostle S. Paule, called the man of sinne, & sonne of perdition, according to the vsuall forme of speech in Scripture, which calleth a bloody man, a man of blood. And those the children of hell, which are markt out for hell. So the man of sinne, and the sonne of perdition, signifie, a man that is a notorious sinner, and such a one as is markt out vnto perdition.
               That these qualities, some ages since, were fitting the Bishop of Rome, no man can doubt that hath read the writings, not of their enimies, but even of their owne servants that haue most respected them. Never was there man that did more prostitute himselfe to vphold the Popes power

then Baronius did. And yet see his own words in the yeare 912. and 8. article. With what face did the Church of Rome then look, and how ilfavoredly? then, when famous queanes, and lewd strumpets did domineere at Rome? at whose pleasure Church livings were bestowsd, Bishopricks given, and that which is horrible to heare, and not to bee spoken, their louers, false Popes, thrust into the seat of Peter. It would bee long to repeate the whole passage; till at last hee breakes out, and asketh, What Priests, and Deacons Cardinals do yee thinke were chosen by these monsters? And hee complaineth that Iesus Christ did sleepe, Now hee speakes of such a great number of wicked & vitious Popes that it should seeme by his reckoning, that Iesus Christ slept a long time. Platina in the life of Benedict the 4. saith, The liberty of sinning hath begot vs these monsters, and prodigies, which by ambition and corruption, haue rather vsurpt, thē possest the holy chaire of Peter, no Prince repressing the wickednesse of these men. Nay I dare affirme, that the histories of Emperours, and Pagan kings, written by their enimies, or by strangers, doe not speake so ill of them, as the histories of the Popes, written by their owne

servants, and flatterers, doe speake ill of Popes. From the yeare 870. to the yeare 1050. You see none but Necromancers, but Adulterers, and Murderers, and infamous persons preferred to the Papacy: Every one knowes the complaints of Bernard, of Petrarke, of Mantuan, bewailing the corruption, & bad report of the Court of Rome. If these witnesses bee not of authoritie enough, at least I hope Popes thē
                  selues shall bee beleeued herein. Aeneas Sylvius otherwise called Pius secundus in the 66. Epist to Iohn Peregall, speaks thus. The court of Rome giues nothing without mony; yea the imposition of hands, & the gifts of the holy Ghost are sold; and the remission of sinnes is communicated vnto none, that haue not wherewithall to pay for it. Where is the man that durst now adaies speake so boldly as S. Bernard did in his 125. Epistle. The beast (saith he) of the Apocalyps, to whome a mouth was given speaking blasphemy, and to make warre vpon the Saints, doth possesse the Chaire of S. Peter, as a Lyon prepared for the pray. I will annex one passage out of the Canonists, which haue glozed the decretals, in the title of Election, and 6. Chap. Their wordes are. Rome built at first by

theeues, doth yet retaine the smacke of her first religion, being called Roma quasi rodens manus. It must needs be that this evill was great, seeing that in a booke so publike & authenticall, which containes all the laws and Statuts of the Church of Rome, these doctors did insert such things to their owne shame. To be briefe, if this be humanitie, to cause 70000 persons, within a few daies to be murdered in a massacre in France; If this bee chastitie, to establish Stewes at Rome: If this bee humilitie, to make Emperours and Kings kisse his feet: If this be fidelitie, to dispense with vowes and oaths; If this be religion, to weare the crosse of Christ vpon his Pantophle: If this be liberalitie, to set the absolutions from sin, and 
                     Taxa Cancellaria A. post fol. 11. dispensations for ill doing, at a certaine price of money, and to make expresse books thereof; I am then content that we be said to haue done his Holinesse wrong by calling him the man of sinne.
               As for the title of the sonne of perdition, it is not our parts to giue iudgement vpon any body, or positiuely to define what men are damned: but wee pray to God to shew mercy to these Popes, which haue bathed their handes in our bloud.

Howbeit * Platina the Popes servant and Secretarie, speaking of their vices, doth as it were despaire of their salvation, saying. Our vices are growne to that heigth, that they will hardly ever find mercy in the sight of God.
               
               Now here. least our adversaries should perplex vs, we are to knowe that the Apostle doth not say, that there must of necessitie be a generall departure, before the son of perdition be revealed, so that when hee shall once come, there shall no more faithfull men be left in the world: It is enough for the fulfilling of his Prophecie, that this departure be begun, and haue already gathered some little strength, then, when the sonne of perdition shall be disclosed; of which departure hee shall make himselfe the head, and seeke to increase it with all his power; which yet shall never bee so great, but that there shall be some faithfull men in the world, left hid amidst this great corruption.
               Moreouer, wee neede not wonder that the Bishop of Rome, is called the man of sinne, in the singular, though there be many of them, one after another. For we speak so commonly, and say that the Emperour

goeth before kings, although there be many successiue Emperours. So our adversaries say that the Pope is the head of the Church, and not the Popes, because there is but one at a time. In France wee vse to say that the king dieth not, because that by the king, wee doe not vnderstand Henry, or Lewis, but a continuall descent of kings, one succeding the other So in the 7. and 8. chapter of Daniell a continuall succession of kings, is represented by one only beast, which appeareth yet more plainely in the 8. chapter 20. verse. The ramme which thou sawest having two hornes, are the kings of the Medes and Persians. And in the verse following, the kings of Greece are figured by a Goat, the horn of which signifieth the first king. The Greeke article 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   which is singular, doth most vsually signifie an indefinite person: as in the 2. to Timothy, and 3. chap. where it is also, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , &c. that the man of God may be absolute, where this word, The man, is aswell, as in this prophecie, taken indefinitely, and applyed to diverse men a part. And so Matthew the 18. verse 17. Let him be vnto thee, as the heathē man, or publican, although there were a

great number of this sort; and so shall wee finde it often. But if the sonne of perdition were but one only man that were yet to come, how shall the saying of the Apostle stand, who presently vpon this telleth vs, that the mystery of iniquity did even then in his time begin to worke, for to prepare his way? Is it credible that 5. or 700. yeares should bee imployed about the producing one only man, which should not last aboue 3. yeares, and some few moneths? Or that the mysterie of iniquity shoulde even then begin to worke, and that this man shoulde not yet be revealed? Especially seeing that our adversaries make Antichrist to bee 
                     •
                   Iew, of the tribe of Dan, and which shall build vp Ierusalem againe, whereas we see no preparations for all this, so that by their reckoning the mysterie of iniquity should bee lesse prepared nowe then it was in the Apostles time. But if any one thinke it strange, that Antiochus Epiphanes which was but one person, should bee a figure of divers successiue persons, Let him remember that many high Priests one succeeding the other, were the figures of Iesus Christ, which yet neverthelesse was but one person. And yet the reason is alike on both

sides. Besides, Antiochus is not the figure of many at a time, seeing there is never but one Pope at the same time.
               Neither, can so great a dominion over so many nations (got, not by any exploite of war, but by guile, as the Apocalyps foretels vs in the 17. ch.) be the work of one only man, much lesse of such a one, that shall raigne but 3. yeares and an halfe; this is a worke of many ages; that which followes, sutes with this, and is full of perspicuity.
            
            
               The second part of this prophecie.
               
                  4 Which is an adversarie, and exalteth himselfe against all that is called God, or that is worshipped: so that he doth sit as God in the temple of God, shewing himselfe that hee is God.
               
                  5 Remember yee not that whē I was yet with you, I told you these things?
            
            
               The exposition.
               
                  4 Whom yee shall know by these markes. He shal oppose himselfe against all that is called God, and which is worshipped, to wit, against the true, and highest God, and against

Emperours, and kings, & magistrates, whom the holy scripture calleth Gods. Nay, which is more, he shall exalt himselfe aboue God, and especially aboue that which is called God by Idolatours, till he shall haue got to be absolute commander over the Church, and be called the head thereof, vsurping both the name and authority of God.
               
                  5 Remember yee not that whē I was yet with you, I told you these things.
            
            
               The proofe of this exposition.
               The proofe of this exposition consisteth in fiue pointes.
               1 To shew that the Pope calleth himselfe God, & taketh the authority of God vpon him.
               2 That hee doth exalt himselfe aboue God, and especially aboue that which is called God by Idolatours.
               3 That hee doth oppose himselfe against God.
               4 That hee doth oppose himselfe against kings, and princes, and magistrates.
               5 That he calleth himselfe the head of the church vniversall.
            
            
               
               The first point.
               That the Pope names himselfe God, and is so called by his favourites, this is a common thing, whereof the Popes Decrees, & the coūcels where he sat as chiefe, are full. The Canon. Satis, in the 96. Distinction, speakes thus. It is manifestly seene that the Pope can in no wise, neither be vnbound, nor bound by any secular power; who is knowne to haue bin called God, by the religious Prince Constantine before mentioned: now it is apparant, that God cannot be iudged by men. He excludes princes therefore from the title of God, that he may reserue it to himselfe; and approving of Constantines saying which calleth him God, thence inferreth that the Pope may not bee iudged by any person. Where we are to note by the way, that Constantine in the councell of Nice, speaking to al the bishops present, said vnto them, Yee are Gods, but never spake this in particular to the bishop of Rome.
               The glosse of the extrauagant, cum inter of Iohn the 22. hath these words. To thinke that our Lord God the Pope, the author of the aforesaid Decretall, and of this, had no power to decree as he hath decreed, would be iudged

an heresie. Where we must note that the Cardinals, & Doctors appointed by Pope Gregory the 13. for the correcting of the Canons, Decretals, Clementines, and, Extravagants, having corrected many other glosses, do not touch this at all, and were willing to haue it remaine as it is.
               In the last councell of Lateran, and 9. Session in the yeare 1514. one of the secretaries of the Popes chamber speakes thus to Leo the 10. The lookes of your divine maiestie, with the beame-darting splendor of which, my weake eies are dimmed, which was inserted in the councell, as good, and warrantable; For there must never any impieties bee put into councels, without being found fault with. Nay which is more, after that the said coūcel was written out, Pope Leo approved of it, and his approbation is set in the frontispice thereof: in the same 
                     Pag. 510. edit. Colon. tom. 4. page the papall dignity, is called, Divinū imperium, the kingdome of God.
               
               In the 2. book of holy ceremonies 7. section, & 6. chapter. There are these words, The seate of God, That is to say, the Apostolical seat. And Steuchus likewise the Popes library keeper, in his booke of the donation of Constantine, saith that Constantine
                  
held Pope Sylvester for a God (& adoravit vt Deum) and worshipped him as God.
               
               In Italie vpon the gate of Tolentū
                   there is this inscriptiō. to Paul the 3. the most high and mighty God vpon earth. Vpon the triumphall arch, erected to Pope Sixtus the 4. as he entered in state into Rome, there was this written

                     Oraclo vocis mundi moderaris habenas
                     Et merito in terris crederis esse Deus.
                     This lower world thy sacred words do sway,
                     Stile thee an earthly God we rightly may.
                  
                  Stapleton an English Iesuit in the preface of his booke, of the principles, of the doctrine of faith cals Gregory the 13. Supremum, plane supremum in terris numen. The supreame, the most absolute supreame God vpon earth.
               And Coeffeteau denieth not this, but saith that the Pope is God in the same sense that the scripture calleth kings, and other powers by the name of Gods: an idle excuse, and against the intent of his Holines For in the old testamēt, this word of Gods is indeed attributed to Princes in the plurall. But for a mans selfe to attribute the name of God vnto himselfe in the singular; this is a thing which no christiā prince

nor prelate ever did. The bishop of Rome is the first, who some ages since began to vsurpe this title.
               We are also to note, that the word Iehovah in the old testament is never attributed to any creature: but well the worde of Elohim may in the plurall, which signifieth Gods, and Lords. As for the new testamēt, wherein the head-springs of all christiā religion are contained, & which should rule our fashion of speaking, yee shall never there finde the name of God in the singular attributed to any but God himselfe, or to Satan whom the Apostle calleth, The God of this world, because in this world hee seeks by al meanes to encroach vpō Gods right. Heathen Emperours also haue taken vpon them the title of God, as Bassian Caracalla, & before him Domitian, whō 
                  
                     Sues. in Dom cap. 13 Mart. lib. 5. ep. 8. 
                  Sueton, and 
                     Sues. in Dom cap. 13 Mart. lib. 5. ep. 8. 
                  Martiall call Dominus Deus noster, the Lord our God, which are the very same words with those which I haue formerly cited out of the glosse. But this name was ever reputed odious amongst the Christians, when it was once attributed to man, because they haue no more excellent or reverent name then this; not as the Hebrewes, who are of opinion that the

name of Iehova is more holy and incommunicable.
               But for to know in what sense the Pope is called God, the Pope himselfe can best resolue vs. For out of this title, he gathereth by consequence that he should bee adored; The last councell of Lateran, in the 3. and 10. sessions saith. The Pope ought to be worshipped of all people, and is most like vnto God: and that a man might not imagine that it speaketh of a civill kind of worship, it is there told vs what manner of adoration this must be, wherwith he is to be adored; to wit, that it must bee with that kinde of adoration that is mentioned in the 72. Psalme. Adorabunt eum omnes reges terrae, All the kings of the earth shall worshippe him. Where by worship, the highest kinde of worshippe is meant, which is due to the son of God; as Tertullian teacheth vs in his 5, booke 7. chap. against Marcion. So doth Mantuan vnderstande it, which speakes of the Pope:

                     Ense potens gemino, cuius vestigia adorāt
                     Caesar, & aurato vestiti murice reges,
                     He hath 2 swords within his power to draw,
                     Caesar adores him with an humble awe:
                     And kings with Caesar too in this do meete,
                     
                        Bowing their necks down for to kisse his feet.
                  
The histories of these last ages are ful with examples of this adoration of the Pope. In the 2. Tome of councels they doe highly magnifie Iustinian because hee did adore Pope Agapet
                        •
                     . But the most remarkable worship that is given him, is that which they do vnto him within the conclaue, immediatly after his election. As soone as ever he is pronounced Pope by the Cardinals shut vp in the conclaue, they presently run vnto him, and pulling of his owne apparell, put on other insteed thereof, redde hose, and red shooes with a crosse of gold, a red girdle with buckles of Gold, a red cap, and a rochet, and answerably fitting him with a red mantle, and a triple crowne glittering with Diamonds, they mount him vp vpon their shoulders aloft, as it were some glorified body, and set him vpon the Altar. This amongst the Italians is commonly called adoration: and is therefore the more worth the noting, because the Pope is set vpon the Altar, which is a place where they set their Masse-god, and which is appointed for divine worship: so that this worship, cannot be taken for a civill worship. Herevnto adde that in civill

affaires kings haue more authoritie then Popes, and should therefore by a consequent rather bee worshipt with civill honour. But they doe not only not worship Kings, but exact of kings themselues to worship the Popes. But if a King called himselfe God, he might seem to haue some shew for it, by alleaging the passage out of the old Testament wherein kings are said to be Gods, yet should a king so doe he would be thought by Christians to bee little lesse then a blasphemer, and I am perswaded that the Pope himselfe would not like it, being that hee vsurps the name of God excclusiuely from al other Princes vnto himselfe, by reason that it is a holy word, and imports as much as adoration. Neither will hee bee woone to grant, that kings, because they are called Gods by David, should therefore deny to bee iudged; seeing that he takes vpon him to bee their iudge. And yet we haue seene before, how the Pope out of this very saying of David, concludeth that no man may be his iudge, although in that place there bee no mention made of Bishops or Pastours, but of Princes: It is easie to bee knowne in what sense he calleth himselfe God, since hee vsually

calls his decrees, and Canons by the name of 
                     Extra. D
                           •
                         Mai
                           •
                        rit▪ & obed titulo. 33. cap. Perpetuas.
                   
                  Oracles. Now an oracle signifieth an heavenly answer, proceeding from the mouth of God. Rom. 3. verse 2. & chap. 11. v. 4. with the like modestie doth he call his decretall Epistles Canonical scriptures in the 19 Distinction, in the Canon In Canonicis, the inscription whereof is this. Inter Canonicas scripturas Decretales Epistolae connumerantur. The decretall Epistles are reckoned amongst the Canonicall scriptures. That is to say, that the Popes Decrees are equall to the holy scripture, and by a consequent are the word of God.
               What can one say more of God then that which the aboue cited councell of Lateran, in the 9. & 10. Sessions speakes of the Pope, to wit, that hee hath all power aboue all powers, both of heaven and earth? And he himselfe speakes as much of himselfe in the 1. booke of holy ceremonies. 7. sect. 6. chap. where Pope Sixtus the 4. speakes thus. This Pontificall sword representeth the Soveraigne temporall power that Christ hath given the Pope his vicar vpon earth, as it is written. All power is given mee both in heaven, and in earth, and 
                  
                     Ps. 72. v. 8. 
                  elsewhere. His dominion shall be from sea to sea, & from

the river vnto the ends of the land. Which power is also signified by the velvet cap which Popes weare. Of which power even over heaven it selfe, Innocent the 3. was bold to make vse in the bull▪ 
                  Ad liberandum: where he grants vnto Pilgrims, that die in their pilgrimage, to enioy a greater degree of glory in Paradice aboue others.
               Besides I say, that to call himselfe his Holines exclusiuely to al others, is to take a name vpon him that is proper to God alone, who is not only the most holy Father, (a name which the Pope doth also assume) but Holinesse it selfe. As also for to attribute all power vnto himselfe as Paule the 5. doth in this holy register, where he calls himselfe a Vice-God, the Monarch of the Christian world: the vpholder of the papall omnipotency.
               Next in order comes our Saviour Iesus Christ, adorned with titles, names & qualities, all which the Pope applyeth vnto himselfe. Hee calls himselfe at least a hundred times in his Canons and Decrees, The spowse of the vniversall Church; Bellarmine goeth yet farther, Etiam Christo secluso, (that is) that hee is so indeed, Christ being set apart, in the 9. Chapt. & 1. booke

of the Pope; And although Christ were not excluded, yet so it is that in matter of marriage, men doe not lightly admit of a companion, much lesse will this bee endured in that holy coniunction with Christ, concerning which S. 
                  2 Cor. 11. v. 2. 
                  Paule saith. I haue prepared you for one husband, to present you as a pure virgin to Christ. And that hee might leaue him nothing proper, Leo the 10. in the Councell of Lateran formerly cited, is called the Lion of the tribe of Iuda, the roote of David, the Saviour of Sion. And Bellarmine in the preface of his booke of the pope, calleth the pope the corner stone, a tryed stone, a pretious stone, whereof Esay speakes in his 28. Chap. 16. verse. Which is therefore the more to be noted, because the Apostle in the 9. Chap. of the Epistle to the Romans, saith, that none that belieue in this stone shall be put to confusion.
               
               After that he hath once seized vpon the names and titles of the Father, and of his sonne our Saviour, it is no wonder that he equalleth himselfe with the holy Ghost, saying in the 25 cause, 1. quest. that to violate his Canons & ordinances is to blaspheame against the holy Ghost, to the end we should know, that such an offence shal

never be pardoned, neither in this world nor in the world to come.
            
            
               The second point. That the Pope doth exalt himselfe aboue God.
               THE Apostle will tel vs in the 10. verse of this Chap. that the sonne of perdition shall vse all guile and deceitfulnesse. Whence it follows that we must not think that this man of sinne, this sonne of perdition, shall openly proclaime vnto vs, and say. I am more great and powerfull thē the eternall God, which created the world. For who would followe him if hee should speake thus? Or how could any one be seduced therewithall? but rather he must insinuate himselfe through deceipt, and vnder the shewe of sanctitie. Hee shall haue (saith the holy Ghost in the 13. of the Apocalyps) two hornes like the lambe, but hee shall speake like the Dragon: making a shew of Christianitie, and professing the name of Christ, but teaching divelish doctrine, As S. Hilarie saith against Auxentius; vnder the colour of preaching the Gospell he shal be contrary vnto Christ, so that the Lord Iesus shall bee denied, whilst men thinke hee is preached. It is sufficient therefore for the

fulfilling of this prophecy, that the sonne of perdition doth in effect lift himselfe aboue God, although he professe that he is beneath him. And it will be no great labor to proue this.
               1 Whosoever shall quit a servant frō the obediēce due to his master, must needs be greater then his master: But the popes dispense with the setvants of God for obaying of God: Whence it followeth that they are greater then God. A horrible thing, yet that which is necessarily inferred out of their doctrine, No man will deny the maior, the minor is verified by a thousand examples.
               1 It is Gods will that we should keep our oathes and vowes, but the pope vseth to dispense with them. Say that a man haue vowed and promised to God to goe on pilgrimage; the pope if it please him, will dispense with him for it, teaching him how to be periured with a good cōscience. And how knowe I whether God also will free me, or whether hee will condescend to his Holinesse his will.
               2 God hath knit man and wife together with a knot, that may not bee losed for any thing but adulterie. But the

pope breakes of marriages in many other cases, frustrating the rule of the Gospell, which saith, That which God hath ioined let no man sever.
               
               3 God hath expresly commanded the obedience & fidelitie of subiects towards their Prince, although he bee an infidell: But the Pope will free subiects from this obedience & fealtie towards their Prince, although this Prince bee no infidell, nor tainted with any other crime, nor one that shall withstand the Romish religiō, but only if the pope be of opiniō that he is not fit for governemēt, as pope Zacharie boasted that he dealt with Childericke, and Sixtus the 5 a little after with our K. Henry the 3.
               4 God saith in the gospell, Do workes worthy of repentance, This commandement is expresse and generall, with which yet the Pope will dispense by his Indulgences as Cardinall Bellarmin saith in the 13. cha. of his 4. booke of pennance; Indulgences cause that for the paines which are pardoned vs by the Indulgences, we be not bound to this commandement of bringing forth fruits worthy of repentance.
               
               5 God in his law doeth formally forbid marriage in the 1. degree of affinitie,

that is for a man to marry the sister of his deade wife, or for a woman to marry the brother of her dead husband. Levit. 18. & 20. And yet for all this, the taxe of the Popes Chancery fees in the 40. leafe, giues a dispensation and permission for this at a certaine price. The Penitentiarie in the Court of Chancerie may dispense in the first degree of affinitie, and such a letter is sold for 9. ducats, and sixe groates.
               
               6 As for a man to marry his Aunt or his neece, a thing which God also hath expresly forbidden in the 18. and 20. chap. of Levit. The Popes dispēsations are frequēt in this kinde; especially in great families.
               7 In all these things, and more such like, the Pope doth exalt himselfe aboue God, since he dispenseth with men not to obay his commandements. And he himselfe & his Doctors do not dissemble this. For in the 8. Title of the grant of Prebēds, he boasteth that by the fulnesse of that power which he hath, he can dispense with the law, & aboue the law. And the Glosse of the Canonists vpon this place maketh it cleere, where it is said. Papa contra Apostolum dispensat, & contra Canones Apostolorum. Item contra vetus testamentum, Itē
                     
in iuramento. The Pope dispenseth against the Apostle, and against the Canons of the Apostles, and against the new Testament, and with oaths. And vpon the Canon, Lector, in the 34. Distinction. The Pope can dispense against the Apostle; and vpon the 25. cause, 1. Question. The Pope doth dispēse with the Gospell, by giving it what interpretation he list.
               
               8 How many dispensations for age doth he giue contrary to the Apostles wil? Who 1. Tim. 3.6 forbiddeth that a bishop should be a young schollar. He bestoweth bishopricks vpon children; yea, the very Popedome it selfe (into which none are nowe a daies invested, but old men) hath in times past bin given to children. Benedict the 6. was not aboue 9. yeares old when he was chosen pope, as Baronius witnesseth in the yeare, 1033. 6. Article. Hee which as yet knew not what faith meant, could not erre in the faith.
               2 To this proofe we may annex an other, which is a demonstration, built vpon these maximes, that, those faults are greater which are committed against a greater person; so it is a greater iniurie for a man to wrong his king, then his neighbour, &

for to strike his father, then his companion, as also vpon this, that the more grievous the faults bee, they are punished the more grievously: If therefore an offence committed against the Pope, be more severely punished then an offence committed against God; if the Popes Decrees be more authorized, thē the commandemēts God: if a man bee thought to haue sinned more hainously in disobaying the Pope, then in disobaying God; how can wee but confesse, that this sin of the two is thought to be the greater, and by a cōsequent that the Pope doth exalt himselfe aboue God? Experience confirmeth this; swear, & blaspheame in Italie, no man is moved at it. Oathes are thought to bee but the flowers of eloquence. But should a man goe to Rome, and there say, that the pope is not head of the Church, it is not the intercession of a king that could deliver him from the stake, or free him frō the clumbs of the Inquisition. The Iewes say that Christ was a deceiver, and yet they are suffered to liue quietly at Rome, but shoulde a man once dare open his mouth to dispute of purgatory, hee would presently bee had to the house of Inquisition. There be certain sins

which they call reserued cases, from which no bishop can absolue a man, except it bee only vpon the point of death. You will imagine perhaps, that these cases are either murder, or parricide, or incest, or atheisme, or sodomie; no such matter. But these great sinnes from which none can absolue a mā except the pope only, are, the stopping of a man vpon the way as he is going to Rome to purchase him great pardons, the intruding ones selfe in a benefice, the stealing of church goods, to haue spoken ill of, or done ill, vnto the Apostolical seat, &c: such sinnes as these cannot be pardoned on this side the Alpes, except it be by a special permission, and that vpon the point of death. If you haue committed either murder or fornication, the priest will absolue you frō this. But if you haue eaten flesh the weeke before Easter, the priest cannot pardō this but must send you to the penitenciarie: and yet notwithstanding, one is the ordinance of God, the other a commandement but of man. In the Taxe of the popes Chancerie, in the chapter of pardons, 36. leafe. Incest with ones mother is fined at fiue groates, but in the page following, the falsifying of the Apostolicall letters are set at tenne groates.
               
                  2 Againe, the pope exalteth himselfe aboue God, when he takes vpon him to be the chiefe iudge in controversies of religion, in steede of deferring this soveraigne iudgement to the holy scripture, which is the word of God. It is said, that it is the church, which doth giue force & authority to the scripture, and that the pope is aboue the church: so he is two degrees aboue the word of God, seeing that he is aboue the church, and the church aboue the Scripture.
               3 But especiallie the pope exalteth himselfe aboue that, which is called God in the church of Rome, for so do papists at this time, call the bread of the Eucharist; they say, that they holde vp God in the Masse, when they hold vp the bread, that they carry God to the sick when they carry the bread, that they eate God and take their creatour, when they take▪ and eat the bread. Many kinde of waies doth the pope exalt himselfe aboue this God. For in the procession vpon the day of his coronation, and at other solemne times, they make this God go before him, carryed vpon a white horse, having a Sansbell about his necke, and a lantherne before, being covered all

over with a Canopy, which is carryed vp by the citizens of Rome. But the pope comes after being carried vpon mens shoulders, vnder a Canopie helde vp by princes or princes ambassadors, the Emperor to (if he be there) putting to his helping hand, or if his Holynesse bee on horse backe holding his horses bridle, after that hee hath first held the stirrup for him to mount; as it is described at large in the 1. booke of holy Ceremonies, 2. Section, & 3. cha. compare the popes manner of furniture with that of his God, and yee shall see the Apostles prophecie fulfilled, where it is said, that he shall exalt himself aboue that which is called God, and is worshipped.
               
               4 You shall see the like example to this, in the 1. Section of the 2. booke in the 14. cha. where it is set downe, with what solemnitie the pope doeth celebrate the masse in his owne person. As he is going vp to the Altar, the greatest prince, or the Emperour himselfe (if he be present) holdeth vp his traine: there is a Canopy carried ouer his head, borne vp by 8. princes, or princes ambassadours: being before the Altar, whilst he is singing of the masse, the prelates come, and kneeling downe kisse

his right knee: others kisse his feete. He doth bow himselfe, I confesse, before the host; but the standers by doe him ten times more reverence, then they doe God. The greatest prince in the company giues him water 4. times to wash, serving it to him vpon his knee, as Charles the 8. did to Alexander the 6. He is capt, & vncapt, shod, and vnshod; gloued, & vngloued; ringed, & vnringed, I know not how often. There is his taster by him, as they vse to haue at princes tables. There standes one by his side, that points at the words in the booke with his finger, as we vse to serue litle childrē. He sucks wine out of the chalice with a reede. So that all well considered, this whole solēnitie, vnder a shew of worshipping the Host, is done farre more for the honour of the pope, then for the honor of his God.
               3 Let vs annex one proofe more; he that giveth authority to the holy scripture hath more authority thē the scripture. But Bishops of Rome take vpon them to giue authority to the holy scripture, & say that wee are to receaue it, because the pope hath so ordained He attributs more authoritie therefore to himselfe, then to the

holy scripture. The minor is proved by the words of pope Nicholas in the 19. Distinction, and Canon. Si Romanorum, where he approueth of their saying which said, That the old and new Testament are to bee receaued, not because they are annexed to the Canons, but because holy Pope Innocent hath pronounced that they must be receaued, For there, he doth not only not reprehēd those that speake thus prophanely, but doth herevpon ground the establishment of the popes Decretals, which are not inserted in the Canons. By this reckoning then, wee must beleeue; that God created the world; that Cain killed Abell; that Noah built the Arke; that God made a covenant with Abraham; that God gaue his law vnto Moyses; wee must belieue all this I say, not because the holy scripture witnesseth as much, but because the pope & the church of Rome doe say that it is true, and that these bookes ought to be receaued; And for to make vs relie more vpon the authoritie of the Church of Rome, then of the scripture, they vse commonly to speake thus vnto vs. How would you knowe that this were the scripture, if the Church had not told you of it? whence they conclude

that the church is aboue the scripture. As if I should say, I should not haue knowne that this was the king, but that such a man shewd him to me, therefore this man is aboue the king. A wicked church may informe vs that this is the scripture. The Iewes made the old Testament knowne to the Apostles, & yet notwithstanding they persecuted our Saviour.
               4 Briefly, to take such wordes out of the common forme of Gods law, as doe forbid vs to make images, or to fall down before them, what is this but to correct God, and by a consequent to exalt himselfe aboue God.
            
            
               The third point. That the Pope doth set himselfe against God.
               This needeth no long proofe, & it doth followe out of the two precedent points. For it is impossible, that hee should call himselfe God, & exalt himselfe aboue God, without being contrary vnto him, & withstanding his wil: yet behold some formal proofs for the confirming of this too.
               1 God in the 4. of Deut. 2. verse, doth

forbid vs to adde any thing to, or take any thing from his word. And at the end of the new Testament, God doth denounce a curse against him that shall adde any thing to the things contained in that booke. A passage, which the Councell of Friuli approved by the Church of Rome doth thus expound. The Apostle S. Iohn in the Apocalyps, vnder the name of one book, doth protest of all the bookes, both of the old and newe Testament, If any one, &c. On the contrary the pope doth presume to make new articles of faith, and to adde to the Creed. At the ende of the last Councell of Lateran, there is a Bull of Leo the 10, wherein all Luthers heresies are reckoned vp. The 26. heresie is, that he said, That out of doubt it lay not in the handes either of the Church or Pope to make new articles of faith. And in the Councell of Florence, in the last session it is defined, that the Church of Rome may adde vnto the Creed. Of all the articles of faith which the pope hath added, I am perswaded that this is the worst. That Iesus Christ did not satisfie for the paine due to sinnes after Baptisme.
               
               2 God saith, Drinke yee all of this, the Pope on the contrary, Yee shall not all drink

of this, but this is the priviledge of Priests, and kings, If in the line going before, the commandement of eating bee made vnto the people, as well as vnto the Priest, why not the commandement of drinking as well?
               3 God saith in his lawe. six daies shalt thou labour. The Pope saith, Yee shall not labour six daies, but yee shall keepe a great many other resting festivall daies in the weeke.
               4 God saith, Deuter. 4.16. Take heede that yee corrupt not your selues, and make you a graven image or representation of any figure, whether it bee the likenesse of male or female. On the contrary the Pope suffereth images of God to be made in stone, and in painting, of the Trinitie in wood, and of God the Father in papall habiliments.
               5 God saith in his law, thou shalt not lust; whence it followeth, that to lust, is to sinne, and so S. Paul calleth it, Rom. 7. v. 7. The Church of Rome on the cōtrary saith, that to lust is not to sinne. And the Councell of Trent in the 5 Session saith, that this lust, which the Apostle calleth sinne, to speake properly is no sin, but onely that it springs from sinne, and makes vs prone▪ to 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
               
                  6 God saith, Thou shalt worship God onely, where he speakes of a religious kind of worship. On the contrary, the Church of Rome doth with a religious worship▪ worship the virgin Mary, the Saints, their Images, their reliques, and the Pope takes vpon him to be thus worshipped, as wee haue aboue shewed by many witnesses, & by experiences, where wee haue also refelled their evasions.
               7 God saith in the 2 of Chron. 6. cha. 30. ver. That God only knoweth the hearts of men. On the contrary the Romish Church saith, that the Saints knowe our hearts, & our thoughts.
               8 God saith in the 1. of the Apocalyps 3. v. Blessed is he that readeth, and they that hear the words of this prophecy. And S. Paul wrote vnto the people of Rome, Corinth, &c. vnto the ende that they should reade that which he wrote. On the contrary the pope forbids the people to reade the scriptures, to finde a Spanish or Italian Bible, in Spain, or Italie, is held for a capital offence and thought to be a note of heresie.
               9 God by his Apostle in the 1. to the Corinth. 14. Chap. doth beate altogether vpon this, that wee ought not to speake in the

Church with an vnknowne tongue; On the contrary, the pope doth make all his publicke service to bee read in a tongue, which the people vnderstand not, and accustometh women to pray in Latin, as though they were afraid to be vnderstood
               10 God saith by his Apostle. 1. Tim. 3, v. 12. Let a Deacon be the husband of one wife. The pope on the contrary, Let him not be married at all; and so of Bishops.
               11 God saith by his Apostle. 1. Cor. 10. If any of them which belieue not call you to a feast, whatsoever is set before you, eate, asking no question for conscience sake. On the contrary the pope saith. If hereticks invite you to a feast, eate not of flesh vpon a fish day although they carne it vnto you, for it is a case of conscience.
               12 God commandeth kings expresly to read in his law; which is the holy scripture, al the daies of their life, that they may learne to feare him. On the contrary the popish Doctors, Bishops and Confessours, which are about Kings, never recommend the reading of the scripture vnto them; for they are afraid, that by this reading they might chance to learne the truth, & come to knowe that their Crownes are not subiect

to the pope.
               Finally, The holy scripture saith that life everlasting is the gift of God;
                     Rom 6.23. Ephes. 2 8. Rom. 8.17. 1 Ioh 1.3. i. Cor. 10 11 Heb. 2.4. Heb. 9.10. & an inheritance, which wee haue as wee are the children of God. That the bloud of Iesus Christ doth purge vs from all our sins. That we eate & break bread in the Lords Supper; That Iesus as he was man, was like vnto vs in all things, sinne only excepted. That Iesus Christ was offered vp for a sacrifice but one onely time. All which doctrines are cleane overthrowne by merits, by purgatory, by transubstantiation, by the sacrifice of the Masse, as wee haue formerly shewed.
               In all these things the pope doth oppose himselfe against God, and resist his word. In so much that he suffereth a 
                     C
                           •
                        n Hac 
                           〈◊〉
                        . causa 31. quaest 1 Canon to be in his book of Decretals, which saith, that the Apostle S. Paul spoke against truth and reason.
               
            
            
               The fourth point. That the Pope doth set himselfe against Kings and Magistrats, and exalt himselfe aboue them.
               This fourth point hath been proued sufficiently

in my first book. To degrade kings and thrust them out of their kingdomes. & after that he hath denounced them deposed, to expose them to the mercy of their subiects, in saying with 
                     Con. Barclaium. c. 7. 
                  Bellarmine, that, Executio ad alios pertinet, the execution belongs to others: To tread vpon Emperours necks, and when they come to kisse his pantofle, to strike of the imperiall crowne with his foot: To make them hold the stirrup and the bridle of his horse; To whip Kings or their Ambassadors in their place with rods by way of pennance, making them to fall downe before him; for which wee haue fresh examples, and they themselues brag of it: to raise infinite sums of mony vpon their Kingdomes vnder the colour of first fruites, bulls, dispensations, absolutions; and to withhold the fift part of their subiects from them, and the third part of their kingdome; are things that cā
                  not be taken for any great good turnes, or testimonies of his loue towardes Princes. As for the exalting himselfe aboue them, pope Innocent the 3. in the Decretall that beginneth with, Solitae, puts as great a difference betweene the pope, and the Emperour, as there is betweene the sun & the

moone. Which according to the rules of Astronomie. is 6539 times lesse then the sun; and we haue seene before how Bellarmine maketh Kings as much inferiour to popes as artificers are to Kings.
            
            
               The fift point. That the Pope doth call himselfe head of the Church.
               WE need plaints rather them proofs vpō this point. For the pope doth not onely take the title of the head of the Church vpon him, but makes vs to feele the effects of it. Neither, when we say that the pope calleth himselfe head of the vniversall church, doe our adversaries say that we wrong them, but they take it hardly, that we doe not beleeue them. And I must needs condemne our selues of blockishnesse in offering to dispute about this title with him, seeing that pope Anaclet in his 3 Decretall Epistle, hath proued it so well out of the Gospel; saying, that Peter is called Cephas, that is to say, the head. For this Etymologie must needes stand for good, since the pope hath approued of it. With the like soliditie,
                     Extrau. v
                        
                           •
                        m sanctā.
                   doth pope Boniface the 8

ground this superiority vpon the very first line of scripture. In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth.
               
               It is true, that to shift of the matter, they vse to say that the pope is but a ministeriall head. But herein mee thinkes they doe delude themselues, because these wordes of a ministeriall head, are meerely contradictory, for it is as if one should say, a kingly subiect, or a masterly servant. And there is no king in the world, which hauing sent his Vice-gerent into a Province, woulde endure that hee should call himselfe king, although he should excuse it, and say that he were but a ministeriall king, And do we thinke that Iesus Christ, whome the holy scripture calleth the head of the church, will be well pleased that a man should take this title vpon him, vnder the pretext that some doe excuse it by,, saying that he is an inferiour, or ministeriall head? And yet for all this, not forbeare to rule like the cheife head, as it often falleth out, that vnder the title of the Kings Lieutenant many, doe vsurp the authority of the King.
               But this is an other question. It is sufficient for vs if it appeare that the Pope names himselfe head of the church, for this

is enough for the fulfilling of the prophecie contained in these words, that the son of perdition shall sit in the temple of God. For it is not without cause, that the holy ghost doth vse this worde of sitting, in steede of raigning. Because this is a word whereby the dignity, and papall authority is commonly exprest. It is said, that he sitteth in the chaire of S. Peter, the common fashiō of speech is to say that Boniface or Clement sate so many yeares, insteed of saying they governed the church so long. And so doth the whore speak in the 18. of the Apocal. I sit as Queen, that is to say, I rule, shee the sāe sat vpon many waters, which are the people and nations, Apoc. 17. ver. 15. To sit therefore in the tēple of God, signifieth to take vpon him to rule in the temple of God.
               This temple of God, is the church of God: according to the stile of the new Testament, S.
                  2. Cor. 6.19 
                  Paul speaks thus to the church of Corinth, What agreement hath the temple of God with Idoles? For yee are▪ the temple of the living God. So likewise it is said in the Apocalyps chap. 3. Him that overcommeth will I make a pillar in the temple of my God. And in the 11. c. the Angel of God cōmandeth S. Ioh. to mete the tēple of God, which is not a building of stones, but the church

of God, called by S. Paule the house of God.
               
               I am not ignorant that some of the Ancient by the Temple of God, haue vnderstood the temple of Ierusalē,
                  1. Tim. 3.15 with the like cōiecture, as they haue said that Antichrist should be Nero, raised vp againe from the dead. But there be some others of the Ancient which contradict them. Chrysostome vpon this place. He shall sit in the temple of God, not in that of Ierusalē, but in the church Theophylact, and Oecumenius, vsing lightly to follow him, say the same. Authors, whō 
                  Bellar. hath thus falsified; He shall sit in the temple of God, not only in that of Ierusalem. This Only is of his own, falsly put in cōtrary to the reading of all copies. S. Hierome sheweth himselfe cleerly to be of this opiniō. He shal sit in the Temple of God, that is either in Ierusalē, or in the church, which later expositiō I take to be the truer of the two.
               
               Others thinke to catch vs with a subtilty, and say. If the sonne of perdition be sate in the church, and the Pope be that sonne of perdition, it followes that the church of Rome is the church, since the Pope is sate there. The Apostle lendeth vs a helping hand to get out of this difficulty. For every one knowes that it is one thing to sit, and another thing to bee sate; the one notes a

moving, the other a resting; the one signifies to take a place, and the other to keepe it. This is the reason why the Apostle hath set it downe in the accusatiue, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , to represent a moving vnto vs. His meaning then is that the Pope shall sit in the temple of God, and take place there, but he doth not deny that after he is entered into the temple, and is sate there, hee shall driue the service of God thence. The temple of Salomō, was it not the house of God? And yet the Priests which were sate there changed it into a den of theeues: how much more if they had brought Idolatry into it? They therefore which knowing the abuses of the Church of Rome, say that they must not go out of it because Antichrist is there, suffer themselues (as it seemeth to me) to be bound with a straw, and to be held with a slight reason▪ and I cannot sufficiently wonder at their foolishnesse: for they speake as if they should say. We may not go out of this house, for the plague is here; or thus, that we may not be the children of perdition, we must be subiect to the sonne of perdition. We confesse that the Church of Rome was the true church, when the Pope was first establisht

therein, as well as the Greeke church, the Syrian, or Armenian, but whē he was once establisht there, by little, and litle he overthrew religion, so that they, which look to be saved, must of necessity goe out of her; And he that shall go out of her, goeth not out of the vniversall Church, but out of a particular corrupted church.
            
            
               The fourth part of the Prophecie of S. Paule.
               
                  6 And now ye know what withholdeth, that he might be revealed in his time.
               
                  7 For the mysterie of iniquity doeth already worke.
            
            
               The exposition of this prophecie.
               
                  6 And now ye know what it is that staieth his comming, which shall come to passe, at the time appointed, and foreordained by God.
               
                  7 For the foundations of this sonne of perditions dominion are already laied. And Satan doth even now draw out the thre
                     •
                  des, and spin the beginnings of his doctrine, which shall be woven togither by an abominable art, and full of wicked craft.
            
            
               
               The proofe of this exposition.
               For to proue this exposition, wee are to shew two things. 1. That there were some seedes of Papistry sowen even in S. Paules time. 2. That Papistry is built with artificiall mysteries, & fraudulent devises.
            
            
               The first point. That there were some seeds of Papistry sowen even in S. Paules time.
               1 THe affectation of preheminencie in the church. 2. The religious service done to creatures. 3. The Distinction of meates, and of daies. 4. The allurements of philosophy. 5. The traditions of men; all these are the maladies of the Papacie, and vices of the church of Rome.
               There were some seedes of these vices sowne in the Apostle S. Paules time. For even at that time, one called himselfe the disciple of Peter, another of Paule, and a third of Apollos; which were enflamed with emulation about chiefdome. The encrease of which disorders was for the present hindered

by the humility, and vnion of the Apostles. And it may well seeme not to bee without great consideration, that the same Apostle hath advertised the Romanes not to be high-minded, vnder the paine of being cut of. Rom. 11. For although the same instruction be giuen in general to the gentils, yet doth he meane it more in speciall to the Romans; foreseeing that their fall would come by pride; & giueth them this information, which they should take insteed of a prophecy.
               2 There were some of them too which were giuen to worship Angels, whom hee reprehendeth in his epistle to the Colossians, 2. chap. Let no man (saith he) beare rule over you, by humblenesse of minde, and worshipping of Angels.
               
               3 There were euen in those daies these words heard, Eate not, taste not, touch not. Col. 2. and many made a conscience of eating certaine meates. 1. Cor. 10. Rom. 14. and this for a religious exercise, and out of a voluntary devotion, & for no other end but to keepe downe the flesh. Then did some begin to make a distinction between daies, as if one had beene better then another, Rom. 15.5. Gal. 4.10.
               
                  4 Then were there some, that sought to seduce the simple by philosophy; where of S. Paul doth also admonish the faithful. Beware that no man spoile you through philosophy, and vaine deceipt.
               
               5 In the same place he forbiddeth the Colossians to sticke to the traditions of mē; and he toucheth the corruption, that was growing amongst thē. Out of these sparks, through continuance of time, there arose a great flame: Satan endeavouring at that time to beate vpon this yron with as little noise as might bee, which hee could not bring to that perfect forme as hee desired, till many ages were past; There were many yeares to be imployed about the licking of this beare, before it could be brought to any handsome shape. The authority of the Apostles, the zeale of their disciples, the violence of persecutions, did stop him frō going forwards in his worke; but if frō the very infancie of the christian church, & in the sight of the Apostles, he did begin to set about this mysterie of iniquity; what did he do after these lights were extinguished, after this zeale was waxen cold; is it likely that hee woulde forget his former worke, or begin it so earely to cast it off at

last? Seeing that if Antichrist must be such a one, as our adversaries describe him to be, to wit, a Iew, one that must build vp Ierusalem againe, and be a soveraigne monarch over the whole world, we see no beginnings yet of all this, nor nothing more vnlikely to come to passe.
            
            
               The second point. With what cunning the prophecie is built and of the diverse sortes of guile that are therein.
               AS the Apostle calleth the doctrine of our redemption, a secret or mistery of godlynesse, because of the height, & depth thereof: so doth he call the doctrin, which is framed with deceipt, and continued by deepe policie, a secret or mistery of iniquitie: which is the selfesame with that, which the spirit of God in the 2. of the Apocalyps calleth the deepnesse of Satan.
               The policies imployed about the building of Poperie, and establishment of the papall dignity, are of 4. sorts. 1. There be some of them, which serue to blinde the people, and to darke their vnderstandings.

2. There bee others that serue to heape vp riches; 3. There be others that serue to exalt the pope, and his clergie to honour, & dignitie. 4. There bee others which serue for the preservation of that which is gotten.
            
            
               The first sort of Policie serving to blind, and inveigle the people.
               THat the people therefore might bee blinded, and deceaued without vnderstanding so much; the pope hath wrested the scriptures out of their hands, and takē order that they should not bee translated into a knowne tongue. Within these fewe yeares, the scriptures were no more knowne to the people of France, then the Alcoran was: There were only some Latin Bibles in Monasteries, and in clergie mens houses. And evē at this very time in Spain, Italie, Sicilie, &c. to see an Italian or Spanish Bible, would be deemed to bee a prodigy, and thought a matter sufficient to fetch one vnder the inquisition. To the same ende it is that hee will haue the common service read in a strange tongue, and the women and children are taught to

pray in Latin, for feare they should vnderstand themselus. This once effected, it was easie for the Pope to drawe religion to his owne profit, & to disguise it as he thought best; the poore people suffering themselus perforce to bee led along by these guides, which haue hoodwinckt their eies. Neverthelesse because it is the nature of the people to be busie about some thing; having taken away the scripture from them, insteed thereof he gaue them images, together with many outward ceremonies, & gay ornaments, to the end that whilst they stood gazing vpon these he might the easier display his nets to ensnare them; Some pretty recreations they haue for to occupy their mindes, whilst hee in the Interim builds a strong fort round about them, for to keepe them in slavish bondage.
               2 But because, be you never so carefull herein, yet there will ever be some curious spirits that will escape and get out, and that it is hard, but that some one or other will be desirous to see the head spring and knowe vpon what authoritie Christian religion is founded; for feare least such a man as this, hauing gotten the sight of the scripture by stealth, should bee offended

for to see it so little agreeing with the doctrine of the Romish Church, they haue sought to prevent this inconvenience, by an impudent shift. That is, they vse to revile the scripture, saying that it doth not containe all things necessary to salvation, that it is but a peece of a rule, that it is obscure, and ambiguous, that the divell himselfe makes vse of it, that it is not the chief iudge of controversies; but that frō thence wee must appeale to the Church of Rome, which cannot bee deceaued, and to the Pope which cannot erre in the faith; By these meanes they haue made the rule of religiō subiect vnto themselues, since that they themselues, are the rule of religion: and haue made themselues, both iudges & parties, since that in the accusatiōs against the Church of Rome, they will haue the Church to be iudge, and acknowledge no other true Church but the Church of Rome.
               3 To the same end is it that they bind and tie the beliefe of the people, with an ignorant respect, making them to followe without vnderstanding, and to beleeue without knowledge, whereas the 
                     Iob. 10 4.17.8.6.69. Scripture would haue vs first know & then belieue.

So doe they fold the faith of an ignorant man within the faith of his curate; but take away the means from him, where by hee might knowe whether his Curate taught the truth or no.
               This also serueth to detain mens minds, to wit, that the Church of Rome by varietie of recreations hath studied to fit it selfe to all sorts of humors, and to content all kind of persons; There is not so distasting a spirit, but may finde something here to please his palat. Doe you loue pompe and magnificence? where is the like to that of the Cardinals, and Prelates? or set out with that stately furniture, as their most solemne Masses are? But if a sordid life bee more pleasing to any one, you haue the Capuchins, and Fevillants; doe you loue to liue at your ease? you haue your Abbays, and Priories, together with richly landed places for Canons and Monckes: who enioy their hearts desires, & haue the world at wil; but if you like rather to liue like a beggar, you haue the 4. orders of begging Friars; if you affect solitarinesse, you haue the Hermits; if to keepe company, you haue the Convētuall Mōks; are you desirous of knowledge, behold the

Iesuits that take vpon them to professe it; or if ignorance? you haue the ignorant Friars, which haue made a vertue of ignorāce; Doth insolencie, and lasciviousnes, like any one, there is shrouetide, a time appointed to daunce, and revell in, which sportes if any chance to distaste, presently therevpon ensueth ash-wednesday, which chā
                  geth their countenances, and turneth all their lewd mirth into a suddaine devotion. At Rome you haue covents of cloystered Monckes wonderfull for their austerity, & stricktnesse of life; and hard by, the commō stewes: liberall almes bestowed on the hospitall of the holy Ghost; but withall selling of benefices, dispensations, absolutions, and Church offices.
               All this is done in divers places, and by divers men, but behold contrary things in one and the selfe same person. The Pope makes Emperours to kisse his feet, but hee himselfe on Maundie Thursday washeth poore mens feet; he calleth himselfe a Monarch & God vpon earth, but ye shal heare him at another time, say that he is the servant of servants. Pretty diversity, and delightfull; a witty people, to cloath religion with this variety of colours. There are

none there, euen to little children of 6. and 7. yeares old, but shall haue some thing or other that wil content them; there are certaine feasts of purpose for them, as the feast of S. Catharin, and S. Nicholas, when they are clad in gay apparell, when they are led about in procession, & haue little painted pictures giuen them to beare in their hāds. When they are 9. or 10. yeares old they haue their heads bound about with fillets, and little crosses laid vpon them of beaten gold, thē the bishop stroaks their crowns, and this is that which they call confirmation.
            
            
               The second Policie serving to gaine.
               IN the second place, Popery hath made religion serue, as a meanes to gather vp riches;
               1 This is the reason why they haue made a new article of faith, which overthrowes the whole gospel: to wit; that Iesus Christ by his passion hath not satisfied for the paine due to our sinnes which wee commit after Baptisme, but that it lieth vp on vs to satisfie for them, by doing pennance in this life, and after this life by beeing

in the fire of Purgatory; a fire, seauen times more hot then common fire is, and wherein a man shall fry for many ages togither. But such is the mercy of his Holinesse, that hee pardoneth a great deale of this time to some, whither it be by iurisdiction, or else by way of suffrage.
               2 To the same end is it, that they tie their pardons to certaine churches, and hang them on certaine altars; to which this priviledge is granted, that whosoeuer shal cause a Masse to bee said there, on such a day, shal haue his choice to free what soule he will out of Purgatory; but this is neuer done without paying; And in the buls of Indulgence there is this clause ordinarily inserted, that this priuiledge is for none, but Manus porrigentibus adiutrices, for such as shall put to their helping handes, that is to say, for such as shall giue some thing to the Church, or which shall put some thing into the poore mans boxe, which for this purpose is set before the church dore where the pardons are hanged. Wherein wee may note a notable point of subtilty, for the Pope sending his Iubilee into Fraunce, sendeth it but onlie into two or three places of the Realme, &

not thorough the whole Country, for so it would be hard for him to gather in the cō
                  tributions; and the summes of mony being dispersed must needs be much diminished in passing through so many mens hands.
               3 With the like cūning is it, that they vse to make the people institute obits, and yearely masses to bee said for their soules, which are bought at a deare rate. For to hope to haue Masses without mony, were but a folly; it is no reason that a mā should die cheape; yet this is one commodity that in this happy age, euery one is received into paradice for his mony; it cannot be imagined what profit they reap hereby: seeing that there is no mā which would not gladly giue all 
                     〈◊〉
                   he were worth, to bee delivered from a fire that should torment him but for halfe an howre, how much more to be freed from a fire wherein hee should lie burning I know not how many hundreth years; these were the meanes by which this shamefull gaine beganne first to encrease, whereby bodyly pennance, is turned into a pecuniarie mulct; they cannot haue the earth broken vp for them to be buryed in, nor the bels rung out, nor be named in the Memento without mony; yea & the masses

are solde for more and lesse according to the degree of the solemnitie that they are set out in; there are none but the poore in a bad taking when they die. The 4. orders of the Friars Mendicant never come to visit them vpon their death beds, neuer accompany them to church at their funerals, nor do them any other seruice. For the Taxe booke in the chapter of matrimoniall dispensations, in the 23. leafe, doth put for an vndoubted maxime, that Hae gratiae non cō
                     ceduntur paup ribus, quia non sunt, ideo non possunt consolari. These favours are not grā
                  ted to the poore, because they are not, therfore they cannot bee comforted. For as thē they thought thēselues to stand on so sure ground, that they might scoffe at the people without any danger, and bragge how they had abused them.
               4 The inuocation of Saints, and miracles, and supposed reliques, haue, and still do serue to the same end; for if one Saint be in credit, every one carieth his offrings to him; The Curate liues by this, & the village fareth the better for it; And when the people come to kisse the reliques, the basen is never farre of. To go away without casting any thing into it, would bee

thought to haue beene done in contempt, and be censured for an vncivill part; Their solemne feastes are daies of collection, which for this reason, haue beene so much the more multiplied; On such times as these, the Saints are better clothed then they vse to bee ordinarily, and the Virgin Mary doth change her attire.
               5 To the same end is it that the Pope hath invented a thousand inhibitions for certaine meats, As also that hee hath forbidden marriage in the third & fourth degree, & in spirituall parentage, & in Lent, &c. Because look how many the more inhibitions there are, by so much the greater need haue we to seeke for more dispensations, which do alwaies bring some profit.
               6 The Clergie it selfe is not exempted hence, vpon whom the Pope doth raise yearely payments, and contributions, and makes every Archbishop amōgst them to buy his Pall at a deere rate, which is a white Pall; 4 fingers broad, with buttons of lead, covered over with blacke silke, made of the wool of certain Lambs which are bread at S. Agnes in Rome, according as it is related in the 1 booke of holy

                     〈2 pages missing〉
                  
                  
vate designes of princes; If any one bee intended to trouble a state, and to make the people take armes against their King, his next way is to fall in with the Father confessours, that so he may knowe howe they are inclined, and by confession egge them on to rebellion.
               5 Absolution after confession doth adde no lesse authoritie vnto them; For by this it is that they haue vsurped a temporall dominion, yea ouer kings and princes; The pope will absolue a King, but vpon some tyrannicall conditions; to wit, if hee will submit himselfe to be ierkt, & to take a certaine number of lashes by the handes of Monkes; or goe in pilgrimage, or make his land tributary to the pope, holding it as from S. Peter, or send so many souldiers to such or such a country, for the service of his Holinesse; whereof we haue produced many examples aboue.
               6 In publike ceremonies, in Masses, in Sittings, & Feasts, they haue taken vpon them to be princes superiours, and exact slavish submission at their hands; The Kings must serue popes at the Masse vpon their knees; They must hold his stirrup as he is getting vp to horse; They must hold

his horse by the bridle as he is going; or else help to beare vp his chaire with their shoulders; they must wait vpon him at the table. And at the popes feast the chiefe Cardinall Bishop, is to sit aboue the highest prince of Christendome; and it is a notable maxime, and infallible rule, which is mentioned in the 3 booke 1. sect. and 2. chap. of popish ceremonies; to wit; Note that the Pope doth never doe reverence to any man.
               
               7 If there bee any fountaine that is good against the stone, or to comfort the stomacke, and strengthen the sinnewes, presently there is the statue of some Saint or other sent, and erected hard by it; as if this were done by some miracle and by vertue of the Saint, that so they may the more confirme superstition.
               8 They haue also yet more exalted themselues by their works of supererogation, by vertue of which, they obtaine a degree of glory in Paradice aboue the common Saints, which had no other sanctitie but to obay God; wheras these squires do more then God hath commāded; their superaboūdant satisfactions serue for others, & the Monckes which haue suffered more

paines their sinnes deserued, are in a manner our redeemers, as Bellarmin saith in the 4. chapter of his 1. booke of Indulgences.
               
               9 The cases of marriage also haue bin a great helpe to encrease their power; for they haue remoued all matters of this nature from the courts of ciuill Magistrates. Whence it comes to passe that men repaire to Rome from all parts of Europe, for the disanulling of marriages, and for dispensations to marry in forbidden degrees; the children that are borne out of which marriages, are boūd of necessity to defend the Popes authority, seeing that such marriages as these, depend altogither vpon his permission.
               10 Of the same rancke is their common service which they cause to be said in the Latin tongue. For as the Romanes did plant their language in the coūtries which they conquered, and the king of Spaine vseth the Indians to speake spanish, because it is a marke of soveraignty, and a meanes to make them the more his owne. So the Pope hath made all the churches which are vnder him glad to yeeld their necks to this yoke, & hath giuen thē the Roman tongue, for a marke of subiection to the bishoppe of Rome.
               
            
            
               
               The fourth Policie. The meanes how to keepe that which they haue gotten.
               THe Popes being thus enriched, and exalted to this height of honour, did wisely cōsider, that it was to little purpose to get, if they were not able to keepe that which they had gotten; & this is the maine point aboue others in which they haue beaten their braines, and laboured to the vtmost of their power.
               1 The first meanes, to preserue that which they had gotten, was to forbid men of the church to marry, for feare lest bishops and Curates, should encroach vpon church goods, and least they should turne little streames out of the common channel to their private families; Gregory the 1. hath told vs as much aboue, saying, that he was therefore vnwilling to admit of a marryed bishop, because a wife and children, doe vse commonly to consume the church goods.
               
               2 And for feare that Princes might come to finger their substaunce, and that their lands (for treason or other such like

crimes) might chaunce to be confiscate to the crowne, they haue got to haue their iudges, their officers, & their prisons apart yea they haue so farre forth prevailed with our ancient kings, (which were intente to nothing else but to draw the sworde, and followe the game) that their civill causes were altogither decided at Rome; they did also obtaine that the church shoulde euer be held to be vnder age, that so they might not be bound to stand to any bargaine, if it were their lucke at any time to be overtaken.
               3 And to the ende that kings & princes should not put their noses in their affaires, by medling with the choosing of 
                     De electione Papae vide 1. sect. 1. lib. sacr. Ceremon.
                   
                  Popes, as they did heretofore, they haue not only confined this election to the suffrages of a fewe Cardinals, but they shut them vp also within the Conclaue, damme vp the windowes, put in their meat vnto them at a little hole; giue them their bread cut in small peeces, their wine in cleere glasses, for feare least there should be any ticket inclosed, wherby they might receaue some information from without; They dine every one apart, without helping one another. And to make them dispatch

their businesse the sooner, their cō
                  mons are diminished, and their ordinarie made lesse from day to day; yea Princes now adaies thinke themselues highly favored if they can buy the Cardinals voyces for huge summes of mony, to the ende they may haue a Pope that will not handle them too rigorously; And there is scarse ever a Pope made but by such meanes as these.
               4. The same politicke wisdome of theirs hath suggested this maxime vnto them, that for the strengthning of their state they must of necessitie oblige great families, and let them haue a share in the pray. Wherefore if a Prince or Lord haue a house overcharged with children, they will bestow a Cardinallship on the youngest, and make him an Abbot, or a Prior, this makes the house the lighter. A father hauing put his daughter into some religious order, is not troubled to provide her a dowrie against her marriage day. They giue civill magistrates leaue, and make them capable of holding benefices, although they be married, so to make them obliged.
               5 The chiefest point of their policie,

is their thrusting of Prelates, and other churchmen into Councels, & into Courts of Parliament, to the end they may know all the affaires of a Realme; which is more; Cardinals promoted to this honour by Popes, sit in the Councels of kings, against all the rules of state, that a king should admit such into his Councel, as are the creatures of a stranger; By the like reasō, kings should also for their parts haue some lay men in all Ecclesiasticall assemblies, and generall Councels, which should haue an eie over their actions, and knowe what they did; but they are to wise to suffer this.
               6 This is not sufficient: For because amongst Prelats, Bishops, Abbots, and the most quallified men of the clergie, there are ever a great many honest, & well minded persons, which doe loue their countrie and the liberty of their Kings, the Pope hath therefore here and there dispersed a great rabblement of petty Monks which should preach the obedience due to him; who meriting for themselues, and others, haue receaued certaine prerogatiues of holinesse from the Pope, which others haue not; The fraternitie of the Cordeliers haue the privilege to drawe a soule

out of Purgatory vpon certaine daies. The Carmelites haue the prerogatiue not to be in purgatory beyond the Saturday after their deaths. To weare the cowle, & make the vow of S. Francis & S. Dominick, doth confer the same grace that baptisme doth as Bernardine telleth vs in his Rosarie, and Thomas of Aquine, in his 4. booke of Sentences, and fourth Distinction.
               
               7 But aboue all, their greatest policy, and all the depths of the mysterie of iniquitie haue beene discouered in their inventing the order of the Iesuites; which leaue the honour of keeping the vowe of pouertie, and chastitie to other orders, binding themselues chiefly to the vow of obedience, being tied in particular by an oath to the pope, whom they sweare to obay, In omnibus, & per omnia, with an obedience, which they call a blind obedience, such as doth execute the commandements of a superiour, without inquiring why; which are sent to run over the whole earth even to the Indies, which haue a permissito goe in Lay mens apparell, and to vse equivocation in iudgement, and not to reveale the confessions of traytours, & conspiratours against the life of their Kings:

which take nothing from any by parcels, but catch by grosse, & swallow vp whole families together.
               All these tricks, and devises, tend chiefly to the ruine and reproach of kings, whō his Holinesse doth cause to bee whipt most shamefully, and with whose crownes hee dispenseth at his pleasure.
               8 It is true indeed that the pope doth recompense them; For hee giueth them of his spirituall graces, an Holy Rose, a Standard, or a sacred sword, a Boxe full of holy Graines, of little crosses, and beads, which in kissing and carrying about them, they shall gaine an hundred yeares of pardon. As also the priviledge of communicating vnder both kinds. Whoe will not stand amazed to behold these things? Or who will be so obstinate as not to be forced by the evidence of the truth? Although al this which I haue said is little, or nothing; I had need of better eies to looke downe in to the bottome of this so deepe a mystery. Wee haue produced nothing of this but what we haue knowne by experience. But how much more is that which lies hid, and which we doe not knowe? All other policie is but blockishnesse in respect of this,

and I am of opinion that they which are the contrivers of it, can hardly look vpon one another without laughing. Finally this is altogether such a subiect, as God doth demand for to shew that he doth cō
                  found the wisdomes of men, and take the subtill in their own devises. But the Apostle calls vnto vs, intending to make the matter more cleere yet.
            
            
               The fourth part of this prophecy.
               
                  7 Only he which now withholdeth, shall let till he be taken out of the way.
               
                  8 And then shall that wicked man bee revealed, whome the Lord shal consume with the spirit of his mouth, and shall abolish with the brightnesse of his comming.
            
            
               The explication of this prophecy.
               
                  7 There is nothing but one that hinders the disclosing of this Bishop. That is, that the Roman Empire (which doth now oversway the whole world) must remaine yet for a time, and afterwards be abolished.
               
                  8 And when this Roman Empire shall bee destroyed, then shall this Bishop bee fully

disclosed, and the Papall see shall bee exalted by the ruines of the Empire, which Bishop God shall beat downe, & weaken by the preaching of his word, but shall not destroy him vtterly till the last day of iudgement, then when Iesus Christ shall come in his glory.
            
            
               The proofe of this exposition.
               FOr the proofe of this interpretation, we are to shew, 1. That the papacie is encreased, and exalted by the ruines of the Empire, 2. That God hath weakned the papacie by the preaching of his word.
            
            
               The first point. That the Papacie is encreased by the ruine of the Roman Empire.
               THe Apostle saith, That hee which doth obtaine shall obtaine, or that hee which boldeth must hold; By him which holdeth he vnderstandeth him, which possesseth, or holdeth rule; which cannot bee vnderstood but of the Roman Empire, which did as then beare rule over a great part of the world. For the worde 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   which

he vseth, doth signify to possesse. as in the 1. to the Cor. chap. 7. v. 30. Hee foretelleth vs therefore that the Empire which did beare rule must be abolished, and that out of the ruines of the Empire the sonne of perdition must exalt himselfe, & bee made manifest. The same word signifies also to withhold, or hinder; which also agreeth to our purpose. For the Roman Empire while it was in force did hinder the pope from rising, and kept him vnder, by punishing him, driuing him to corners, degrading him, if at any time he failed to do his duty. But this Empire being decayed in the West, & diminished in the East by the Sarasins, The popes found means to seize vpō the chiefe citie of the Empire, together with a great part of Italie, & to devoure the neighbouring Churches, and Realmes at his pleasure.
               Now although the Fathers haue spokē nothing concerning these things, but only by guesse, & coniectures; because they were not as yet come to passe, nevertheles I knowe not how it hath come to passe to bee a generall receaued opinion amongst them, and a common prophecie, that this sonne of perdition whom they call Antichrist,
                  
should rise out of the destruction of the Empire, and be exalted vpon the ruins thereof: And they apply this passage to that purpose, wherin they al hold that Antichrist is spoken of: Tertullian in his book of the resurrection of the flesh, chapter 24 Onely (saith he) hee which now holdeth, must hold till he be abolished; what is this but the Roman Empire, the scattered parts whereof being divided amongst tenne kings shall produce Antichrist, and then shall that wicked man be revealed, &c. Chrysostome in his 4. sermon vpon the second to the Thessalonians, What is it therefore that withholdeth, that hee bee not made manifest, that is to say, what is it that hindreth him from being revealed: some say that it is the grace of the holy Ghost, others say that it is the Roman Empire, of whose opinion I am altogether. The Greeke scholiast gathered out of diverse interpreters, saith the same. By him which holdeth, hee vnderstandeth him which hindreth; And what is this? some say that it is the holy Ghost, others that it is the Roman Empire, and this opinion is the best; S. Austin in his 20. booke and 19. chap. of the cittie of God: Whereas the Apostle saith, that only he which now holdeth, must hold till hee be abolished,

this is thought by some and that not absurdly to be spokē of the Roman Empire, as if it had beene said, Only hee which now beareth rule, must rule, till he be put from it. Primasius; The Roman Empire shall be destroyed before that Antichrist bee revealed; S. Ierome saith the same in the 11. quest. to Algasia where he doth expoūd this place, If the Roman Empire bee not first destroyed, and Antichrist goe before, Christ shall not come. And a litle after, hauing said that the name of blasphemy written in the forehead of the harlot clad in skarlet, is, Roma aeterna, hee addeth, that the Apostle durst not say in expresse tearms that the Roman Empire should bee abolished, for feare of drawing persecution vpon the Church.
               Since therefore that the destruction of the Roman Empire must goe before the manifestation of the sonne of perdition which is called Antichrist, we are to looke whether this Empire be destroyed. For if it be found that it was long since ruinated, there is no question but the sonne of perdition is made manifest.
               Here vpon there is a question moved whether the Empire of Germanie bee the true Roman Empire, and the same Empire

which was in the Apostles time. There be some that affirme this, building vpon this ground, that the Emperour of Germanie is called King of the Romans. Others say that we are not to stand on wordes, but things: And that the Romā Empire, wherof S. Paul speaketh, is no more, as Machiavell saith in his 1. booke of the Florentine historie: that, L' Imperio é tutto in terrâ. the Empire is all fallē flat vpō the ground. That the Empire of Germanie came not by succession from the auncient Romane Emperours; but that Charles the Great, King of France was the first founder of it. That the Emperour of Germanie holdeth nothing neither in Rome nor in Italie. That Germanie for the most part is out of the ancient Roman Empire. That it is vnlikely that hee should be the Roman Emperour, which is not onely not Emperour of Rome, but sendeth to Rome to tender his submission, and to take an oath of allegiance and obedience to him that beares sway there, to wit, to the Pope of Rome. And indeed Lypsius whoe hath spent his whole study in an exact knowledge of the Roman Empire, and which in this point yeelds to no man living, affirmes boldly

that the Pope holdeth the remainder of this Empire; wherefore hee saith that this Pope and Roman Dictatour doth sustaine the parts of this ruined edifice. That hee hath his Senate clad in purple, whom wee may compare to Kings; That hee hath imposts, and Embassadours from farre countries. That Kings themselues, and Princes doe bend before him, and bow down their heads in token of subiection. Wherevpon also he saith that this sacred Empire at Rome, hath beene, and is, insteed of an ankor to floating Europe: And in my opinion the Pope and his Parasites do but plainly scof at the Emperor, in calling him king of the Romans, since that they haue taken away all Rome and Italy from him. But we need not here go about to decide this differēce; for it is is sufficient that all confesse the Roman Empire long since to haue beene so decayed, that one may say truly that it is ruinated, and destroyed; as say that our Kings should bee thrust out of al France, except it were a little Corner in Brittany, one might say that their kingdome were destroyed, & abolished. Besids, Bellarmine doth not see how he doth contradict himselfe, in affirming that the Roman Empire

whereof S. Paule speakes is not yet abolished: For hee saith by a consequent that the Empire of Germanie doth hinder the comming of Antichrist: which being granted, there is no likelyhood that Antichrist must be a Iew which shall take vp his seat in the kingdome of Ierusalem, for the Emperour of Germanie hath no meanes to hinder this.
               This then being out of question, to wit, that the Roman Empire, whereof S. Paule speakes, is already ruinated, it must needs also be that the sonne of perditiō is already made manifest; since that hee is to rise out of the ruines of the Empire, and bee made manifest by the abolishment therof. We are therefore to finde out some state that did raise it selfe by the fall of the Roman Empire: the head whereof must call himselfe God, and take vpon him to rule in the house of God, which is his Church, and boast of signes and miracles: Doubtlesse the Turke never tooke such titles: & there shall no man but the Pope be found to whom all these things will agree: who hath also made the seate of his Pontificall Empire in the same towne, which in the Apostle S. Pauls time was the seate of the

Roman Empire, and which for many ages together was the chiefe cittie of the Empire: so that it cannot bee denied but that he holdeth the same place which the Roman Emperours did of old: And this is so knowne a thing that our adversaries thē
                  selues are forced to confesse it, some of whose testimonies wee will cite. Nicholas Machiavell dedicateth his Florentine historie to Pope Clement the 7: And yet for al that, in the 1. booke there of hee is not afraid to speake in this manner: The Emperour therefore becomming a Christian, and withdrawing himselfe to Constantinople, it followed therevpon that the Roman Empire came to decay, and the church of Rome to encrease the more: neverthelesse till the comming of the Lombards (all Italie being vnder the rule of Emperors or Kings) the Popes never tooke any other authoritie vpon them at that time, but to looke into mens manners, and their doctrine: In other matters they obayed the Emperours or Kings, which sometimes did put them to death, and imploy them as their servants in what businesse they pleased: but that which woone them the more honour, and made them to be the more respected in Italie, was King Theodoricks laying

siege to Ravenna: because Rome remaining without a Prince, the Romans to haue the more refuge, were compelled to yeeld the Pope the more obedience. Yet they did not gaine much authoritie by this, only the Church of Rome got to be preferred before that of Ravenna. But the comming of the Lumbards, & the division of Italie into so many parts, were the occasions of the Popes rising. Because he (being as it were the head at Rome) the Emperor of Constantinople, and the Lumbards did so far forth respect him, that the Romans by the Popes meanes did enter a league of friendship with the Lombards, and with Longinus, not as subiects but as friends. And so the Popes continuing to be friends both with the Lombards, and with the Graecians, did encrease their dignitie; but a little after ensued the downefall of the East Empire, which hapned about that time vnder the Emperor Heraclius, by the Sclavonians, Persians, Sarasins, &c. He addeth farther that the Pope being not able to obtaine succor from the Emperour against the Lombards, sought to the kings of Fraunce for aide, and that all the wars which were in Italie after that time were raised by the Popes, which made Barbarians come to succour them,

vnder which word of Barbarians hee doth also comprehend the French, who were the only men that did vphold the Papacie as it was falling, and which gaue the Pope whatsoever he doth possesse in Italie. Finally hee concludeth this whole narration with these words. Wherfore to describe that which followed after this time, wee neede no more to tell of the ruine of the Empire which is vtterly decayed, but how the Pope came to encrease.
               
               Hee that woulde see more particularly how the bishop of Rome hath made his cō
                  modity by the ruine of the Empire, let him read Sigonius his historie of the kingdome of Italie. In the beginning of his 3. booke he relateth how (the Emperour Philippicus Bardanes, opposing himselfe against the receiving of images into churches) Pope Gregory the 2. did for bid the Italians to receiue any letters frō the Emperour, to pay him any tribute out of their mony, to place his statue in their temples, or so much as once to name him in their publike service. This was the first time that the Popes did rebell against the Emperours, being much enfeebled by the Sarasins in the East, and spoiled of the Empire of the West. Before

then they tooke heed not to raise any mutinies. Now this first attempt of the Popes fell out in the yeare of our Lord, 712. yet this stroke drew no bloud, for no man did for all this withdraw himselfe from beeing subiect to the Emperour. And Sigonius tels vs plainly that eleven yeares after, the Emperour Leo gaue Marin, an Esquire of his body, the governmēt of the city of Rome, which place they that helde were called Dukes of Rome, to whom he gaue in commission to put Pope Gregorie to death: which he being not able to effect (the authority of Emperours as then decreasing from day to day, he commanded his Lieutenant in Italie who was called the Exarch, to spoile him of his Popedome, & to degrade him; But Gregorie sued to the vsurpers of Lombardie for aid, against the Emperour his naturall Prince: And his dispute concerning the service of images served him for this purpose, wherein vnder the colour of devotion he did oppose himselfe against the Emperors, which did beat downe images in all places; and having perswaded the Italians that to overthrow images was to overturne Christian religion, hee made the Emperours odious

to the people of Italie. Till at last in the yeare 725. hee wrought them of Rome, of Campania, of Ravenna and Pentapolis to revolt from the Emperour, with a thousand cruelties practised vpon those that tooke the Emperours part; Wherevpon Sigonius concludeth thus; By these meanes Rome and the Dukedome of Rome came to be in the Popes power, being taken from the Grecians by reason of their wicked heresie; that is to say, that the Popes did take away the chiefest part of the Empire from vnder the Emperours government, because they would not yeeld to worship images. This was the pretext; but the true cause was, because the Emperour was poore & weak so that one might offend him without much danger. This notwithstanding was nothing in respect of the greatnesse to which Pepin king of France did exalt the Pope in the yeare 755. which is the time wherein the Pope did first begin to bee an earthly Prince vnder any title. Now even as when a great tree doth fall, every man runs with his hatchet to get some branch or other: Even so in the ruine of the Roman Empire, diverse Princes, and people 
                     •
                  an to the wracke thereof, and every one

snatched a part of it. But the Bishop of Rome over and aboue the possession of the head citty of the Empire, and of the country round about, did by little & little take the markes and dignitie of the Empire vpon him, to wit, his habit, & shooes of skarlet; his senate clad in skarlet, the power of enrolling some for Gods, and Canonizing them for Saints: the obeisance, & submission of all the Princes which doe agnize him▪ the Canon law in imitation of the civill: Embassadours called Legats, as those of Emperours. Papall iniunctions in imitation of the imperiall. Imposts, and tributs vnder the title of Annates and contributions. The imperiall crowne; but triple. So that becomming of a Bishop to be a King, hee did labour tooth and naile to make a monarchie of the church, & a Temporall Empire of a mysticall and spirituall body: For which purpose hee made vse of our ancient kings (especially after Lewes surnamed the Debonnayre) which being plaine meaning men, not seene in pointes of religion, thinking that to study was a disgrace for a King, suffered themselues to be led by an idle respect, vnder colour of the keyes, and S. Peters chaire, till a last

they did cease to bee their owne masters, seeing that their crowne is at the popes disposall, who takes it and giues it to whō he thinkes good▪ These things haue beene noted by Guicciardine that famous Historian in the fourth booke of his historie, where after a long discourse of the rising and advancements of the popes, hee shuts vp all with these wordes. The Popes vpon these foundations, and by these meanes being exalted to an earthly dominion, having by little and little neglected the salvation of soules, and cast aside the remembrance of divine instructions, bending their studies howe to attaine to worldly greatnesse, & vsing spirituall authoritie no farther, but as it was an instrument, and help for the temporall, did begin to shew more like secular Princes then Bishops; A 
                     Out of the Venice edition printed in the yeare 1514. in pag. 125. after these wordes Il Ba glidi Digiuno.
                   passage, which together with others the Expurgators haue razed cleane out of the last editions of Guicciardine. To be briefe he must bee very little read in history, that can bee ignorant of the accomplishmēt of the Apostles prophecy, which saith that when he which bore rule should be abolished, then the sonne of perdition should be exalted and made manifest.
            
            
               
               The second point. That God hoth staggered the Papacy by the preaching of his word, & shall destroy it finally by his last comming.
               IN the yeare of our Lord 1513. the popedome being in the heigth of worldly glory, and covering al the earth over with a darknesse more thick then that of Egypt, pope Leo the 10 began a most shamefull trafficke: sending messengers to carry his pardons into all places, who sold the remission of sinnes at a set price, and for two crownes would drawe a soule out of Purgatorie. These Babylonish merchants wēt from towne to towne venting their ware, and gathering infinite summes of money, which as they made shewe was to bee imployed in warre against the Turke, but the diuell a souldier was euer prest for this purpose; but all was converted by these Collectours to the buying of Cardinals caps, and the maintaining of pride and insolency, as if one should take a sack full of crownes, and throwe it into a deep quagmire. The holy scripture as then was no

more knowne to the people then the history of the newe Guinie. The subiect of their sermons was onely to speake of the miracles of Saints, and vertues of reliques: Iesus Christ could scarse be knowne from their common sort of Saints, and it was a long time before he could get a feastiuall day to be assigned vnto him. The common fashion was to wrap men, as they lay a dying, in a Monks gown, that so they might dy in the state of grace; this was thought to bee of no lesse vertue then a second baptisme. Amidst this so grosse ignorance which was scarse two fingers bredth from paganisme, yet for all, euen at that time, this marchandize did seeme so odious, that euery one cryed after a reformation, & many had a desire to see the fountaines and headsprings of christian religion, and to consult with the scripture that was kept hid from them. Luther did translate it into the German tongue, & being assisted by others did by vrgent perswasions exhort the people to follow the 
                     Ioh. 5. v. 3
                        •
                     
                   coū
                  sell of Iesus Christ, who willeth them to search the scriptures that they may haue eternall life: These abuses being by these meanes discouered, the Gospell was made

open vnto all, and infinite sorts of people came flocking vnto the doctrine of saluation. England, Scotland, Denmarke, Suethland, the greatest part of Germanie, & of Swizzerland, a great part of the low Countries, of France, of Hungary, Bohemia, Polonia, Morauia, and Transsyluania, acknowledged their errour, opened their eies, gaue the glory to God, and shook off the Romish tyranny, not to speak of those which euen in Italy and Spaine it selfe doe grone vnder the yoke, and earne after liberty. To these churches newly reformed in many places, we may add others which before Luthers time held the same doctrin that he did, which were in Hungaria, in Province, in the valleyes of the Alps, in Bohemia, and in diuerse other places, being the remainder of that horrible persecution, which the pope practised amongst them some foure or fiue hundred yeares since. Since what time, euen in the Countries ouer which the pope is absolute commander, the reliques are not visited so often as they were wont, and may bee seene for lesse money, then they vsed to bee formerly: The gifts and offerings of our Lady of Loretta, and of S. Iames in Gallizia,

are by two thirds lesse then they were: The badges of the 
                     They bore crosses on their breasts which waged warre for the Pope against the Turke, or any other infidels.
                   crosse, by which the pope in turning of his hand could leuie whole armies; are now no more in vse. And there be some states and common-wealths, euē in Italy it selfe, which dare argue the case, and dispute with what right hee holdeth one of his swords, to wit, the temporall. And out of doubt popery had beene abolished ere this, if Kings and Princes had not vpheld it by their power, and if their crueltie had not compelled men to yeeld vnto it for feare; and if the great revenews which the Clergie possesse did not hold many people fast bound by the bellies, & obliged to maintaine this error. Now this so suddaine and so great a change doth evidently shewe, that before euer Luther taught, many did distast this abuse, and watcht for nothing but an occasion to cast of the yoke of tyrannicall superstition, we haue therefore by the events which fell out in our fathers time seene a greate part of the accōplishment of the Apostles prophecy, which is, that Iesus Christ shoulde consume the sonne of perdition by the spirit of his mouth, which is a fashion of speech vsed by Isaiah in the 11. chap. & 4.

ver. where speaking of Iesus Christ he saith, that he shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, & slay the wicked with the breath of his lips. so, that which the Prophet calleth the breath of his lips, S. Paul calleth the spirit, or breath of his mouth; wherfore also in the 1. of the Apoc. it is said that a sharp two-edged sword went out of his mouth: which signifies the peircing vertue of his word. And out of questiō if the kingdom of the son of perdition must be established through the doctrine of lies, it must needs bee that hee must be overthrown by the word of truth. Nor doth S. Ieromes interpretation, in the 11. quest. to Algazia, cōtradict this, which will haue the spirit of his mouth to signifie the power & ordinance of his maiesty: For what is the worde of God but his ordinance? And preaching, which makes the foundations of Babylon to totter, could it haue this vertue without the power & efficacie of God for to quicken it?
               Now to shew that this finall destructiō of the son of Perditiō must not be wrought all at one blow, but by little and little, the Apostle vseth the word 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , which signifieth to wast and consume, and not to kill as the cōmon translation of the church of Rome turnes it, as if it were 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ; I do

not here dispute whether S. Paule by this discomfiture or consuming, do vnderstand an vtter abolishment, or only a weakening of the Papacie: only this I say, that the Apostle vseth such words as signifie that this destruction shall not be effected but in processe of time, and by degrees. I say moreover that God hath already put his hande to the worke, and made vs see the accomplishment of this prophecy well onward.
               For as for the finall destruction of the sonne of perdition, S. Paule hath told vs before hand that it shall not be till the day of iudgement, saying, that God shall abolish him with the brightnesse of his comming; Agreeable to the prophecy of Daniel, which makes him to last, till the thrones were erected, and the ancient of daies sate,
                  
                     Dan. 7. v. 8.9.10. 
                  and that the sessions were held, and the bookes were opened. Which we are therefore the more to note for feare least any one to delicatly impatient should flatter himselfe in his hopes and promise to himselfe that he shall liue to see the Pope vtterly abolished: for feare also least being too hasty in our desires, we come at length to murmur, and complaine as if the time were prorogued.
               This point were at an end, but that I cā
                  not

passe by 
                     Apol. contra Regem. c. 9. parag. At inq
                           ••
                        unt.
                   
                  Bellarmines allegation of Chrysostome, taken out of his 4, sermon vpon the 2. to the Thessalonians, which place (as it seemes) he did not vnderstand. Chrysostome speaketh thus, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Bellarmine in the 9. chapt. of his booke against the king turnes it thus. Quemadmodum irruens ignis passim minuta animalia etiam antequam planè adveniat procul adhuc situs terrefacit & consumit. He thought that 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   signified, passim irruere, wheras it signifies, illabi, or supervenire, & that 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   signified, terrefacere. Whereas it signifies sopire or soporare; but let vs come to that which followes.
            
            
               The fift part of this Prophecie.
               
                  3 Which wicked mans comming is by the effectuall working of Satan, with all power and signes, and lying wonders.
               
                  10 And in all deceiueablenesse of vnrighteousnesse, among them that perish, because they received not the loue of the truth that they might be saved.
               
                  11 And therefore God shall send them

strong delusion that they should beleeue lies.
            
            
               The explication of this prophecie.
               
                  9 The Pope shall come fortified with the might and efficacie of Satan, with power, and signes, and false miracles, & serving to establish lies.
               
                  10 Whereby such as are markt out to perdition shal be lewdly seduced, because they haue not loved the truth of the gospell which might haue saued them.
               
                  11 And therefore God shall suffer thē to be seduced, and to be driuen into strong delusions, and that they may beleeue lies.
            
            
               The proofe of this Exposition.
               ALthough the ordinary workes of God deserue most to be admired, yet men never wonder at these, but are still desirous to see some extraordinary thing: Few are there that take notice of the suns moving, but what a wonderment would it be to see the sun stand still? And yet notwithstanding the motion thereof is the more wonderful of the two. Man is naturally enclined to looke after extraordinary eventes,

but to to carelesse to better himselfe by them. So the Iews resorted to Christ: because of the miracle of the fiue loaues, but not to receiue instruction. This is the reason why God, being willing to direct mēs vnderstandings by naturall means, did annex miracles to the publication of his law and his gospel: that so he might plant a dutiful respect in our hearts, before he did engraue his will in them. Yet for feare that miracles by being made to commō should cease to be miracles, he thought it not fit to satisfie every mans curiosity in this, but sends vs backe to the hearing of his word: which being once confirmed by miracles in the first publication thereof, to aske any more for miracles is manifest incredulitie. Herevnto adde that Satan doth sometimes imitate the miracles of God, but never his truth, whēce it happens that he which will not beleeue except he see miracles, doth thereby (without thinking of it) sollicit Satan to worke some miraculous feates, and to sport himselfe in deluding him. This is the reason why our Lord in the 13. of Deuteronomie doth forbid vs to iudge of the doctrine by the miracles, and woulde that we should rather iudge of the miracles by

the doctrine, saying that if any one shal giue vs a signe, or wonder, and the signe or wonder which he told of should come to passe, yet we must not harkē vnto him if he once say, Come and let vs go serue other Gods; that is to say, if he shall teach false doctrine. Such were the miracles of the magicians of Egypt, which counterfaited the power of God. Such were the miracles of the ancient hereticks, who disputing against the Catholickes did alleadge their miracles, as Tertullian reporteth in 44. chapt. of the booke of prescriptions. They will moreover (saith he) speake much concerning the authority of every hereticke, that they haue more then any others cōfirmed the certainty of their doctrin that they haue raised the dead, healed the sick, foretold of events to come, that they might be reputed for Apostles: as though this also were not written, that many shall come doing great miracles, for to strengthen the deceitfulnesse of their wicked preaching. And in the 3. cha. of his 3. booke against Marcian, hee saith, that the false Christs doe worke miracles very easily. For Iesus Christ tels vs that in the last day many shall say vnto him, haue not we cast forth divels in thy name? To whome he shall answere, I know yee not, depart from

me yee workers of iniquity. And in an other 
                     Mat. 24 ver 24. Marc. 13 v. 22. place he saith, that false Christs; and false prophets shall arise, & shall shew great signes, and wonders, so that if it were possible they should deceiue the very elect. And S. Paul yet more in particular saith of the sonne of perdition which is called Antichrist, that his comming shall be with signes, and lying wō
                     ders, so called, both because they shall bee deceitfull miracles, and meere illusions, as also because they shall serue to establish a lie.
               Which made me not a little wōder how Bellarmine and others came to put miracles amongst the notes of the true church, since the spirit of God hath given it vs in these last daies for a marke of the false. And that after the miracles of the Apostles, and their disciples, we hear of no miracles foretold, but only those of false teachers, and the sonne of perdition, as the author of the commentary vpon S. Matthew (commonly fathered vpon Chrysostome) saith in the 49. sermon. We do not now acknowledge ani
                        •
                      to be the ministers of Christ because they doe profitable miracles, but because they do no
                        ••
                      of these miracles. It is an evill and adulterous generation that seeketh signes, saith

Christ in the 12. of Matthew; But the faithful rest the contented with the wil of God revealed in his word: For if we teach no other doctrine then that of the Apostles, their miracles are ours, and confirme our religion. It is for them that forge newe articles of faith, to worke new miracles, that they may be beleeued.
               Now for to finde the accomplishment of S. Pauls prophecy in the miracles of Popery, wee are of necessitie to rippe vp the whole matter from the beginning, and to see by what miracles the Papacy beganne first to be advanced.
               The Apostles & their Disciples having wrought many excellent and sauing miracles, this vertue did insensibly diminish by little and little. This notwithstanding in the third and fourth ages there were some miracles done. But wheresoever God hath his Church, the divell will be sure to build him a chappell not far of: and where he cā
                  not overthrowe the worke of God by cō
                  tradicting it, hee will obscure it by counterfeiting the like therevnto. He did therfore doe many miracles by the handes of hereticks, as S. Austin doth confesse in his 13 tract vpon S. Iohn, and in the 16. chapt.

of his booke of the vnitie of the Church, where he saith that Donat and Portius did miracles, of whom and of all those which pray towards the sepulchers of the dead, and which see visions, he saith, that they are either the fictions of lying men, or prodigies of deceitfull spirits.
               
               Satan hath for this purpose made vse of another more subtill device. For hee hath raised vp historians, which in rehearsing the true miracles of the good servants of God, doe adde some of their owne, & mingle the true with the false. Or else he himselfe hath wrought some absurd and ridiculous miracles, which hee hath patcht in among the actions of the Saints, so to make the true miracles suspected, being thought to come out of the same shop.
               
                  S. Martin did doe God great service in winning the Gaules from Paganisme, and advancing Christian religion, and was a man full of zeale, and mightie in workes; but Severus Sulpitius, which tels vs that he saw him, reporteth many things of him which turne to his disgrace, and make the whole historie ridiculous. Hee saith that Martin healed one that was possessed of a divel by giving him somthing to purge,

and that he made him void the divell out at his backe parts.
                     Tractain de trans
                           •••
                         Martini.
                   He, the same relateth how Martin did inioine a company of wild fowle not to catch any more fish, cō
                  manding them to flie thence into a desert country. A certaine man comming into one of Martins cels, & finding a fire there sate him down, tuckt vp his clothes about his knees, so to warme him the better, which Martin (who as then was in another roome) knowing by revelation, cryed out from farre. Quis nudato inguine nostrū incestat habitaculum? These tales which follow here are worse. He saith that Martin promised the mercy of Iesus Christ vnto the divell, if hee would but repent, as if Iesus Christ had died for the divels also. The brother of Martin being dead, his soule was presented before God, and for his sinnes sent to hel, there to be grievously tormented: But two Angels, came, and signified to God (for God himselfe knewe not of it) that this was the man for which Martin prayed, wherevpon God commanded that hee should bee releast, sent backe againe into the world; and restored to Martin. After his death a dog barked incessantly at certaine men as they passed

by, one of which turning backe, said vnto the dog, In the name of Martin I command thee to be quiet. What was this but to place Martin in the roome of Iesus Christ, & to make vse of his power in a matter of no importance? whereby you may see, that Satan did euen then begin to cast his proiects, how he might establish the worship of Saints in the Church, and make them which had abandoned the false Gods, change the true Saints into Idoles. Now this was about the 400. yeare of our Lord.
               But these things began dayly to growe worse and worse; for two hundred yeares after came Gregory the 1. Bishop of Rome, surnamed the Great, for what reason I knowe not; who in his dialogues doth furnish vs with other examples of this kinde. In the 1. booke and 4. chap. an Angell geldeth S.
                  
                     Nocte quadam assistente Angelo Eunuchizavi sevidit.
                   
                  Equitius in his sleep. In the same place a maid comming into a garden, and taking a lettice to eate it, crusht the divell betweene her teeth in the lettice: and this poore divell (whom belike she swallowed downe together with the lettice (being commanded to goe out and chekt by Equitius, excuseth himselfe, saying. 
                     Ego quid feci? sedebam ibi super lactuc
                           •
                        m venit illa & m
                           •
                        
                        mordit me.
                   
                  Alas what hurt did I, I was sitting quietly vpon

the lettice, and she came & bit me. The fault was in her for not making the signe of the crosse when she gathered the lettice: and it may bee the diuell would haue vanished from out the leaues, if shee had but dipped her lettice in vineger. In the 19. chapter. S. Boniface maketh a fox, with all gentlenes that may be, to bring back a chicke which he had taken away. And in the 10. chap. a Lady of good fashion is possessed with a diuell because shee lay with her husband the day before the dedication of a certaine church. In the first chapter of the 2. booke, the diuell breakes S. Bennets bell with a stone, which hee did vse to ring, when hee would haue meat brought vnto him. A little after, the same Saint burning with the fits of loue, did (for to correct the outragious insolencie of his flesh) roll his naked body vpon thornes, and nettles, till the blood sprang out againe. In the 20. chap. a Monke holdes a candle to S. Bennet all supper time, as though it had beene a sinne for him to set it downe vpon the table. In the 22. chap. the Deacon saying, as the fashion is, 
                     Si quis non communicat det locum.
                   
                  If there be any one here that doth not communicate, let him depart, two maids being buried in the church, which died

without euer receauing the Communion, rose out of their graues, went out of the church, & returned againe after the communion was ended. In the 14 chap. of the 3. book, S. Eutiche calleth a Beare his brother, giuing him a charge to lead his flock to feeding, and to bring them home still at night. In the 15. chap. some of the cloaths of this Saint, being hanged out, haue the vertue to procure raine. In the 4. booke and 21. chap. two Monkes that were hanged, doe sing most melodiously vpon the gibbet after their deathes. And this fourth booke is spent wholly in mentioning of soules, that say they are in Purgatory, not in a fire vnder the earth, that the Pope might draw them out by his Indulgences (for this invention was not yet thought vpon) but in bathes, in the wind, vnder the leaues of trees, or in the cold water. And these soules being asked why they suffered these paines, answered, because they had wronged some Monk or other, or had not giuen that to the Church which they had promised. Wherevpon Gregory stands amazed at the so frequent visions of souls, neuer heard of before. Saying in the 41. chap. Whence comes it to passe I pray you,

that in these latter daies we haue so many things revealed concerning the soules of the departed, which lay hid from vs before?
               
               Behold two abuses, euen in those daies, crept into the Church of Rome, and both confirmed by miracles, to wit, the Adoration of Saints, and the opinion of Purgatory; although this were another kinde of Purgatory, thē that, which we haue in the church of Rome now adaies. And this was not aboue 600. yeares after Christ.
               But in the two next ages following, Satan holding on his olde course, did much advance the mysterie of iniquitie, hauing raised vp a new heresie, to wit, the Adoration of images, which was no small helpe to the exalting of the Papacy. For in the controversie cōcerning Prioritie between the Patriarch of Constantinople, and the Bishop of Rome, the Emperour Phocas deciding it on the Bishop of Romes side, & a little after the Emperours forces decaying in Italie, the pope after hee had vsurpt the title of the head of the church, began to cast about how hee might shake of the yoke of the Empire: and the 
                     Bell. lib. 
                           •
                         Imag cap. 1
                        •
                      
                     parag Arg
                           ••
                        mentum. E
                           •
                         adem occas
                           ••
                        one amisit dem Leo 
                           •
                         successor es ius imperi
                           ••
                         Italiae.
                   the question concerning images falling fit to his purpose for to withstand the Emperor, which

did persecute the worshippers of images, he made himselfe Prince of Rome, and of a great part of Italy, by such meanes and degrees, as we haue formerly related. Miracles were made serue to this end, which as then were so frequent, that it was held for a miracle, not to worke a miracle. Baronius in his Annals, in the 870. yeere parag. 63. names certaine witnesses which report that three miles of from the towne of Damas, there was in former times a table or image of the virgin Mary in painting, the painting whereof came to bee flesh incarnate within the wood, and sent forth a more odoriferous oyle then balme. Luitprandus, and Platina in the life of Sergius the third, reports that when the body of pope Formosus was carryed into S. Peters church, all the images of the Saints that stood there did him obeysance. Bellarmine in the 12. chapter. of his booke of images, speakes of an Hermit that was tempted with fornication, to whom Satan promised that he would tempt him no more, that is to say, that hee would giue him the gift of continency, on conditiō that he should ever after that adore the image of the virgin Mary. This was a meanes rather to incite

him on to it afresh. There are images shewed at Burgo in Spaine, which are reported to haue fallen from heauen, and to be made by S. Luke, and images of a crucifix the haire & nailes of which do grow out new every month. Caesarius and others recite infinite miracles done by images, which did sweat, or weep, or speak, or wag the head, and it is certaine that (if at leastwise we may beleeue these people) the image of the virgin Mary hath wrought a thousand times more miracles, then Iesus Christ himself ever did in his own person. Which holy virgin they haue prophanely dishonored, by attributing such miracles vnto her as are scarsely honest. There is an Italian booke sufficiently knowne, intituled, Miracoli d' ella gloriosa virgine Maria printed at Milan in the yeare 1547. which saith that a certaine Abbesse being great with child, the holy virgin willing to cover her crime, did in her steed present herselfe before the Bishop in forme of an Abbesse, and shewd him by an ocular demonstration that she was not great with child. The same booke relateth that an honest woman snatcht the virgin Maries sonne from betweene the armes of her image,

saying vnto her, Giue me my sonne which is kept prisoner, or I will not giue thee thine, & that the virgin Mary for to haue her owne sonne did free the other womans sonne out of prison. Caesarius in his 7. booke 35. chap. reports that the virgin Mary for 12. whole yeares together, did supply the place of a certaine Nunne called Beatrice, whilst shee lay in the Stewes, till at last she came backe againe to take her place, and freed the Virgin from standing sentinell any longer. And God being enraged against the rebellion of men, hath giuen to these miracles a powerfulnes of deluding, that so the Apostles prophecy might bee fulfilled.
               Nowe looke after what manner Satan went about at first to establish the worship of Images, the same way did he go to lay the foundation of transubstantiation, & did also for the authorising of this, serue his owne turne with a new sort of false miracles. For many faithfull servants of God opposing themselues against this errour in the rising thereof, the foster-fathers of this abuse, began to invent a kinde of miracles never heard of before. A certaine Monke reportes that he saw Iesus Christ in forme

of a childe sitting vpon the Altar; another saith, that 
                     Albertus Krantzius in Metrop lib. 1 cap 9. Wernerius Role uingius de laud Westph cap 7. Sigon. de reg. Ital. ad annum 1264. Platina in Leone 3. Onuphr. in Platinae Vrbanum 4. Meierus annal. Flandri. lib. 33. 
                  Wittikind King of the Saxons, entring disguised into a church, and diligently observing the Christians fashion of receauing the communion, saw them put a litle pretty smiling boy into their mouths. Others report that they haue seen the host make the signe of the Crosse: others that they saw Angels which held a little childe vpon the altar, and afterwards cut him into a thousand small pieces. Iodocus Coccius Canon of Iuliers doth produce 35. such like examples as these, and yet doth not alleage the one moyty of them. All these miraculous apparitions of flesh, and bloud, beganne in the yeare 785, for before that time they were never heard of, nor doe our adversaries alleadge any one example of them: neverthelesse to giue colour to these new fables, by the testimony of some ancient witnesse, one (I know what manner of man) Amphylochius by name, hath written the life of S. Basill, many ages after Basill was dead, altogither different from that which Nazianzen hath writtē of the same subiect, where he saith that a Iew saw an infant torne in many pieces betweene S. Basils handes. The like fable is related by

                  Simeon the Metaphrast, a new author, in the life of Arsenius the Hermite. For it shal never be found that any author, as ancient as Basill, or Arsenius, or those which came long after, did ever speake of this. The 8. age began first to bring forth these prodigies, and impostures: Iesus Christ as then beginning to make himselfe known in the Masse, and to shew himselfe in his proper shape, beeing a perfect compleate man in heauen, and but a childe vpon earth, wholly entire in heaven, but here cut and mangled into small pieces betweene the hands of the Priest. Wherefore they do yet keepe some bloud & flesh in many churches, for feare least the people suspect that these were illusions. For Satan even in those daies did secretly begin to weaue the web of the mistery of Transubstantiatiō: which having cōfirmed by these miracles, he got it at last to passe in an article of a councell, the Lat
                        •
                     ran Councell I meane, held vnder Innocent the 3. in the yeare of our Lorde, 1215. To these apparitions they annexe the testimoines of beasts. There were an hiue of Bees seene in S, Gervays his monastery in Paris which builte a chappell of waxe in honor of the Host; but aboue all,

the miracle of the Asse that left his provender to worship the hoast, seemes most ridiculous to the king of Great Brittaine: and that with good reason: howsoever 
                     Apol. in Regem cap. 9. 
                  Bellarmine in his answere to the king seeke to colour it with other miracles mentioned in the Scripture, which, as he saith, seeme no lesse absurd to him. Wee are therefore now come to that passe, that it is helde impiety not to think that foolish legends forged but of late, must haue all one authority to bind our beliefe, as the word of God, besides, no miracles of the scripture do plāt Christiā vertues in brute beasts: for it must needes be (by their reckoning) that this Asse (going of his own accord to worship the hoast) had some zeale in him & knowledge of God, which was not to be seen in the Kine that drew the Arke, nor in Balaams Asse. The miracles that are done nowe a daies are of no more worth, and are al reducible to one miracle, which is to driue away divels, who make as though they were afraid of holy water, and the signe of crosse, so to detaine the people still in errour: and as theeues are thought to giue life when they do not take it away, so the divels are said to do good when they cease

to hurt. Wherevnto they do willingly cō
                  descend, for to make men thinke that the Masse or these cōiurations haue some vertue in them. The Pharisies accused Iesus Christ for casting out divels by Beelzebub Prince of the divels, thinking that Beelzebub did cast out others as being more powerfull then they. But we speak not as the Pharisies: for we say not that these coniurers of spirits in this age, do cast out divels by any superiority or predominancie that they haue over them, but by collusion, and by the voluntary departing of the divels themselues. Wherefore they cannot answer vs as our Lord did the Pharisies, that if Satan cast out Satan his kingdome cannot endure, because hee is divided against himselfe, for in all their exorcismes we presuppose that the diuels are to well agreed. Yea and I say, that if Christ could haue done no other miracle but to heale those which were possessed with diuels, the Pharisies had had some reason to doubt of his power: but he gaue sight to such as were borne blinde, raised the dead that lay stinking in their graues, multiplyed the bread, things which the diuels cannot doe, and which our aduersaries (though neuer so

foole-hardy in imitating) doe not yet dare to counterfait: for they haue beene manie times taken tardy in lesse matters, and punished for such pranckes by iudges of the same religion that they are. In the yeare 1509 there were fowre Iacobin Friers executed at Berne, for raising vlcers, in the feete, in the hands, and in the side of a simple man, of whom they would haue made another S. Frauncis, and giuen him the marks, as 
                     Langii Chron. Citizense ad annum. 1509. 
                  Langius witnesseth in his chronicle, and it is a thing commonly practised to this day in Swizerlād. In the year
                     S
                           •
                        e
                           •
                        dan l
                     ▪ 9 1534 the Cordeliers of Orleans did put a Novice of their profession over the vault of the church, which with pittifull sighes & great lamentation did faigne that hee was the soule the Provosts wife of Orleans, that died without giuing them any thing, and gaue them to vnderstand that she was dā
                  ned, and that her body must bee digged vp againe out of the earth. This point of knavery being detected by the Officiall, the two principall authors of it, to wit, Colimā
                   and Steven of Arras, were sent to Paris, & after iudgement past, were forthwith led backe againe to Orleans, and there in an open place (where malefactours vse to suffer)

were made to confesse their imposture. Papon in the sixth edition of his Reportes, 1. title, & 6. Iudgement. doth relate manie sentences that haue past in the high Courts against these false, and abusiue miracles. The miracles of Martha Brossiere, which was possest with a diuell, haue lately beene found to be false, and shee condemned in iudgement, Mounsieur Marescot a Physitiā that was sent for to visit her, hath written an expresse booke of this. Mounsieur Boutiller that famous advocate at Paris hath written a set tract against the fable of Gargoville of Roane, slaine by S. Roman, wherein it is said, that for a requital of this good turne, God hath done him this favor that whosoeuer doth but lift vp his coffin (be it that he bee a parricide or haue committed incest) is forthwith absolued both from the punishment, & the guilt of these crimes. Read the miracles of our Lady of Halls in Flaunders, published by Lipsius, & you shall see that the good man hath spent 40 yeares in gathering choice flowers of Grammar Latin to throw them downe at the feete of an image, and made vse of all his philosophy vpon an idle toy: there shal you see how he doth often call the Virgin

                  Deam, & Divam, Pagan-like substituting femall Gods. S. Ignatius Loyola the father and patron of the Iesuits had not for a lōg time done any miracles: but his opening vertue began of late to shew it selfe, by vnstopping the obstructions of a wench troubled with the stone & making her to leake. This is the first signe of any powerfull vertue that was in this Saint, and this goodly miracle was newly printed of late at Liege and at S. Omers, and is proclaimed by the common cryer to be sold at Paris.
               
               To go about here to reckon vp a thousand false miracles wherewith the legends are stuft, were nothing else but to rake vp heapes of dunge. S. Dominicke heales a wenches thigh, by rubbing it over with the oile of Loue, as his Legend reporteth. That of S. Frauncis saith, that he preached to the Pyes, and Swallowes, and called thē his sisters: that he gaue his hand to a wolfe calling him his brother, and that the wolfe gaue him his paw. The booke intituled Fasciculus temporum, composed by a religious Carmelite, vpon the yeare 754, reporteth of S. Gingolfs wife, that she vsed to sing with her lower mouth, which was inflicted vpon her for a punishment, because

shee scoffed at her husbands miracles. In all this, the greatest miracle is the patience of God▪ and the blockishnesse of the people, that are thus led. But it must needs bee that the Apostles prophecie, must be fulfilled; which saith, that the comming of the sonne of Perdition should be in all power, and signes, and lying wonders: and that God should send the powerfulnesse of delusion for a punishmēt vnto such as would not loue his truth, On whom (saith the Apostle) God hath sent strong delusions, that they should beleeue lies.
               
            
         
         
            THE PROPHECIE CONtained in the 12. Chapter of the Apocalyps. CHAP. 3.
            
               
                  
                     1 AND there appeared a great wonder in heaven: a woman clothed with the sunne, and the moone was vnder her feet, and vpon her head a crowne of 12. starres.
                  
                     2 And shee was with child, and cried travailing in birth, and was pained ready to be delivered.
                  
                     
                     3 And there appeared another wonder in heaven: for behold a great red dragon hauing 7. heads, and 10. hornes, & 7 crownes vpon his heads:
                  
                     4 And his taile drew the third part of the starres of heaven, and cast them to the earth. And the dragon stood before the woman which was ready to bee delivered, to devoure her child, when shee had brought it forth.
                  
                     5 So she brought forth a man child, which should rule all nations with a rod of iron: and that her child was taken vp vnto God, and to his throne.
                  
                     6 And the woman fled into the wildernesse, where she hath a place prepared of God, that they should feed her there a thousand, two hundreth, and three score daies.
                  
                     7 And there was a great battaile in heaven, Michael and his Angels fought against the Dragon, and the Dragon fought and his Angels;
                  
                     8 But they prevailed not, neither was their place any more found in heaven.
                  
                     9 And the great Dragon, that olde serpent, called the divell and Satan, was cast out, which deceiveth all the world; hee was even cast into the earth, and his Angels were

cast out with him.
                  
                     10 Then I heard a lowd voice in heaven, saying, Now is salvation, and strength, and the kingdome of our God, and the power of his Christ: for the accuser of our brethren is cast downe, which accused them before our God day and night.
                  
                     11 But they overcame him by that blood of the Lambe, and by the word of their testimonie, and they loued not their liues vnto the death.
                  
                     12 Therefore reioice yee heavens, and yee that dwell in them. Wo to the inhabitants of the earth, and of the sea: for the divell is come down vnto you, which hath great wrath knowing that he hath but a short time.
                  
                     13 And when the Dragon saw that he was cast vnto the earth, he persecuted the woman, which had brought forth the man child.
                  
                     14 But to the woman were given two wings of a great Eagle, that she might fly into the wildernesse, into her place where she is nourished for a time, and times, and halfe a time, from the presence of the serpent.
                  
                     15 And the serpent cast out of his mouth water after the woman like a flood, that he might cause her to be carried away of

the flood
                  
                     16 But the earth holpe the woman, and the earth opened her mouth, & swallowed vp the floud which the Dragon had cast out of his mouth.
                  
                     17 Then the Dragon was wroth with the woman, and went and made war with the remnant of her seed, which keepe the commandements of God, and haue the testimonie of Iesus Christ
                  
                     18 And I stood on the sea sand.
               
            
            
               The Exposition of this Prophecie.
               
                  1 A Great signe appeared in heaven, to wit, a woman which was the type of the Church of Israell. And this Church was illightned with the brightnesse of the knoweledge of God and did tread vnder her feet the mutable instabilitie of worldly things, which is like to the change of the moone. And was crowned with a douzen starrs, which are the twelue Patriarchs, the fathers of the twelue tribes of Israell.
               
                  2 And of this Church must there a child be borne, to wit, the Messias, in expectation of whome she did suffer, and was in anguish,

looking for the manifestation of this Messias.
               
                  3 But behold on the other side the divel like a red dragon, hauing 7 heads, and tenne hornes, and 7 crowns vpon his heads.
               
                  4 Whose venemous temptations haue vsed to make the third part of those that are in the visible Church, to fall away, whom he turneth aside from heauenly things to earthly. And this divell did watch with all diligence for the time when Iesus Christ should be born of the Church of Israel, that he might make him to perish as soone as ever hee was borne, having raised vp a persecution against him in his cradle, then when Herod would haue put him to death.
               
                  5 Now of this Church of Israel was a man-child borne, to wit, Iesus Christ, which must rule all the world with a strong & mightie scepter. And this Iesus was lifted vp from earth to heaven by his ascension.
               
                  6 And after the ascensiō of Iesus Christ Satan hauing raised vp a persecutiō against the Iewes, so to enwrap the Christian Iewish Church in the same ruine, this Church did retire aside into a place called Pella, where she lay hid 1260. daies, which are three years and a halfe.
               
                  
                  7 Now after this ascension, there was a great battaile fought in heaven, Iesus Christ and his Angels fighting against the Prince of the divels, and the wicked spirits that took his part.
               
                  8 But Satan was overcome, & cast out of heaven.
               
                  9 So was this old serpent, called the divell and satan (which thought to haue seduced all men) put to flight; And was throwne downe from heaven to earth, and all wicked spirits together with him.
               
                  10 Then I heard a great voice in heaven, saying; Now by the ascension of Iesus Christ (vvhich hath taken possession of the kingdōe of God, being sate at his right hand) is salvation purchased vnto the Church, and the mightie kingdome of our God is established, and the power of his Christ. For the divell vvhich did accuse the faithful incessantly before God, is cast out of heaven, and put by from his trade of accusation.
               
                  11 But in vertue of the death of Iesus Christ, which by his death hath subdued him that had the power over death, to vvit, the divell, they haue overcome him, being armed vvith the vvord of the Gospell, to vvhich they haue geuen testimony by their suffrings,

& by their preaching, hauing vvillingly exposed their liues to the death, for the iustifying of their faith in Iesus Christ.
               
                  12 Wherefore reioice O yee Saints which dwell in heauen, but tremble yee inhabitants of the earth, which dwell in the continent, & in the Ilands; for the divell is come downe vnto you, for to vvreake his anger vpon you, knowing that he shall ere long be cast into the bottomlesse pit, and that all his povver to doe hurt, shall shortly be taken away from him.
               
                  13 When the divell therefore savv that he vvas casseered of his kingdome, & that he vvas throwne out of heauen, hee did set himselfe to persecute the Church of vvhich Iesus Christ was borne, that is, the Church of the faithfull Iewes, amongst vvhom vvere the Apostles, and Disciples of Iesus.
               
                  14 But God shewd this Church a vvay to escape the persecution vvhich the divell had raised, by flying away, & hiding herselfe in the aboue named towne of Pella, on this side Iordan, vvhere God did nourish and defend her, for a yeare, two yeares, and a halfe an yeare; that is, for three yeares and a halfe.
               
                  15 This persecution then of the Christian Church, being no vvaies advantagious to Satan, he mooved Pagan & heathen people

to rise vp against the Church of the Apostles, and their Disciples, so to oppresse them and vvorke their ouerthrowe.
               
                  16 But these people stirred vp by Satan vvere swallowed vp in the bottomelesse pit, and vvere cast downe into hell.
               
                  17 Satan therefore being enraged that hee could not vvorke the overthrowe of the Christian Iewish Church, laboured by all means to persecute the Churches of the Gentiles, vvhich the Church of the Iewes had planted and begotten, vvhich Churches of the Gentiles doe keepe the Commandements of God, and lay vp the doctrine of the Gospell in their hearts.
               
                  18 And in this vision that I saw I was not transported out of my body, but, being only ravished in spirit, I remained on the sea shore.
            
            
               The cleering of this prophecie, togither with the proofe of this exposition.
               ALbeit this chapter make no mention of the bishop of Rome, yet I must of necessity expound it, because it serues for the vnfolding of the chapters following, and because they depend vpon this. Now the

exposition which I giue of it is so cleere & naturall, that it may be thought a labour spent in vaine to goe about to proue it.
               By this woman I vnderstand the church of Israel, after Abraham & the patriarches, which were the fathers of the 12 tribes of Israell, till the Iewish church began to bee mixed togither with that of the Gentils, which came to passe presently vpon the time of the Apostles. This is the reason, that (although the church of the Iewes before the preaching of the gospel, and before the ascension of Iesus Christ be the selfe same Church with that of the faithfull Iewes, which from the Apostles time did beleeue in Iesus Christ) yet so it is, that for the more perspicuities sake I cal the church of the Iews after the ascension of our Saviour Iesus Christ the Iewish-Christian church, for to distinguish it from the Iewes that were the enimies of the gospell: & yet notwithstanding it is still the Church of Israell.
               
               There be 2 reasons that enforce me not to vnderstād the church in generall by this woman, but only the church of Israell. The first is because Iesus Christ is borne of the church here mentioned. For least any man

should vnderstand this of a metaphoricall birth, the holy Ghost doth there make expresse mention of a birth that goeth before his ascension: which cannot agree to regeneration, whereby Christ is formed a new in vs. The second reason is because in the 17. verse this church is manifestly distinguished from that of the Gētils; as the mother from the daughter. Besides the whole course of the chapter sheweth vs that this is the meaning.
               In the third verse the diuell is represented in the forme of a beast having 7. heads and ten hornes, which is the forme vnder which the Roman Empire is represented in the 7. of Daniell: and in the 1. verse of the chapter which wee come next to handle; where we will examin the reason why the Empire is described in this manner. And the diuell and the Empire are both represented vnder the same forme, because the diuell did as then make vse of this mightie Empire for to persecute the church.
               In the 4. verse their revolting, which held some place in the Church, is compared to the falling of starres throwne down from heauen vpon earth. For as the church is often called the kingdome of heaven, so

by the same reason they which are placed therein are compared to starres: whose apostacie is as the falling of one from heavē to earth, both because they are shut out of heauen, as also because they deiect & debase their desires and affections from heavenly to earthly things. Which will also serue vs to expound the 10. verse of the 8. chapter of this booke, where it is said that a great star fell from heauen, which did infect the thirde part of the waters of the earth, the meaning whereof is nothing els, but that a great man of note in the Church should fal from the faith, and by his example corrupt many others.
               That which is said in the fifth verse, that the child (which is the Messias) shall governe all nations with a scepter of yron, is taken out of the 2. Psalme, ver. 9. Thou shalt crush them with a scepter of yron, that is to say, thou shalt keepe them vnder with a mighty scepter, and with a powerfull dominion: in which Psalme the extent of the absolute Empire of Christ Iesus is described vnto us.
               The flight and retiring of the Iewish church, and the three yeares and an halfe wherein shee lay hid, as it is in the 6. & 14.

verses, are proved to be true by history. Eusebius in the 2. booke of his history, and 5. chapter saith; The people of the church of Ierusalem were before the warre began by an oracle revealed to some of the chiefe amongest them, commanded to depart out of that citty, and to dwell in a towne on this side Iordano called Pella, whether as many as beleeved in Iesus Christ fled hauing left Ierusalem. Now this warre lasted 3. years and a halfe, as we may gather out of Dion, and Iosephus, from the third booke of his Iudaicall historie to the 6. In the 67. yeare of our Lord, in the month of Aprill, 4. moneths after the death of Nero, Vespasian sent at first by Nero began to lay his siedge to Gadara, and Iotapata, and to subdue Galilee. In the 70. year of our Lord on the 8. of December Titus the sonne of Vespasian tooke Ierusalem, & razed it to the ground, afterward departed thence to triumph at Rome, leauing some few forces to finish that which he had left vndone, which was effected with little or no resistance.
               The Prince of the Angels Michaell which is spoken of in the 7. verse, is Iesus Christ our Lord. For this is he which is the head of the Angels; this is 
                     Heb. 2.14. Col 2.15. Ps. 68.19. Eph. 4.8. he which hath

overcome the diuell; this is he to whom alone the name of Michael agreeth, which signifieth, Who is as God? for hee hath thought it no robbery to be equal to God his father. Phil. 2.6.
               Now the battel that was fought in heaven must bee vnderstoode to haue beene fought after the death or ascension of our Lord, and not after the retiring aside of the Iewes into Pella, although there be mention made of this before the fighting of the battaile in heauen: for S. Iohn hauing first related what befell the church vpon earth, mounts vp againe to the things that were done in heauen: and indeed in the 14. this very flight of the church is set after the fighting of the battaile in heaven: which I doe not thinke was so in effect, but that hereby God did in a visiō represent to S. Iohn, that Satan was cast out of heauen by Iesus Christ.
               To this purpose wee are to note that in the 1. of Iob, the 6. verse, it is said, that the children of God (which are the Angels) came and stood before the Lord, and that Satan also thrust in amongst them. And in the 22. chapt. of the 1. of Kings 21. verse, it is said, that a wicked spirit came and stood

before the Lord, offring his service to seduce the Prophets, and to be a lying spirit in their mouths. By which places it appeares, that Satan in that time had as yet free accesse into heauen, and that he was found amongst the Angels. But in the 10. chap. of S. Luke, and 18. verse, Iesus speaketh thus, I saw Satan like lightning fall downe from heaven. And in this 12. chapter of the Apocalyps, Satan is described vnto vs falling from heauen to earth presentlie after the ascensiō of Iesus Christ. By which passages of scripture it seemeth that the ascension of our Lord did wholly exclude Satan out of heaven, and barred him al entrance there again for ever after that time, tumbling him downe into this lower region. Wherevpon S. Paul also in the 2. chapt. to the Ephesians, calleth the wicked spirits, the powers that rule in the aire, & the prince of the diuels, the Prince of the powers that rule in the aire. Which region of the aire is in infinite places of holy writ called by the name of heauen: in which sense I am perswaded that must be vnderstoode which the same Apostle speaketh in the 6. chap. of the same epistle, where he saith, that the spirituall wickednesses are in the high, or

heauenly places.
               Now that Satan being in heauen did accuse and calumniate the faithful to God, it appeareth by the example of Iob, whom he accused to God, as if al his zeale and innocencie had beene mercenary, and led by profit. Wherefore also hee is called the divell, that is to say, a slanderer.
               The waters which Satan did powre out after the church for to hurt her, are the people, and nations. The meaning whereof would haue been hard for vs to haue foūd out, if the holy Ghost himselfe had not expounded it in the 15. verse of the 17. chap. The waters which thou sawest, are people, and multitudes, and nations.
               
            
         
         
            THE PROPHECIE CONtained in the 13. Chapter of the Apocalyps. CHAP. 4.
            
               
                  
                     1 And I saw a beast rising out of the sea having seaven heads and ten hornes, and vpon his hornes were ten crownes, and vpon his head the name of blasphemy.
                  
                     
                     2 And the beast which I saw was like a Leopard, and his feete like a beares, and his mouth as the mouth of a Lyon: and the dragō gaue him his power and his throne and great authority.
                  
                     3 And I saw one of his heads as it were wounded to death, but his deadly wound was healed, and all the world wondered and followed the beast.
                  
                     4 And they worshipped the dragō, which gaue power vnto the beast, and they worshipped the beast, saying, who is he like vnto the beast? who is able to warre with him?
                  
                     5 And there was given vnto him a mouth, that spake great things and blasphemies, and power was given vnto him to do 42. moneths.
                  
                     6 And he opened his mouth vnto blasphemie against God to blaspheme his name, and his tabernacle, and them that dwell in heaven.
                  
                     7 And it was given to him to make warre with the Saints, & to overcome them, and power was given him over every kinred, and tongue, and nation.
                  
                     8 Therefore al that dwel vpon the earth shall worship him, whose names are not written in the booke of life of 
                        〈…〉
                     , which

was slaine from the beginning of the world.
                  
                     9 If any man haue an eare let him hear.
                  
                     10 If any man lead into captivity, hee shall goe into captivity: If any man kill with a sword, he must be killed by a sword: here is the patience, and the faith of the Saints.
                  
                     11 And I beheld another beast cōming vp out of the earth, which had two horns like the Lambe, but he spake like the Dragon.
                  
                     12 And hee did all that the first beast could do before him, and he caused the earth and them which dwell therein, to worship the first beast, whose deadly wound was healed.
                  
                     13 And he did great wōders, so that he made fire to come downe from heaven on the earth, in the sight of men.
                  
                     14 And he deceived them that dwel on the earth by the signes which were permitted him to do in the sight of the beast, saying to them that dwell on the earth, that they should make the image of the beast, which had the wound with a sword, and did liue.
                  
                     15 And it was permitted vnto him to giue a spirite vnto the image of the beast, so that the image of the beast should speake, and should cause that as many as would not worship the image of the beast, should be killed.
                  
                     16 And he made all both smal & great,

rich & poore, free & bond, to receiue a marke in their right hand, or in their foreheads.
                  
                     17 And that no man might buy or sell, saue he that had the marke, or the name of the beast, or the number of his name.
                  
                     18 Here is wisdome. Let him that hath wit, count the number of the beast: for it is the number of a man, and his number is six hundreth threescore and six.
               
            
            
               The exposition of this Prophecy.
               1 Then I saw the Roman Empire to raise it selfe vp from amongst the people and nations, hauing its seat in the towne which hath 7. hills, and which must be governed with 7. kinds of principal governments, to wit, by kings, by Consuls, by military Tribunes, by Decemvirs, by Dictatours, by Emperours, and last of all by Popes. Which Empire is composed of 10. principall parts, which are so many kingdomes. And this cittie seated vpon 7. hills bore a wicked, and blasphemous name, to wit, Rome the Euerlasting.
               2 And this Empire looked like a Leopard, by reason of the speedy atchieuements of its conquests. And held fast the

substance of the people as a beare, which keeps that which he hath gotten vnder his pawes, and devoured the nations as a Lion deuoureth his pray. And the divell (which is the 
                     Ioh. 16.11. Prince of this world, and which 
                     Luk. 4.6. takes vpon him to dispose of kingdomes at his pleasure, gaue him his power and rule, and great glory.
               3 And it came passe that one of these governments, to wit the 6, which is that of the Emperours, was ouerthrowne, then when (the Lombards hauing chased the Lieutenants of the Empire out of Italie) Rome did cease to be vnder subiection to the Emperours; wherefore to say truth, the Empyre did euen at that time leaue to bee the Roman Empire. But not long after this mortall blowe by which the Empyre of Rome was layed on the ground, this monarchie began to grow vp afresh, and to reviue againe by the Roman Hierarchie, which did reerect a newe Monarchie at Rome, and raise vp the Empire that was fallen: And all the people submitted themselues vnder the gouernement of this Romish church,
               4. And did serue Idols; which who so serue, doe serue the divell, the author and

aduancer of this Papall Hierarchie, & did attribute that vnto this Hierarchie which did appertaine vnto God, saying who is there that is like vnto this Empire, & who is able to resist it?
               5 And God hath suffered this Empire to take proud and blasphemous titles,1. Cor. 10.
                        ••
                     
                   and it must endure 1260. yeares.
               6 And this papall Hierarchie doth set it selfe to belch forth horrible blasphemies against God, and to wrong his name and his Church, and his Saints.
               7 Yea God hath suffered it to persecute the faithfull, and to ouercome them, & power was giuen vnto it ouer infinite people, and tongues, and nations.
               8 In so much that all men shall fall downe to worship it, whose names are not found in the booke of life of Iesus Christ which died for vs, written before the foū
                  dations of the world were laid.
               9 If any man haue an vnderstanding to conceaue this, let him conceaue it.
               10 For they which persecute, shall be delt with after the same manner▪ whosoever leadeth the faithfull into captiuitie, shall himselfe at length be made a captiue; whosoeuer slayeth them shall bee slaine.

Herein appeareth the faith and patience of the Saints.
               11 I saw also a Monarch of another name and fashion then the former Roman Emperours, to wit, the Pope, which wore a miter with two hornes vpon his head, & which seemed in outward shew to profess Christ, and his doctrine, but whose doctrine indeed was diabolicall.
               12 And he tooke all the power of the Roman Empire vpon him at Rome being the seate of the Empire: and exhorted all people to submit themselues to this Roman Empire, which being destroyed by the Lombards in Italie, was brought to life againe, and reestablished by the Papacy.
               13 And this Pope wrought miracles; insomuch that he sent forth the thunderbolts and lightnings of his excommunications against Kings and their people: & caused S. Anthonies fire to come downe from heauen, and made it to thunder and lighten by a miracle.
               14 And the people were seduced by the miracles which God gaue him power to effect, for to establish this Roman Papal 
                     〈◊〉
                  , commanding the people to make

vp the image of the ancient Roman Empire againe; that is to say, to serue the Papall Empire with the same manner of obedience as they did the old Roman Empire, which being demolished was built vp againe by the Papacy.
               15 And God did suffer him to giue force and strength to this Papall Empire, which did resemble the ancient Empire, for the spirituall power that it did vsurpe gaue life & strength to its temporall power. Which Papall Empire being nothing but an imaginarie Empire, and which consisteth only in opinion, neuertheles speaks proudly, and maketh such to be massacred, and burnt, as doe refuse to submit themselues to this imaginarie Empire.
               16 And hee made all, both small and great, rich and poore, bond and free, to giue him their handes, and take an oath to be faithfull vnto him, and to bee markt by their actions. And their foreheads were marked with the marke of Confirmation, and they made profession of his religion, which profession of religion is often in the holy scripture, called by the name of a marke in the forehead.
               17 And he tooke order that no man

might trafficke nor sell, nor buy, nor exchange benefices: nor bee suffered to purchase an Archbishops Pall, nor haue a Licence, nor any pa
                     •
                  t in the Church goods, no nor yet buy an estate, if hee had not the name, and profession of a Papist: and were not of the number of those which are marked with the figures or numbers of the letters of his name.
               18 In which nūber they which think themselues the wisest may find some thing worth their search. Whosoever hath vnderstanding let him diligently calculate the summe, to which these greeke cyphers or numbers of the pope of Rome doe amount, for it is an vsuall number amongst men, and therefore easie to be vnderstood. And this number to which the greeke letters of his name do amoūt, is six hundreth sixtie six. For this word (Latin) (which is the ordinary name, by which the Greeke church doth cal those of the Romā church and their head) being written in Greeke and after calculated, makes vp iust 666. Which number also by an admirable occurrence, doth admonish you that 666. yeares after the revealing of this Prophecy, this 2. beast, to wit, the Pope shall begin

to heale the wound of the ancient Empire, and place the Roman Empire againe in its former seat.
            
            
               The proofe of this exposition.
               BEfore wee goe about to proue this exposition, wee are to note fiue things.
               1 That all the ancient, and our adversaries themselues doe vnderstand the Roman Empire by the first beast, and Antichrist by the second.
               2 That the holy Ghost in this prophecy doth not speake according to custome, but according to the truth; and therefore holds him to be the Roman Emperour which raigneth at Rome, and not him which doth not rule there, howbeit he beare the title thereof.
               3 That in the yeare of our Lord 752. the Lieutenancie of the Empire being destroyed by Aistulphus king of the Lombards, the Emperour of Constantinople did vtterly loose all his dominion ouer Italy, & the citie of Rome, so that he could neuer after recouer it: whence it followes that the Emperour of Constantinople, did at that time cease to be the Roman Emperour.
               
                  4 That the holy Ghost in this Prophecy makes the Hierarchicall Roman Empire, to be a continuation of the Romā Empire, as which did succeed in the rome, and vsurp the rights thereof, and makes but one Empire of them both, hauing chā
                  ged the head, that is to say, the forme of governement.
               5 That the holy Ghost in this prophecy puts a difference betweene the Roman Hierarchie and the Pope. Seeing that the Pope is but one person at once: but the Hierarchie is the whole body of the Prelates and Clergie, that doe vphold his authoritie.
               This being premised for the better opening of the matter in hand, we will now come to proue, and demonstrate the seuerall parts thereof.
            
            
               The first part of this Prophecie.
               
                  1. THen I saw a beast rising out of the sea, hauing seaven heades and tenne hornes, and vpon his hornes were tenne Crownes, and vpon his head the name of blasphemy.
            
            
               
               The Exposition of this Prophecy.
               1 THen I saw the Roman Empire to raise it selfe vp from amongst the people and nations, hauing its seate in the towne which hath 7 hills, and which must be gouerned with 7 kindes of maine governements, to wit, by kings, by Consuls, by militarie Tribunes, by Decemvirs, by Dictatours, by Emperours, and last of all by Popes. Which Empire is composed of 10. principall partes, which are so many kingdomes. And this citie seated vpon 7. hils bore a wicked and blasphemous name to wit, Rome the Everlasting.
            
            
               The proofe of this Exposition.
               By the sea, the people and nations are vnderstood; according to the exposition of the Angell in the 17. chap. and 15. verse of this booke. The waters which thou sawest, are people, and multitudes, and nations. A fashion of speech vsed by Daniell, in the 7. chap. and 3. verse; Where in steed of saying that he saw 4 great Empires rise vp from amongst the nations, he saith that 4 great

beasts did rise vp out of the sea. So speakes Esay in his 8. chap. and 7. verse; and David in the Psalmes, 46. verse 4. and 65. verse. 8.
               That by the 7. heads, 7. hils are vnderstood, vpon which the citty of Rome was situate, the Angell witnesseth in the 17. chap. of this booke, and 9. verse. The seaven heads are seavē mountaines whereon the woman sitteth. Afterward he addeth in the 18. verse, That woman which thou sawest is the great citty which raigneth over the kings of the earth. This cannot be vnderstood of any other citty but of Rome, which in the time of S. Iohn raigned over realmes, and was the seate of the Empire, and there was no other citty at that time which had seaven hils, wherfore also it is called in greek 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , Septicollis. And there was a solemne feast, called Septimontium, in honor of the towne, as 
                     Varro lib. 5 Dies Septimentium no
                        
                           •
                        inatu
                           •
                         ab 
                           •
                        is 7. moati
                        
                           •••
                         in queis 
                           •
                        rbs sita est
                   
                  Varro witnesseth in his 5. booke of the Latin tongue. And 
                     Varro lib. 5 Dies Septimentium no
                        
                           •
                        inatu
                           •
                         ab 
                           •
                        is 7. moati
                        
                           •••
                         in queis 
                           •
                        rbs sita est
                   
                  Martial saith that hee coulde see the 7. hils of Rome from his house: and Propertius in the 10. elegie of his 3. booke,
               
                  Septe vrbs alta iugis toti quae prasidetorbi. Also our aduersaries themselues doe not deny but that this citty whereof S. Iohn speaketh is Rome: but they would haue it

to be heathnish Rome. We will shew in the 17. chapt. that S. Iohn did speake of Rome also after Paganisme was abolished: but in this chapt. it is sufficient for vs that by the 7. heads the 7. hils of Rome are vnderstood, taken in that sense as our adversaries would haue it.
               By these 7. hils we do vnderstand 7. divers successiue governments, which haue borne soveraigne rule ouer the citty of Rome: to wit, the Kings, whō the Consuls succeeded, whose forme of governement was interrupted 3 several times by the Militarie Tribunes which were endued with consular authority. Afterward by the Decemvirs; and by the Dictatous, at diuerse times, but most especially vnder the Dictatorship of Sylla, and Iulius Caesar. After whom Octavius Augustus established the Monarchicall state of Emperours, whose gouernement ouer Rome and Italie being interrupted by the Herules and Goths, neverthelesse they made a shift a little after to recouer it againe: vntil the Lombards at last hauing destroyed the Empire in Italie, opened a way vnto the Pope to make himselfe Lord of Rome, & to build vp the Romane Monarchie to that heighth as we see

it is come to at this day. And this exposition is not of our owne inuenting, but groū
                  ded vpon the 17. of the Revelation the 10. verse, where he saith that the 7. heads are 7. kings (so doth-he call all soueraigne power) fiue of which were fallen, and the 6. was, & the 7. was not yet come. There is nothing so cleere and evident. For at the time when S. Iohn had this Revelation the 5. first of these 7. soueraigne gouernements were abolished, to wit, the kings, the Consuls, the Militarie Tribunes, the Decemvirs, and the Dictatours, the sixth did flourish, to wit, the Emperours, and the 7. to wit, the Popes were not as yet come. I am not ignoraunt that euen then there were Consuls still remaining, and Militarie Tribunes, but they had no soueraignty. The Consulship was a place more of dignity, then any authority, and serued for nothing else but to distinguish the yeares in their Fasti. And the Military Tribunes were but the Captaines of one Legion, which are at this day called the Colonels of a band. It is not therefore an interpretation of our owne inuention, when we say that these 7 heads doe signifie 7. seueral formes of soueraigne gouernment ruling Rome one after an other, and

not all at the same time: seeing that S. Iohn saith that 5. of these 7. heads were fallen, that one was, and that the 7. was not as yet come. This doubtlesse is an admirable exposition, and was suggested to his Maiesty of England by the spirit of God.
               
                  S. Iohn doth adde further, that this beast which is the Roman Empire had 10. diademes, or crownes; the meaning is plaine: we vse to say that our King, besides the crowne of Fraunce hath also the crowne of Navarre: and that the kings of England & Spain, are kings of more crownes thē one, that is to say of more Realmes or Provinces; The like is here to be vnderstood. The 10. crownes of the Roman Empire are 10. great Provinces & principall parts, whereof the Empire did as then consist; Italie, Spaine, the Gaules, Germanie, Hungary and Bulgarie, Greece, Natolia or Asia minor, Syria and Assyria, Egypt, and Affricke. The Iles are dependances of the next continēt. And vnder euery one of these great partes are comprehended the next small provinces which were kept in subiection by the same armies: as Dacia & Moldavia by the Legions appointed for Hungarie. If there were any other Provinces, as Armenia, &

                  Arabia, they were neuer held but weakly, and in part, and were often lost, and they are reckoned for dependences of Asia minor, and of Syria.
               
               And although the Romane Emperour be here compared to a beast, yet this doth not deny but that there were some good Roman Emperours: and we may not think it strange that the holy Ghost doth represent this Empire vnto vs by a Beast, which was not only gouerned by Neroes, Domitians, and Heliogabales: but by Theodosies also, & Valentinians, Christian and religious Princes. For Empires are called beasts in the Prophecy of Daniel, and in the Apocalyps, because of the manner by which they did first rise and increase, to wit, by violence and crueltie. For no man can deny that the Romans at first were nothing else but theeues, and common robbers, which heretofore hauing nothing but onely one walled towne, had no right ouer Italy lesse yet ouer Greece, ouer the Gaules, ouer Spaine, Africke, or Asia; but it is possible enough to gouerne that with order and equitie, which was first laid hold on by iniustice.
               It remains that we see what these names

of blasphemy are, which this citie and Empire of Rome did beare. S. Hierome in the 11. question to Algasia, expounds this place thus. There is (saith S. Iohn in the Revelation,) a name of blasphemy written in the forehead of the queane clad in skarlet, & this name is, Rome The Everlasting. The same citie is likewise called Dea, Goddess, And so doth Iulius Frontinus cal her in his booke of water workes. The queene and Empresse of the world, which is the Goddesse of the earth, and all the nations. And Martial speaketh after the same manner, in the 8. Epigram of his 12 booke.

                     Terrarum Dea gentium
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         Roma
                     Cui par est nihil & nihil secundum.
                     Queene of the earth, Goddesse of this worlds round,
                     Whose like or second may no where be found.
                  
The Emperours also were not without 
                     Virg. Ecl. 1. O Melibae
                           •
                         Deus. & paulò pòst, Bissenos cui nostra dies altaria fumant. Martial. Epig. 8. l. 5 Edictum domini dei
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         nostri. Horat. Epist. 1. l. 2. Praesenti tibi maturos largimur honores, Iurandas
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         tuum per nomen ponimus aras Codicis lib. 1. tit. 2. de sacrosanctia Ecclesiis, Capitationis modum beneficio nostri nominis sublevandum
                     ▪
                   blasphemous titles. For they were called Gods, not only after their death, but whilst they were liuing too: There were altars built in honor of them, They had sacrifice offered vnto them; The common fashion of swearing was to sweare by the Genius of the Emperour, their statues were places of refuge for offendours, as for example,

to the servants of Iulius Sabinus, of whom for this fact there is mention made in the 8. chapt. of the 1. booke of Iustinians Institutioos. There offendours might rest more secure then in a Temple, as Philostratus saith in the life of Apollonius; and Tertullian in his Apologeticke oratiō against the heathen affirmeth that it was lesse danger, for a man to sweare falsely by Iupiter, then to periute himselfe by the name of the Prince. And Plinie the younger in the 97. Epistle of his 10. booke saith, that he made al such, as renounced christianity, to kneele downe before the image of the Empeorur, and to offer incense and wine vnto him for sacrifice. Which impietie beeing abolished by the Christian Emperours, yet neuerthelesse (that this prophecie might be fulfilled, there were still some names of blasphemie abiding, for retaining of which they cannot be excused. In the yeare of our Lord 314. Petronius Arrianus, and Iulian being commaunded to look to the safety of many bishops that were returning into Affricke, & to defraie the charges of their iourney, writ thus to Domitius Celsus the Emperours Lieutenant in Affricke, Many bishops of Affricke

are cōe to the country of the Gauls by the heavenly commandement of our Lord Constantine. And a little after; Following the commandement of the Eternitie of that thrice gratious Prince, as Baronius doth relate it vpon the 314. yeare of our Lord. The selfe same title is giuen by Symmachus to Valentinian, Theodosius, & Arcadius in the 54 Epistle of the tenth booke. Multa victoriae debet Aeternitas vestra, & adhuc plura debebit. In the second Apologie of Athanasius, there is an Epistle of Colluthas, wherein he saith, that the Godhead of Augustus had taken order for a Church to bee built in the village of Secontaururus with all speed possible, and commands them to fall about it as soone as ever they should receaue the Divine letters patent. Ausonius speakes thus to the Emperour Theodosius in the beginning of his Poems.

                     Nil dubites authore bono, mortalia quaerunt
                     Consilium, certus iussa capesse Dei.
                  
and a little after. Non tutum renuisse Deo. According to this manner of speaking did the Emperours vse to call their Institutions, Divine Institutions, and their Edicts, the Edicts of God. In the 1. booke of Iustitinians Code, and 2. title, the Constitutions

of the Emperours are called heavenly Oracles, and divine Sanctions; that is to say the word of God.
            
            
               The second part of this Prophecy.
               
                  2 ANd the beast which I saw was like a Leopard, and his feet like a beares; & his mouth as the mouth of a Lyon; and the Dragon gaue him his power, and his throne, & great authoritie.
            
            
               The Explication.
               
                  2 AND this Empire looked like a Leopard, by reason of the speedy atchieuements of its Conquests. And held fast the substance of the people as a Bear, which keeps that which he hath gotten vnder his pawes, and devoured the nations as a Lyon devoureth his pray. And the divell (which is the Ioh 16.11.
                   Prince of this world) and which Luk. 4.6.
                   takes vpon him to dispose of kingdomes at his pleasure, gaue him his power, and rule, and great 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
            
            
               
               The proofe of this Exposition.
               THis interpretation needeth not much proofe; euery man knowes the speedy atchieuements of the Romans conquests, especially after the 2 Punick war. Then (as Florus saith) the conquest of Macedon followed that of Africke, then, that of Greece, & of Syria, & of all the rest in a huddle, carried away by the vnresistable tide, & rushing torrent of Fortune. It is said of Pompey that he ouerran the world by his conquests in lesse time, then one could haue run it ouer a foot. And Caesar in the war against Pharnaces doth boast, that hee no sooner came and saw him, but he ouer came him. Whosoeuer shall but consider the exploits of this Empire, will thinke that more then twice the time was imployed about the performance of them.
               As for the shedding of bloud, Plutarch in the life of Caesar reporteth, 
                     •
                  hat in the conquest but of the Gauls only which was 10 years a working, there were a milliō of men slaine. And Iosephus telleth vs that in the siege of Ierusalem vndertaken by Titus and Vespasian there died 11000000 men:

and yet neuerthelesse these Princes haue beene noted for examples of clemency. What might Marius and Sylla those bloudy minded men doe? and how much blood may we thinke, was shed in all the rest of Europe, Asia, and Africa? The Amphitheater where the people were entertained to passe away the time, where murder was a common sport, where men went to see Lions and Tigers teare men asunder, so to solace themselues, what else was this but a discipline of crueltie, and a means to accustome the people to murder, & to drink in bloud at their eies by way of recreation?
               As for the wealth of this Empire, it is an incredible thing: the riches of our Kings are but pouertie being compared to these. Some of the citizens that were enfranchised by the Emperors, haue not yeelded to kings in this respect, a great many examples whereof are found noted by Lipsius in his last chap. and 2. booke of the greatnesse of the Roman Empire. Lucullus and Apicius did spend more at one supper, then a Prince does in a month. Caligula in one yeare did consume all that which the couetousnesse of Tiberius had scraped together,

which did amount to six hundreth and fiftie millions, and 4 hundreth fiftie foure thousand crownes, as it is summed vp by Hadrianus Iunius.
               
               These great riches came vpon them by the robbing and pilling of the Provinces of the Empire, whereby they did sucke away all their substance from the Provincials, and spoiled thē of their goods as much in time of peace, as of warre.

                     —Referebant navibus altis
                     Occulta spolia, & plures ex pace triumphos.
                  
Read, to be informed in this, the life of Antonie in Plutarch. He levied two hundreth thousand talents out of Asia yearely, every talent being worth 6 hundreth crowns. But this being not enough to content his greedy mind, he doubled the sum. Wherevpon the people seeing themselues not able to hold out, sent Deputies vnto him, one amongst which told him. If thou wilt raise a double yearely Tax vpon vs, giue vs also double harvests, two summers & two autumes in one yeare. Hence arose the great hatred against Publicans, which is often mentioned in the scripture, and witnessed by Cicero in the first Epistle to his brother Quintus.
               
               
                  Now albeit some of the Romans did excell in morall vertues, and that we take many examples of iustice, continency, clemency, and sobrietie from them, especially before the time that Attalus bequeathed his mooueables and treasures to the people of Rome, yet so it is that all these did nothing but assist iniustice, and their vpright dealing was like that of theeues, which when they haue robbed a man will goe aad divide the pray equally. For what were the Romans, but common robbers, and forragers of all habitable countries? If they did sometimes mannage that with order, or were liberall of that which they did take from others wrongfully, or if out of a theeuish mercy, they did suffer them to liue whom they might haue killed, I say that these vertues are no vertues; since they serue to vphold vices, and are imploied either to color iniustice, or to establish tyranny.
               Finally, no man may thinke it strange that the holy Ghost saith, that the Diuell gaue this power to the Roman Empire. For howsoeuer Monarchies be of God, & the Roman Empire was established by his providence, for secret reasons reserued to

himselfe, yet it was not he that did vrge on the Roman to invade others countries, but Satan, to whome also they haue attributed all the glory of their victories, as Symmachus saith in his 54. Epist. where he brings in the citie of Rome speaking after this manner in favour of the heathenish superstition. This religious service hath brought the world vnder my lawes: these sacrifices haue driven Hannibal from my walles, and forced the Gaules to remoue their siege from the Capitoll. Whensoeuer a Captaine had slaine another Captaine of the aduerse armie with his owne hands, hee hung vp his armor to Iupiter Feretius. Because the army of the Romans as they were flying away did take courage againe & turne back vpon their enimies, therefore did Romulus erect a temple to Iupiter Stator.
                  
                     In orat. de aruspice resp.
                   
                  Cicero reporteth that the Captaines of an hoast after a conquest obtained did vse to goe to Pessinunte, there to performe their vowes to the mother of the Gods. And we neuer read that they vndertooke any businesse of moment without consulting their Augurs and Soothsayers, and without obseruing the flying, the eating, the singing, the going of birds. To conclude, Plutarch in a

set tract of his brings in the Fortune of the Romans contesting with their vertue, wherein they dispute whether of the two did conferre more to the founding of this Empire, so that on whether of thē it light, God shall bee sure to goe without his honour.
            
            
               The third part of this prophecie.
               
                  3 And I saw one of his heads as it were wounded to death, but his deadly wound was healed, & all the world wondered and followed the beast.
            
            
               The Explication.
               
                  3 And it came to passe that one of these governments, to wit, the sixth, which is that of the Emperours, was overthrowne, then, whē the Lombards having chased the Lieuetenants of the Empire out of Italie, Rome did cease to be vnder subiectiō to the Emperours. Wherefore (to say truth) the Empire did evē at that time leaue to be the Romane Empire: But not long after that mortal blow by which the Empire of Rome was laid on the grounde, this Monarchie began to grow vp a fresh, &

to reviue againe by the Romane Hierarchie, which did reerect a new monarchie at Rome, and raise vp the Empire that was fallen, and all the people submitted themselues vnder the government of this Romish Church.
            
            
               The Proofe.
               THere is nothing more agreeable to the event then this interpretation. In the year 752. Aistulphus king of the Lombards destroyed the Exarchat of Ravenna, and put downe the Exarchs, which 200. whole yeares after Narses had beene the Emperours Lieutenants in Italie. This is the deadly wound which the beasts did receaue. Now because Rome was a part of the Exarchat, Aistulphus did pretend that being Lord of the Exarchat, he was also to be Lord over Rome, and began to wast the territories of the Duchy of Rome. Stephen the second was then Pope, who in this extremitie sought to his soveraigne Lord the Emperour for succour, to wit, to the Roman Emperour, but being not able to get any aide from him, because he was weake, and elsewhere occupied, the foresaide Pope had recourse to Pepin king of

                  Fraunce, which not long before had got to bee king by deposing Childericke his Master and lawfull Soveraihne. At his request Pepin came downe into Italie in the yeare of our Lord .754. And having compelled Aistulphus to receiue conditions of peace, returned into Fraunce. But in the yeare following Aistulphus broke the agreement, & did forrage the Roman territory againe: This drew Pepin the second time into Italie, where having overcome Aistulphus he took the Exarchat frō him, and bestowed it on the bishop of Rome, & made him Lord over Rome, and a great part of Italie, 666. yeares after the time that the Apocalyps was revealed to Saint Iohn. So the Popes became Princes by the inconsiderat liberality of our kings, & began even then, to shew their good wils to cut of Monarchs, to imitate their actions, and to encroach vpon the rightes of the Roman Empire. Hereby the Church of Rome became to bee Queene over other Churches, and in her Prelats and Hierarchicall orders did reerect the Empire that was fallen: tyrannising over the goods & consciences of men, vsing her temporall riches as a meanes to augment her spirituall

power, and to establish a Monarchie at Rome over the Church, bearing rule over the Temporaltie, and Spiritualty in Christian kingdomes; For how be it the successours of Charlemaine were and are as yet stiled the kings of the Romans, and that the Othons had a Regent at Rome, & handled the Popes as their subiectes, yet this did not last long: and the Pope foūd a meanes so to free himselfe from beeing vnder their dominion, that at length hee made them to be his vassals & bondmen, and to receiue their crown by his benefit, & vnder his permissiō, till it should please his Holynesse to take it from them, & bestow it on whom hee thought good: to to kisse his feet, to lay downe great sums of gold at his feete for tribute; and even then when the German Emperours did curbe the Popes, yet they did stil acknowledge themselues subiect to the Church of Rome. This once obtained it is no marvell if hee name himselfe a King and Monarch, and call his Bishoprick an Empire, and so haue reestablished the Roman Empire in its former seate, as Austin Steuchus the Popes library keeper saith,
                     Pag. 3. in his first booke of Constantines donation, in such

tearmes as may seeme to be made of purpose for the vnfolding of this prophecy. After the destruction of the Roman Empire (saith hee) caused by the lewd liues of the Emperours, if God had not raised vp the Papacy, in which the Roman maiestie did reviue, it would haue hapned, that Rome being succoured by no man, had beene inhabitable, or made astinking oxe-stall or pigstie. But in the Pope there arose, if not the greatnes of the Ancient Empire, at least a forme not much vnlike vnto that, whereby all nations did heretofore obay the Emperours. And this is that which S. Iohn addeth, that all the earth went after the beast wondring. A little after the same Steuchus calleth the Papacie an Empire, and maiesticall Royalty: And so doth Lipsius speake of it, and others formerly cited, all which doe acknowledge, that the Popes are the true possessours of the Empire, and doe hold the place of the ancient Roman Emperours, that is to say, that they are Caesars successours more thē the Apostles. Now by these words of S. Iohn, to wit, that all the earth wondring at the healing of this wound went after the beast, it appears that the woūd which

the Empire did receaue by the Herules, Gothes, Vandals, was not the wound here spoken of: For the healing of this wound by Belisarius and Marses, drewe no people or nations to the obedience of the Empire, no countrie moved with admiration, did for this submit it selfe voluntarily. The fruit of this conquest over the Gothes was the establishment only of the Exarchat in a part of Italie. But the restoring of the Roman Empire by the Roman Hierarchie drew infinit sorts of people to the obedience of this Empire; And wee may say that all the earth moued with admiration, out of a voluntarie respect ran after the beast, which shall bee proved more fully yet by the 12. and 14. verse.
            
            
               The 4. part of this Prophecie.
               
                  4 And they worshipped the dragon which gaue power vnto the beast, and they worshipped the beast, saying, who is like vnto the beast? who is able to warre with him?
            
            
               The Explication.
               
                  4 And did serue Idols; which, who so

serue, doe serue the divell, the Author and advancer of this Papall Hierarchie; and did attribute that that vnto this Hierarchie which did appertaine vnto God, saying who is there that is like vnto this Empire, and who is able to resist it?
            
            
               The proofe of this exposition.
               This is a rare prediction, and such as giues light to this whole prophecie. For here the holy Ghost makes idolatrie to bee borne iust at the same time that the Roman Hierarchie did begin to possesse an earthly Empire, and to imitate the Roman Empire that was decayed. Which was manifestly verified in this, that when the Roman Empire went to ruine in Italie then was the question about the worship of images most hot. To which worship the people of the East did not yeeld then, when the Popes first of all became Monarches at Rome, but they were woon vnto it by little and little, after the imitatiō, and by the authority of the Church of Rome. The other kind of Idolatrie, to wit, the worshipping the bread of the Eucharist, grounded vpon transubstantion, began

also to grow vp in the Church iust at the same time that the Pope grew to be a Prince and earthly Monarch; for we may see some small seeds of this in Damascene which liued in the 750 yeare of our Lord, and as this errour did increase by little & little, Bertram a Priest that liued in France vnder Charles the bald in the yeare 870. writ an excellent booke in confutation thereof, which is to bee seene at this day. And at the same time Iohn Erigen surnamed the Scot a Monke of S. Benedicts order wrot another booke against the selfe same errour. But the Bishops of Rome which had erected the service of images, did also establish the worship of bread: & condemned the writings of the said Scot, especially Leo the 9. in the yeare 1055 having assembled a Councell at Rome, and another at Verseil in Piemont for the confirmation of this Idolatry, against which many of the faithfull did oppose themselues, and amongst others Berenger Archdeacon of Angers, a man of great knowledge and holy conversation. At last truth was overborne by falsehoode, our kings lending a helping hand to the Pope. And that this prophecy

might be fulfilled in all points, looke how Idolatry did encrease, so did the greatnes of the Roman Hierarchie encrease; in so much that all did dread the power therof, thinking that none was able to resist it. As for the peoples worshipping of this Hierarchie, & giving it that which did appertaine vnto God, we will speake of this in the verse following.
            
            
               The fift part of this Prophecie.
               
                  5 And there was given vnto him a mouth that spake great things, and blasphemies; and power was given vnto him to doe 42 moneths.
               
                  6 And he opened his mouth vnto blasphemie against God to blaspheme his name, and his tabernacle, and them that dwell in heaven,
               And it was given vnto him to make war with the Saints, & to overcome them, and power was given him over every kinred, & tongue, and nation.
               
                  8 Therefore all that dwell vpon the earth shall worship him, whose names are not written in the booke of life of that Lambe which was slaine from the beginning of the
               
                  
                  9 If any man haue an eare let him heare.
               If any lead into captivitie he shall goe into captivitie, if any man kill with a sword he must be killed by a sword: here is the patience and the faith of the Saints.
            
            
               The Explication.
               
                  5 And God hath suffered this Hierarchie, and Roman Church, to assume prowde, and blasphemous titles, and it must endure 1260 yeares.
               
                  6 And this Papal Hierarchy doth set it selfe to belch forth horrible blasphemies against God, and to wrong his name, and his Church and his Saints.
               
                  7 Yea God hath suffered it to persecute the faithfull, and to overcome them, and power was given vnto it over infinit people, & tongues, and nations.
               
                  8 In so much that all mē shall fall down to worship it, whose names are not found in the booke of life of Iesus Christ that dyed for vs, which book was written before the foundations of the world were laid.
               
                  9 If any man haue an vnderstāding to conceiue this let him conceiue it.
               
                  
                  10 For they which persecute, shall bee dealt with after the same māner; whosoever leadeth the faithfull into captivity shall him selfe at length be made a captiue; whosoever slaieth shall be slaine: herein appeareth the faith and patience of the Saints.
            
            
               The proofe.
               The proofe of this exposition doth cō
                  sist in 5. points.
               1 To shew what blasphemous titles the Roman Hierarchie doth assume, and how she doth attribute that vnto her selfe which doth of right appertain vnto God.
               2 How shee doth blaspheme against the Saints & against the Church of God.
               3 To shew how she hath persecuted them and overcome them.
               4 To speak of the time that she must last.
               5 And of the obedience that the people yeeld vnto her.
               The first point is easie to prooue, whether you respect the heade of this Hierarchie, or else consider the whole body. The head is called God, the Divine Maiestie, the vniversall Bishop, the head & Spowse of the Church, the corner stone, the Lion of Iuda, and Saviour of Sion, the most holy

Father, and his Holynesse, and doth arrogate many more such like prowd titles, as we haue formerly shewed by a great nū
                  ber of examples. The body of this Hierarchie vnder the name of the Church doeth vsurp that which appertaines to God, saying that the Church cannot erre, and that it is the supreame iudge in matters of religion: And that it is this church which giveth authority to the scripture, & is the only infallible Iudge of the interpretatiō thereof. They cal this Church the Romā-Catholick church, not in that sense as the Ancient did take Catholicke for Orthodox, but by Catholicke they vnderstande vniuersall, exclusiuely to all other churches, as if there were no other church but the Roman. 
                     Leo x in the Bull exurge, which is at the end of the last Lateran coū
                        cell, doth cō
                        demne Luther for saying that the Church or the Pope could not make new articles of faith and the power of adding to the Creed is given to the Pope in the last session of the Councell of Florence.
                   They say that this Church hath authority to make newe articles of faith, and to adde to the Creede: That she is the mother and mistresse of all other Christian Churches: So the French and Spanish Church are become the handemaides of the Roman, and if any one beeing asked of what church he were, should answere, I am of the French church, hee would bee thought ridiculous, or scarce well in his wits, because the Frēch church

is now reckoned for nothing, or for some smal dependance of the Roman. Al which positions, are as so many blasphemies. 1. For, to take vpon ones selfe not to be able to erre, and to be supreame iudge in matters of religion, is to intrude into Gods place, and to take away this dignitie of being highest Iudge from Gods word. 2. To boast that they giue authority to the holy Scripture which is the word of God, this is to exalt themselus aboue the word of God: For hee which giueth authoritie is more great then he which receiveth it. For if we consider well of the matter, wee shal finde that it is not the characters, nor the booke, which are vnderstood by the name of the holy Scripture, but God speaking in his worde: the church of Rome therfore in this doth exalt her selfe aboue God. 3. Likewise the Church of Rome doth make her selfe equall with God, whē shee doeth challenge the authority of giving an infallible interpretation of the scripture, and which shall be of equall authority with the scripture it selfe, for none cā giue interpretation of a law, which shal be of equal authority with the law, but only he which made the law: the church of Rome therefore is God, and doth vsurpe

Gods seat, since she giveth interpretatiōs to Gods law, which are of equal authority with the law. Nay, which is more, I say that to interpret the law after this manner, is a great deale more thē to make it, since that the people are not bounde to followe the letter of the law and of Gods word, but the interpretation which the Church of Rome shall giue of it. 4. The Church of Rome also doeth make her selfe as God, when in steed of instructing the people to beleeue in the word of God, she teacheth them to beleeue in the Church. For if you aske the simple people why they beleeue this or that, they will answer you because the church beleeues it, and by the Church they vnderstand the Roman Church, as if to beleeue in the Roman Church, and to beleeue in God were all one. Now it is to be noted, that in all these errours by the word Church, the people art not meant, for they are no iudges, they giue no authority to the scripture: but by the church the Hierarchie is vnderstood, and the body of Prelats which being dispersed thorough diverse nations doth depend vpon Rome, that is to say on the Romane consistorie, and the Popes chaire. It was neuer heard of, before the Pope came to rule,

that for to be saved, a man must needes be a Roman, and that the words, Vniversall and Roman were coincident; whereas the Apostle wrote to the Church of the Romanes after the same manner as he did to the Church of the Corinthians, or Ephesians, & gaue her not any title of superiority: without doubt he should haue spake thus vnto them. Although your Church be the Mistresse of all other Churches, and my admonitions may seeme needlesse for you, because ye cānot possibly erre in the faith, and because S. Peter your bishop is the head of the Church, to whō I my selfe also am subiect, yet notwithstanding I thought good to write vnto you for these and these reasons. Not a word of all this, but in the 11. chap. he threatens thē with being cut off, if they grow to be high minded, or disesteeme the grace of God.
               The holy Ghost addeth that this Hierarchie doeth blaspheme against the church of God,2. Point how the Romish Church doth revise the Saints.
                   and against those which dwell in heaven: If by heaven hee vnderstand the Church, as in the 9. chapt. and 1. verse, and in the 12. chapt. and 4. verse, or if the falling away of those which went out of the visible church bee represented

by the starres which fell from heaven, it is easie to prooue how the Church of Rome doth diffame those which did, and stil do, serue God in puritie, fastning odious names vpon them, and calling them Heretickes, Schismaticks, Infidels, Vaudians, Albigeans, Huguenots, Calvinists: perswading the simpler sort, that wee hold good workes to bee vnprofitable: that wee approue all kinde of dissolutenesse, that wee are enimies of the Virgin Marie and the Saints; that we make God the author of sinne: and such like things as we detest, & which are cleane contrary to our beliefe.
               But if by those which are in heaven the Saints in Paradice bee vnderstoode, the Church of Rome doeth wrong these no lesse; For is it not an iniurie to the Saints to change them into Idols? and to make thē the instruments of dishonouring God worshipping and adoring them with a religious kinde of worship that is due onlie to God? who cā doubt but that the Saints do hate such as honor them thus? To omit how the Romish church doth ty the Sts to a block, imploying thē about base offices, cōmending the keeping of their hogs to one, of their horses to another, the curing

of the scurfe to a thirde; and that the Legends of the Saints do disgrace them, in so much that they make the Virgin Mary to converse with Queanes, and to favour them in their vncleanenesse as wee haue shewed aboue.
               
                  3. point. that the Church of Rome doth persecute the faithfull.
                  As for the persecutions which this Hirarchie hath raised against the faithfull, & the victories which it hath had over the Church; It is never found that the Orthodox Church did make any massacres of the ancient hereticks. Crueltie is most sutable with falshood. To burne a Christian because he would not obey the Pope, is a thing which had never beene seene: but began after the Pope grewe to bee an earthly Monarch. It is well neere 400. yeares since Innocent the 3. within the space of a few monthes, made more then 200000 of the faithfull to bee slaine, whō they called Albigeans, after the same maner as they doe vs Hugenots now adaies. It is not aboue a hundred years since, that all Europe did streame with blood, & that the Pope and his adherents thought by slaughter and torments to haue rooted vs out vtterly. In S. Bartholomewes massacre, in the yeare 1572, more then 80000 men

were slaine in cold blood. At Lyons 150. persons put into prison were drawne out all one after another, and stabbed at the gate of the prison. At Orleans 400 persons shut vp in a house (which was called the house with 4 corners) were burnt al together. The Duke of Alua plaied the butcher at Flaunders, and vnder the shadow of a Catholike zeale slew millions of mē. In recompence whereof the Pope sent him an holy sword, & consecrated gloues. The punishments of the Inquisition surpasse all crueltie. The bull of Phalaris is nothing in respect of this. A man is carried to prison not knowing wherefore: after he hath beene cubd vp in solitarinesse, and never seene one glympse of light for a whole yeare together, at last there coms one vnto him, and questions with him about certaine interrogatories; if hee say that he is a good Catholike, and doe renounce his former heresie, hee shall haue this favour to die a more gentle death. For recant never so much, the very once being accused of heresie is thought enough to condemne a man. If hee persevere in defence of the truth, and triumph in martyrdome, after a thousond tormēts

endured in private, he is brought forth in publike, wrapt about the head with an ougly coife which they call S. Bennet, having a vizard on his face with a yawning mouth, and a long taile made fast behind at his backe, as they vse to paint the divel; and so burnt by little and little, being put in and taken from the fire I know not how often, to the end he might not die as some doe without feeling that they dy. Tyrannie, which the Turkes and Mahometans (though the sworne enimies of Christs name) doe detest: for they never practised any thing vpon Christians, that came neere to this crueltie.
               We are also to speake of the continuance of time that this Hierarchicall Empire shall endure.
                     The 4. point of the continuance of the Empire.
                   The holy Ghost saith that it shall last 1260. daies, where wee must take each day for a yeare: For this Prophecie doth every where almost borrow the tearmes of Daniel, and vse his fashion of speech, who by a weeke vnderstands 7. yeares, and who foretelleth that from the permission of returning, & building vp Hierusalem againe, (granted by Darius, Nothus) vntill the finall destruction thereof, there should be 70 weekes,

that is to say 70 times 7 yeares, to take a day for a yeare, which make 490 yeares which afterward came to passe; and this wonderfull prophecie was fulfilled at the time appointed. So likewise in Ezechiel in the 4. chap. and 6. verse. Thou shalt beare the iniquitie of the house of Iudah 40 daies: I haue appointed thee a day for a yeare. And in the 14 chap. of Numbers .34. verse. After the number of the daies in which ye searched out the land, even 40. daies every day for a yeare, &c. It is no new thing therefore in Scripture to take a day for a yeare; but it is the stile of the prophecies. Now here is a mystery, and an admirable correspondency: for herein the Iewish-christian Church which lay hid 1260 daies, flying the persecution of the heathenish Roman Empire, was a figure of the flight and persecution of the Christian Church vnder the Papall Roman Empire, which persecution must last 1260 mistical daies, which amount to so many yeares.
               Since it is so that the holy Ghost throughout this whole chap. speakes of the succession and establishment of this Roman Hierarchie, insteed of the Roman Empire, and that we haue shewed that the

Pope began to lay the foundations of this temporal Empire in the yeare of our Lord 755. if therevnto yee ad these 1260 yeares of the continuance of this Hierarchicall Empire, it must needes last to the 2015. yeare of our Lord: according to which reckoning it hath 404. yeares yet to continue. Wherevnto if yee ioine the prediction of the Apostle, who hath told vs that Christ shall abolish this sonne of perdition by the brightnesse of his comming, yee may well neere guesse the time of the cōming of the Lord. Herevnto adde that amongst the Iewes this was an vsuall prophecie, that as the world was made in 6. daies, and after came the day of rest, so the world must endure sixe thousand yeares, & afterwards there shall be an everlasting time of rest: That is to say, that there must be so many thousande yeares in the worldes duration, as there were daies in the creation. For as the Apostle S.
                  2. Pet. 3.8. 
                  Peter saith: One day with the Lord is as a thousand yeares, & a thousand yeares as one day. According to this calculation, this present yeare of our Lord, 1611. being the 5560 year of the world. If the papall Empire must yet continue 404 years,

its end must bee in the 5964. yeare of the world, which is nor farre of from 6000 yeares. Astrologie also doth lend vs some light in this matter: for in the yeare of the world 3665. Ptolomie Philadelph raigneing in Egypt, some 469 yeares after the building of Rome, there lived one Hipparchus a famous Astrologer, who reports that in his time the star commonly called, stella polaris, which is in the taile of the lesser beare, was 12 degrees & two fifths distant frō the poles of the Equator. This starre from age to age hath insensibly still crept neerer to the Pole, whēce it appeareth that the poles of the Equator are moueable; it is not now past 3 degrees distant from the poles of the Equator: when this starre therefore shall come to touch the Pole there being no farther space left for it to go forward (which may well enough come to passe within fiue or sixe hundreth yeares) it seemes that thē there shall be a great change of things, and that this time is the period which God hath prefixed to nature. All these observations put together make vs presume that the Romā Hierarchicall Empire must endure till the 2015 yeare of our Lorde. And that this

Empire being abolisht, the Pope yet shall remaine still, but without power & authoritie, til that Iesus Christ shal destroy him by his last comming, which (as it should seeme by the evidēces formerly cited) shal be some one, or two and twentie ages, after our Saviours incarnation, who is God over all, blessed for ever. Yet I would not haue any think that I speak this as though I went about to prie into such secrets as God himselfe would haue to be hid, or as though I meant to define any thing absolutely concerning the last day, but onlie that I might not seeme to neglect the Revelations which the holy Ghost hath laid open vnto vs in this prophecy: seeing that here he telleth vs how long the Papal Empire shall last, and that S. Paule and 
                     Of this place of Daniel see th
                           •
                        
                      9. Chapt.
                   
                  Daniell in his 7. chap. doe stretch the tearme of time, wherein the son of Perditiō shall last, to the day of iudgement.
               Our adversaries goe more boldly to worke. For taking these 1260 daies simply for 3 yeares and a halfe, they say that Antichrist must not raigne aboue 3 years and a halfe, and that 45. daies after the last Iudgement shall be. If this be true, thē the faithfull that shall liue vnder the dominion

of Antichrist, shall knowe the day of iudgement exactly, and Christs speech shall not be verified of them, wherein hee saith, Of that day and howre knoweth no mā no not the Angels in heaven, as the king of great Brittaine hath learnedly obserued: who notes also that our Lord Iesus hath foretold that at this time men shall bee eating and drinking, & making merry; which sheweth evidently that this shal be a time of rest, and not of troubles and persecutions, and that the comming of Iesus Christ shall not be lookt for. Besides, that such an Empire, which (as they say) shall subdue all the world, should in 3. yeares & a halfe rise, increase, and fall, is a thing altogether impossible: a man cannot in that time ride over a quarter of the countries in post, how much more time had he need aske to conquer them? Or who can imagin that the mystery of iniquitie should in Saint Paules time begin to prepare the way for the sonne of perdition to enter, and that now, that is to say, some 1550. yeares after, there should bee no preparation at all.5. Point of the religious service done to the Popes seat.
                  
               
               It remaines that we speake of the obedience and religious service which the people shall giue to this Roman Hierarchie:

The holy Ghost saith that all mē that inhabit the earth shall adore it: Hee saith, All men, although there bee many countries which never did acknowledge it: for the Scripture lightly speakes after this manner of great Empires, which hold a great number of people and many realms vnder their dominion: especially the Prophet Daniel (to whose stile the holy ghost doth conform himselfe in the Apocalyps) in the 2. chap. 37. and 38 verses, speaking to Nabuchadnezar. O King thou art a king of kings, and in all places where the children of men dwell hee hath given them into thine hand, and hath made thee ruler over them all; although hee had nothing at all in Europe, and but little in Affricke. There is the like forme of speech in the 7. chapter, verse 23. So in speaking of the Pope wee vse to say that all the word is vnder him, although the Turke and Mores disclaime him: but by so saying wee meane that hee hath a large dominion. And our adversaries themselues doe not deny this, since they are of opinion that the heathenish Romā Empire is meant in this prophecie, which yet notwithstanding, was never absolute cōmander over one fourth part

of the world: And I cannot imagin that there shall or can be such a Monarchie to which all the world (without excepting any place) shall be subiect. It is not three yeares and an halfe, no nor 3 ages that wil be sufficient for the obtaining of such a conquest. And there is not the man to bee found with a braine strong enough, to governe an Empire of this nature. The most politicke head in the world would in the governement of such a state be distracted with the multiplicitie of businesse and fall into shivers.
               The dutiful respect therefore and obedience, which the people must yeeld to this Roman Hierarchie, is called Adoration: Not only because the head of this Empire shall cause himselfe to be adored, and make men kisse his feet, but also because of the strange kinde of soveraigntie that the body of this Hierarchie hath attained vnto. The Cardinals in all their meetings, and solemne feastes, goe, and fit before kings, as we haue already 1. Lib. 3. cap.
                   shewed. In Spaine a man may offend the king with lesse daunger then the least of the Inquisition. Frō 
                  Gregory the 7. surnamed Hildebrād, which was made Pope,

in the yeare of our Lord 1073, to Leo the 10. who died in the yeare 1521. there are 448. yeares, during which time wee may say that the Papacie was at the height of her power and glory. Then Moncks were highly honoured, and the Popes Legates tooke their places before kings: then the Pope could command all the nobles, and all the men of armes, to come out of Frāce or England, or any other quarter of Europe, and make thē trot from far through I knowe not howe many places to ioine their forces against the Sarrasins, and filled all Fraunce with widdowes and Orphanes: to him that chaunced to die in this warre, the Pope gaue a degree of glory in Paradice aboue the common sort of Saints. Then he which wore the badge of the crosse did cease to bee the kings subiect, and no Magistrate might touch him what offence soever hee had committed, because hee was the Popes souldier. At that time he made kings to be ierkt, and stroke of the Emperours crowne with his foot, and trod vpon his necke. His power now a daies is much diminished over that it was, and yet even at this time, he makes men come from farre and neere to seek at

Rome for the remission of their sins. And an offence committed against his owne person is a reserved case, whence none in Fraunce may absolue a man, but the least Priest that is, hath authority to pardon a sin cōmitted against the Maiestie of God. Nay which is more, they take vpon them to make God, and to create their creator with the repeating of certaine words; No mervaile therefore if they be so much honoured and respected. So we haue seene this prophecie fulfilled on everie side: whence also wee may assure our selues of the accomplishment of the other part of this prophecie. That they which kill shall be killed, and that they which persecute vs shall bee dealt withall accordingly. Which yet we do not desire, having learn
                     •
                   of our Savior to blesse those that curse vs, and to pray for their amendment.
            
            
               The 6. part of this prophecie.
               
                  11 And I beheld an other beast comming vp out of the earth, which had two hornes like the lambe, but hee spake like the Dragon.
               
                  12 And hee did all that the first beast

could do before him, & he caused the earth, and thē that dwell therin to worship the first beast, whose deadly wound was healed.
            
            
               The Explication.
               
                  11 I saw also a Monarch to rise vp frō a low estate, being of another name and nature then the former Roman Emperours, to wit, the Pope, which wore a miter with tvvo hornes vpon his head, and which seemed in outwarde shew to professe Christ, but whose doctrine was diabolicall.
               
                  12 And he tooke all the power of the Roman Empire vpō him, at Rome, being the seate of the Empire, and exhorted al the people to submit themselues to this Roman Empire, which being destroyed by the Lombards in Italie, was brought to life againe, and reestablished by the Papacie.
            
            
               The proofe.
               
                  S. Iohn doth here speake of two beasts, the former of which is the Roman Empire as all confesse, and the prophecy is cleere. This Empire being excluded out of Rome & Italie by the Lombards, was recovered

by little and little, and restored againe by the Roman Hierarchie, which is helde by S. Iohn for the same beast with the Roman Empire, because it is stil one Empire raigning at Rome, though vnder an other title. The second beast is a liuely representation of the bishop of Rome.
               1 For Saint Iohn saith that this beast came vp out of the earth, that is to say, rose from a small beginning, and meane estate, according as the Latins cal such as get vp from a little, Terrae filios, as mushromes, or toadstooles that growe vp out of the earth in a night: a fashion of speech vsual in Scripture, as in the 2. chapt. of the 1. of Samuell. He raiseth vp the poore out of the dust, that is to say, out of a base condition of life. Now who is there but knows how meane and poore the state of the bishops of Rome was before they came to be earthly Monarchs? Then when they had not one foot of ground, and that the Emperours made them be whipt, emprisoned, & banished them? Then when the 
                     Theod. hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 16 Imperator imperavit Liberium relegari Beroeam quae est in Thracia: Liberi
                           •
                         abeunti misit imperator s
                           •
                        
                        lid
                           •
                        s 500. in s
                           •
                        mptus.
                   Emperour Constantius having exiled Liberius bishop of Rome, gaue him 500 crownes for pitty sake ro relieue him. As the grain of mustard seed, which our Savior speaks

of Luke the 13. ve. 19. which is but little, brought forth a tree, within which the birds of the aire built their nests, so out of this smalnesse of bishops, did the greatnesse of the Pope arise, within the which infinite companies of beneficed men doe nestle themselues, which liue vnder his shaddow.
               2 S. Iohn also saith that he shall haue hornes like the Lambe, but shall speake like the dragon, as if he should haue said, ye wil say when yee see him that hee resembleth Christ Iesus, which is the Lambe of God; and looks like a Christian, but his doctrin is Diabolicall. This also agreeth to the Pope which cals himselfe the Vicar of Iesus Christ, but whose doctrine is contrary to Iesus Christ; for proofe whereof reade my second booke, in that place, where I defend his Maiesties of Englands confession of the faith, It may bee that the two hornes of his ordinary miter, do serue also for the accomplishment of this prophecy.
               3 In the third place S. Iohn saith that hee shall exercise the authority of the first beast, which is the Roman Empire, for as much as he shal counterfait the actions, & vsurp the rights of the Roman Empire:

That this also agreeth to the Pope wee may proue by infinite examples. 1. Hee hath taken a crowne hauing cast away his Bishops crosier staffe. 2. He hath taken the Emperours 
                     Eutrop. l. 9 Carausius purpuram sumpsit & paulo post Galerius pur puratus traditur ad vehiculum decurrisse. S. Ambrosius Theodosio dixit purpura imperatorem non sacerdotem facit.
                   habit which was of skarlet, together with shooes of skarlet, which were proper to the Emperours. 3. The Emperours had a Senat clad in skarlet, & hee hath a Senate of Cardinals clad in cloath of the same colour. 4. In the Senate there were Apotheoses, or Canonizations of Gods practised, as there are Canonizations of Saints in the Popes consistorie. 5. The Emperours caused themselues to be adored, and were 
                     Aurel. vict in Diocletiano▪ Passus adorari se appellari
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         deum Lamprid. idem ait de Heliogabalo in vita Alexandri Severi.
                   called Gods. So the Popes call themselues God, and take vpon them to be adored. 6. The Emperours brought vp the right of fiefs and other duties to be paid to the Lord Paramont in case that the tenants were changed. In imitation whereof the Pope hath established his Annates, by which all Church livings are made fiefs to the Papall See, and pay the first yeares revenewes in case of a new election. 7. The Emperours did receaue the submissions and acknowledgements of subiection, from forraine Princes by their Embassadours: so the Pope doth receaue the

                  submissions of kings, and their oathes of fealtie, which are all bound as soone as ever there is a new Pope chosen to send their Embassadours to kisse his feet, and to tender him an oath of allegeance. 8. The Emperours had their Imposts, and Tributes; & the Pope hath his S. Peter pence, levied in many Countries vpon the head of every particular man: as also petty cōtributions, and a thousand diverse commodities that arise out of dispensations, absolutions, provisions, advouzons, indulgences, erections, derogations, exchange of vowes, matrimoniall causes, &c. which are the tributs, and imposts of this Roman Empire. 9. The Emperours had their civill law, and he hath his Canon law. 10. The Emperours had their Indictions of 15. yeares, and hee hath his Roman Indictions of the like time. 11. The Emperours had their Publicans, & tole-gatherers, which did farme the revenewes of the Empire. So the Pope hath his Dataries and Bullists which rent the commodities of this spirituall merchandise. 12. The Emperours had their Trapezites, or exchangers at Rome: & the Pope hath his Banckers in Lions, and diverse other places of Europe, which will procure

dispensations and absolutions from Rome at a certaine price, and help you to obtain the remission of your sinnes by letters of exchange. 13. The Roman Emperours having conquered a countrie, laboured to plant the Latin tongue in it: in imitation of which policie, the Pope hath so prevailed, that he hath brought all the countries which are vnder him to pray to God,
                     Sucton. Caligula ex capturis prostibul
                           •
                        um vectigal instituit, quantum quae
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         vno concubitis mereret. Lamprid. i
                           •
                         Alexandr
                           •
                        
                        ▪ Severo. Lenonum vecctigal & m
                           •
                        
                        retricum, & exoletorum in sacrum oerarium vetuit inferri & ad ins
                           ••
                        
                        rationem theatri, amphitheatri, & Circi deputavit.
                   and say their service in the Latin tongue, and it is not long since that in France the law acts, and publike instruments were made in Latin; in doing this, hee hath stamped the print of his governement vpon vs, and made vs weare the badges of his Empire. 14. The Roman Emperours took an yearly rent to suffer the Stewes; The Pope which did succeed in this Empire, hath also succeeded in the honestie of this action.
               4 For to make the matter more cleer, S. Iohn hauing said that this second beast doth resemble the first beast, and exercise his power, addes that it is in the presence of the first beast, & in the very place where the seat of the Roman Empire is, that is to say, at Rome it selfe: or at leastwise in the presence of this Hierarchicall Roman Empire.
               
               
                  Let the reader therfore put al this together, to wit, that we are foretold of a man 1. which shall rise vp from a meane estate. 2. Which shall be a Christian by profession, but yet shall teach wicked doctrine. 3. Which shall vsurpe the rights, and imitate the actions of the Roman Empire. 4. which shall haue his seate in the same place, where the seate of the Empire was. And after that hee hath runne overall histories, and drawed his braines drie with long seeking after another besides the Pope, to whome all these things may agree: yet shall he never be able to shew vs such another: The verses following will tell vs of other markes no lesse cleere, and evident.
               Neverthelesse (since it appeareth by the 12. verse, that the second beast which wee proue to be the Pope, shall make vse of this healing and reestablishment of the Roman Empire, for the authorising of this Empire reestablished by the Papacie) it is manifest that this wound here spoken of cannot be the death of Iulius Caesar, nor of Domitius Nero, nor yet the stroake receaued by the Herules, and Gothes, because the healing of these wounds did no

way encrease the dignity of the Pope, nor did he gaine any thing by them. Who can imagine that the people were moued to yeeld themselues subiect to the Papacie, by wondring at the Empire which being fallen was set vp againe by Augustus Caesar, or by Vespasian, or by Narses? But wel may it be that the wound receaved by the Lumbards being healed by the advancement of the Roman Hierarchie, the Pope did hereby come to bee an earthly Monarch, and by this meanes advance his spirituall power. So did hee make the people to submit themselues to the Roman Empire that was healed of the deadly wound in as much as the state of the Roman Monarch, which he tooke vpon him after the destruction of the Roman Empire by the Lombards, made him to be highly respected of the people, and did infinitely exalt his authoritie.
            
            
               The 6. part of this prophecie.
               
                  13 And he did great wonders, so that he made fire to come downe from heaven on the earth in the sight of men.
               
                  14 And deceived them that dwell on

the earth by the signes which were permitted him to do in the sight of the beast, saying to thē that dwell on the earth, that they shoulde make the image of the beast which had the wound of a sword, and did liue.
               
                  15 And it was permitted to him to giue a spirit vnto the image of the beast; so that the image of the beast shoulde speake, and should cause that as many as would not worship the image of the beast should be killed.
            
            
               The Explication.
               
                  13 And this Pope wrought miracles, in so much that he sent forth the lightnings, and thunderbolts of his excommunications against Kings, and their people: and caused S. Anthonies fire to come downe from heavē and made it thunder and lighten by a miracle.
               
                  14 And the people vvere seduced because of the miracles which God did suffer him to doe, for the authorizing of this Romane Papal Empire, commanding the people to make vp the image of the ancient Roman Empire again, that is to say, to serue the Roman Papall Empire with the same manner of obedience as they did the ancient Romane

Empire, which being demolished was built vp againe by the Roman Hierarchie.
               
                  15 And God did suffer him to giue force and strength to this Papall Empire, or Hierarchie, made after the image of the ancient Empire, for the spirituall power that it did vsurpe gaue soule and life to its temporall power. Which Papall Empire being nothing else but an imaginarie Empire, and which consisteth only in the opinion of such as yeelde obedience vnto it, neverthelesse speakes prowde things, and makes all such to be massacred and burnt, that shall refuse to subiect themselues to this imaginarie Empire, made according to the image of the ancient Roman Empire.
            
            
               The Proofe of the exposition.
               The Holy Ghost giu
                     ••
                   one more marke yet to know the 
                     〈◊〉
                   by, to wit, that he shall worke great sig
                     ••
                  s, and miracles. As for the miracles of paperie wee haue spoken sufficiently of them alreadie. Amongst other signes, S. Iohn saith that

he shall make fire fall downe from heavē. Whether it be that we are to vnderstande this of S. 
                  
                     You haue an example of this engraued over the Portall of S. Anthonies Abby were Paris. read also the Legend of S. Anthonie.
                   
                  Anthonies fire which the begging friars in times past made to fall vpon such as offended them; or whether it be to vnderstood of the divers shrines, and popish reliques, which when a man pul
                     •
                   down, the heaven straight waies is on fire, and there is nothing but raine, and lightning; or whether it be that S. Iohn speakes this of spirituall thunderbolts such as are the Popes excōmunications, vnder which Christian realmes some 600 or 700. years since did tremble.
               These things are done (saith S. Iohn) by the seconde beast in the presence of the first, that is to say by the Pope in the presēce of the Romā Hierarchical Empire, in the same place where the seate of the Empire is, & for the authorising therof. Which Hierarchical Empire
                  ▪ the holy Ghost by an admirable kinde of speech, and full of waight, cals the image of the first beast: because that although the Roman Hierarchie, be a continuation, and succession of the ancient Roman Monarchie, and is 
                     〈◊〉
                   in this book by the same beast. Neverthelesse, if we consider the point somewhat

better, and looke a little neerer into the matter, wee shall finde that it is rather an image and imitation of the ancient Roman Empire, and a kinde of part that is acted vpon the seat of the ancient Empire. So the Roman Hierarchie is called the image of the beast, both because it is built in imitation of the Roman Empire, as wee haue shewed aboue by 14 examples, as also because it is an imaginarie Empire, which doth consist only in the opinion of the subiects. Since the power therof hurts none but such as feare it. Its dispensations are worth as much, as we esteeme them to be worth; set light by the Popes thunderbolts, and you shall sleepe the better. The price of his holy Graines, Agnus Dei, Beads, holy roses, and consecrated mantles, cōsists only in the opiniō of the buyers. And his trading of late begins not to be so good as it was. Should a Prince or. cōmon wealth but a hundreth years since haue done but a quarter of that which the Venetians haue within these few years, he (being bound hand and foot) had beene cast downe into hell and given to the Divell without all remission. The Croysade had beene preached against him in al places,

by vertue of which millions of men would haue assembled themselues together from all parts of Europe. to fall vpon the heretickes, that so they might gaine Paradice. But the King of great Brittaine, which hath stript the whore, and laid opē her mysteries, doth even to this day stand still vnexcommunicated. The gunpowder threatnings, are more dangerous then the Popes excommunications.
               Now albeit this Hierarchie be an image of the ancient Empire, yet Saint Iohn saith that this image doth liue and speake, and that this second beast which is the Pope, giues life vnto it, & makes it speak; words wonderfully expresse, and significant. For the temporall power of the Popes Hierarchicall Empire would be nothing else but a dead image of the ancient Roman Empire, were it not that the spirituall power, did quicken the temporall, and giue strength vnto it. For it is his spirituall power, that accumulates such great store of goods, and riches vpon the temporall; which opens the peoples purses vnto him which forceth kings necks to bow, which makes his thunderbolts so dreadfull, which compels men to repaire from all

quarters to Rome, for to share of the spirituall liberalities of his Holinesse. Yet he is ever a gainer hereby, and his spirituall power, serues for nothing but to vphold his temporal, as Guicciardine formerly alleaged, affirmeth. It is the same spirituall power, that makes this image of the beast to speake, that is to say, which causeth that this Papall Empire (formed according to the pourtraiture of the Roman Empire) should speake so big, giue lawes, pronounce decrees, decide questions of faith with a finall resolution, & command all such to bee put to death as shall refuse to obey him: sounding the trumpet from an high place, thereby to incourage kings and people to exercise crueltie.
               This notwithstanding wee are to note one generall doctrine, that as they are not the carvers, nor founders, that make Idols but they which serue them, so also in this place, that the Pope which is the founder of this image, and principall promoter of this Hierarchie resembling the Romā Empire, is not he for all that which hath made it to be an image, but the opinion of the people. Wherefore S. Iohn saith that this second beast, which is the Pope caused

the inhabitants of the earth to make an image of the first beast, and to erect an Empire like to the Roman Empire that was decayed▪ For it is not the subtiltie of the Popes that hath made this Papall Empire, but the stupiditie of the people.
            
            
               The 7. part of this Prophecie.
               
                  16 And hee made all, both small and great rich and poore
                     •
                  , free and bond, to receaue a marke in their right hand or in their foreheads.
               
                  17 And that no man might buy or sel saue he that had the marke, or the name of the beast, or the number of his name.
            
            
               The Explication.
               
                  16 And hee made all both small and great, rich and poore, bond and free, to giue him their hāds, & to take an oath to be faithfull vnto him, and to be markt by their actions. And their foreheads were markt with the marke of confirmation; & they made profession of his religion, which profession of religion is often in holy Scripture, called by the name of a marke in the forehead.
               
                  
                  17 And hee tooke order that no man might trafficke, nor sell, nor buy, nor exchange benefices, nor be suffered to purchase an Archbishops pall, nor haue a license, nor any part in the Church goods, no nor yet buy an estate, if he had not the name and profession of a Romanist.
            
            
               The Proofe.
               By the right hande is meant the outward actions. This is a fashion of speech vsuall with the holy Ghost. As in the 144. Psalme, ver. 8. Whose right hand is a right hand of falshood, that is to say, that they are disloyall in their actions. And there is nothing more common in scripture, then by the cleanenesse, or vncleannesse of the hands, to vnderstand the iustice or iniustice of the actions, as Psal. 18. ver. 25. & Psal. 24. ver. 4. By the right hand wee may likewise vnderstand the promise of fidelitie, as S. Paul in the second to the Galath. v. 9. saith that Iames, Peter, and Iohn, 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , gaue him and Barnabas their right hands. So in the last chap. of the 1. book of Chronicles, all the sonnes of king David, gaue their hands to bee vnder king Salomon.
                  
That is to say, tooke an oath of alleagiance to be true subiects vnto him.
               As for the marke in the forehead, the Apocalyps it selfe shews vs, what the meaning of this is. For in the 9. chap. & 4. ver. the Locusts are commanded, not to hurt the grasse of the earth, neither any greene thing, neither any tree, but only those men which haue not the seale of God in their foreheads. And in the 7. cha. God doth marke his faithful servants in their foreheads. As therefore the truely faithfull are not marked in the forehead with any visible mark but this marke in the foreheade is the vnfeigned profession of a true Christian, so likewise the marke of a beast in the forehead of a man, is the profession of beeing faithfull vnto the beast, as Thomas also doth expound it in the 3. P. of his summes 63. quest. and 3. Art. 
                     Character bestiae intelligi potest vel 
                           •
                        bstinata malicia quâ aliqui deputātur ad poenam aeternā vel professio illiciti cult
                           ••
                        .
                   
                  By the Character of the beast we may vnderstand either an obstinate malice, by reason of which some are adiudged to everlasting punishment, or the profession of an vnlawfull religion. This marke therefore is the profession of Popery. But if any one be desirous rather to know of a marke really imprinted in the forehead, there is the marke of confirmation may

satisfie him, with which the Bishop doeth marke children in the forehead, without which marke the 
                     Can. vt. Ieiune Dist. 5. de consecrat.
                   
                  decrees of the Church of Rome pronoūce that a man is but halfe a Christian.
               Without this marke, and profession of Poperie S. Iohn saith that no man is admitted to sell or buy, for all the goods of this Papall Empire are bought and sold. It is nothing else but a bare traffique. Benefices are exchanged vpon certaine considerations; He that hath but a leane bishopricke layes about him howe hee might scorce it for a fatter. As soone as ever an Abbotship or benefice is vacant, manie may sue, but he shall be sure to carry it away that can bribe best, & giue the greatest presents. There are Abbotships conferred vpon Captaines, and illiterat men, Bishopricks, and Cardinalships bestowed on little children; and sometimes in waie of recompense for vnhonest services. To be briefe it is a most shamefull merchandize. And how should not these things be sold, since that God himselfe is sold, and that we haue heard aboue how Pope Pius the 2. complaineth that the holy Ghost is sold at Rome, and the forgiuenesse of sins?

Nowe I am of opinion that it is easier for them to sell him, then to deliuer him after they haue sold him.
               No man (according to the rules of the Church of Rome) may haue a share in the emoluments of this merchandize, but only he which shall professe himselfe to be a Roman, and to be of the church of Rome, & a true subiect to the Pope. The formes of the admission of Bishops, Archbishops Cardinals, Knights of Malta, yea and of kings themselues, haue this article inserted expresly in them, of fidelitie and obedience to the Papall See.
            
            
               The 8. part of this prophecie.
               
                  17 And hee tooke order that no man might buy or sell; saue he that had the marke or the name of the beast or the number of his name.
               
                  18 Here is wisdome. Let him that hath wit, count the nūber of the beast: for it is the number of a man, and his number is 666.
               
            
            
               The Explication.
               
                  17 And hee tooke order that no man

might trafficke, nor sel, nor buy, nor exchāge benefices, nor bee suffered to purchase an Archbishops Pall, nor haue a Licence, nor any part in the Church goods, no nor yet buy an estate, if he had not the name and profession of a Romanist: and were not of the number of those which are marked with the figures, or numbers of the letters of his name.
               
                  18 In which number they which think themselues the wisest may finde some thing worth their search. Whosoever hath understanding let him diligently calculate the summe, to which these Greeke Cyphars or numbers of the Pope of Rome doe amount; for it is an vsuall number amongest men, and therefore easie to be vnderstood. And this number to which the Greeke letters of his name doe amount, is 666. For this word, Latin, which is the ordinary name by which the Greeke church doth call those of the Roman Church, and their head) being written in Greeke, and after calculated makes vp iust 666. Which number also by an admirable occurrence, doth admonish you that 666. yeares after the revealing of this prophecie, this 2 beast, to wit the Pope, shall beginne to heale the wound of the ancient Empire, and place the Roman Empire again in its former seat.
            
            
               
               The Proofe.
               Of the traffick, and the marke, we haue said enough already. But concerning the number of the name of the second beast there is more difficultie: There bee two things that giue vs some light in this matter, the one is, that S. Iohn saith, that the number is the number of a man, that is to say, a number vsuall amongst men; So hee puts vs out of the labour of seeking after mysticall numbers, as when a day is taken for a yeare. The other is, that since the question is of numbring or cyphring the Letters of this name, this name must of necessity be in a tongue, the letters of which are cyphers or Arithmeticall numbers. Now this is proper to the Greeke and Hebrew tongues, to haue no other cyphers but the letters of their Alphabet. But being that S. Iohn wrote in Greeke, & that to the Greeke churches too, this name cannot but be Greeke. S. Irenee following these rules, noted (two hundreth yeares after the birth of our Saviour, that the letters of cyphars of this word 
                     
                        
                           
                              •
                           —30
                        
                           
                              •
                           —1
                        
                           
                              •
                           —300
                        
                           
                              •
                           —5
                        
                           
                              •
                           —10
                        
                           
                              •
                           —50
                        
                           
                              •
                           —70
                        
                           
                              •
                           — 200
                        666.
                     
                   
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , that is to say, Latin, being added together make vp iust 666. Now to knowe whether this name bee the true name or

no of the Bishop of Rome, we are not to look to the fashion of speech that is in vse with vs now adaies in France or Italy, but to the Greeks manner of speaking, seeing that S. Iohn wrote in Greeke and to the Greekes; and into the nature of the thing.
               We are therefore to knowe that after the Empire was translated, the Cittie of Constantinople was called new Rome, and the Countrie about commonly called Thracia was called Romania likewise, and is so called to this day. But as for the churches of Italie, France, and Spaine, which are reckoned vnder the Roman Patriarchat, the Greekes doe commonly call thē the Latin churches. When the Greeks see a french man or German in their country, they aske him, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ? Are you a Latin? that is to say, as we vse to speake here with vs, are you of the Romish Church? So at the end of the Councell of Florence, there is a long list of the names and subscriptions of the Greeke Bishops, and in the second place the subscriptions of the Bishops of the Romish Church, amongst which there bee some French men, and Spaniardes, and Flemmings, and yet neverthelesse over the head of all

these subscriptions is written, Subscriptiones Latinorum patrum; So Nilus Bishop of Thessalonica wrote two books in greek one against Purgatory, the other against the Primacie of the Bishop of Rome, where he speakes (I know not how often) of the Latins, and of the Latin Church, without ever calling it the Romā church. Let this therefore bee taken for certaine, that then when the Bishop of Rome became a Monarch, and erected an earthly Empire at Rome (for this is the time of which S. Iohn doth prophecie) the Roman Church was commonly called the Latin Church, and by a consequent, the head thereof was called Latin.
               As for the nature of the thing, there is no name that is more agreeing vnto it; seeing that the Latin tongue only is received in Popish churches; all their service is said in Latin, the people are taught to pray in Latin; the Buls, and Indulgences, and letters of absolution are all made in Latin, the holy scripture is not allowed of but in Latin, and the Latin translation is preferred before the originall. And it is not long since that in the court of Parliament, and seates of

Iustice, al the decrees, and sentences, acts, and publike instrumentes were set downe in Latin. To conclude, all that is there is Latin. I am verily perswaded that Irenaeus speaking this had no reference to the bishop of Rome, for although he take vp Victor bishop of Rome somewhat short, for his sharpnesse & violence, yet the bishops of Rome in his time were so poore and feeble, that no man could possibly imagin that they shoulde ever haue come to this heigth. And indeed Irenaeus was rather led away by the coniecture of other names, where the selfe same number is foūd. But the experience of succeeding ages hath refuted his other coniectures, & ratified this, by which he hath opened a way vnto vs to know the truth, which he could not liue to know by experience, as we haue.
               But if besides this we shew that not only the number of 666. is found within this word Latin: but also that this very number doth point out the time vnto vs exactly in which the Pope became to be a Monarch, & began to lift vp the Roman Empire into its former seat, then I hope that they which are most set against this doctrine,

will wonder at this interpretation, and by an amazed silence giue the glorie to God.
               We must vnderstand therfore, that the first persecution of Christians (raised vp by Nero in the last yeare of his raigne) fell out in the year of our Lord, 69. Fourteene yeares after, that is, in the yeare 83. Domitian began an other persecution, in which S. Iohn was cited to Rome, and thence banished into the Isle of Pathmos, as S. Hierome witnesseth in his 
                     Quartode 
                           〈◊〉
                         anno secundam post Neronē persecutionē movente Domitiano in Patmon insulā relegatus scripsit Apocalypsin.
                   
                  Catalogue. This persecution was more gentle then the others, and the Emperour went not so farre as bloud, as he did afterwardes towardes the ende of his raigne. In this Isle, did this Revelation appeare to S. Iohn, Apoc. 1. ver. 9. which afterward he committed to writing, towards the end of Domitians raigne as Irenaeus witnesseth in his fifth booke. For he remained in this Island vntill the time that Nerva came to rule, which began his raigne in the yeare 97. Seeing therfore that the Pope began to be a commander & temporal Prince in Rome & Italie in the yeare of our Lord, 755. by the indiscreete liberality of Pepin king of Fraunce: if ye go 666. yeares higher, yee

shal light vpon the yeare of our Lord, 89. In which yeare S. Iohn was yet in the Isle of Pathmos, where he cōtinued some few years after, at what time he had leasure to commit that to writing, which he had received from God by Revelation. It is true that Pepin, and Charles the Great his son, & Lewis the Debonnayre his grand-child which gaue this donation, did yet reserue the right of soveraignty vnto themselues. But for all this the Pope did not spare to labour the best he could to make himselfe a monarch, and did even at that time lay his proiects for the compassing of a Monarchie, taking vpon him to bestow the dignitie of a Patrician vpon Pepin, which none but the Emperours could conferre, & presuming to set the Imperiall Crowne vpon the head of Charles the Great, and that by a sleight, the said Charles the great not marking so much, and after being angry with him for so doing, and saying as he went out, that if hee had thought the Pope would haue vsed him so, he woulde not haue come into the Church, as Eginard witnesseth in his history. So the Pope encreasing dayly more and more, did in fine driue the successours of Pepin, and

                  Charles the great his benefactours out of all Italie: and hath brought them to kisse his feet, and to hold their crownes at his mercie and discretion, calling himselfe Lord commander over the Empire, and bragging that he hath receiued the dominion of heaven and earth from God.
               Now here I cannot but wonder at the rashnesse of some which dare accuse Irenee for writing this word, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , falslie with an 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , as if a Graecian, and one of the learnedst amongst them, knew not howe to write true orthography in his owne tongue. For although this word bee also written without an Iota, yet they which haue any skil in the tongue, do know that the Graecians did vse to write an 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   where the Latins wrote an I. So Nilus, and Epirus, and Mithras, are written in Greeke 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Ioseph Scaliger in his notes vpon Eusebius Chronicle, page 106. markes how the Graecians doe often turne the I, of the Latins into 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   when it is long, & that an N comes after, as in these words, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Not that they did write it so still, for this was left indifferent. Nor will any man wonder here at, which knowes that the Latins did

pronoūce their I long like 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , whence that inscription Capteiuei of a Comedie in Plautus comes, and the verse of Lucilius cited by Quintilian in the first book of his oratoricall instructions, Iam pueret venere, è postremum facito at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      I, for hee helde that it should be written puerei, mendacei, furei. The importunity of our adversaries haue forced me to play the schoole boy, and to rub vp my old Grammar learning, in steed of admiring the secrets of the wisdome of God, who vnder the transparent vaile of this prophecie, hath made vs to see, and feele his truth.
               But here I am to admonish the reader that when I lay the accomplishment of of these 666. yeares vpon the 755 year of our Lord, I do not thereby vnderstande that Antichrist did but then begin to be made manifest. He was made knowne before by many effectes, neverthelesse nothing like so manifestly as after when hee came to be an earthly Monarch: For hee had before this time taken the title of Head of the Church vpon him, vnder a shew that in the contention between him and the bishop of Constantinople, the Parricide Phocas had adiudged the Primacie

to the bishop of Rome, iust 666. yeares after that Pompey had taken Ierusalem, and subdued the nation of the Iewes which as then was the only church of God. For Pompey wrought this exploite 61 yeares after the birth of our Saviour in the consulship of Cicero and Antonie, and Phocas gaue the Primacie to Boniface the 3. in the yeare of our Lord, 606. so that to count from this exploite of Pompey there are 666. yeares: By this meanes betweene the subduing of the church of the old Testament by the Roman Empire, and betweene the bondage of the church of the newe Testament by the bishop of Rome there are 666. yeares, which is an excellēt observation, and which his Maiestie of Englād hath faithfully noted. But this 13. chap. speaks not of the time in which Antichrist began to appeare, but of the time in which he began to establish a worldlie Empire, and encroach vpon the rights, & imitate the actions of the Roman Emperour. Which he began 666. yeares after this Revelation.
            
         
         
            
            THE PROPHECIE CONTAIned in the 14. Chap. of the Apocalyps. CHAP. 5.
            
               
                  
                     1 Then I looked, & lo, a Lamb stood on mount Sion, and with him an hundreth, fortie, and foure thousand, having his fathers name written in their foreheads.
                  
                     2 And I heard a voice from heaven as the sound of many waters, and as the sound of a great thunder: and I heard the voice of harpers, harping with their harps.
                  
                     3 And they sung as it were a new song before the throne, and before the 4. beastes, and the elders: & no man could learne that song, but the hundreth fortie and fowre thousand, which were bought from the earth.
                  
                     4 These are they which are not defiled with women: for they are Virgins: these follow the Lambe wheresoever he goeth: these are bought from men being the first fruits vnto God and vnto the Lambe.
                  
                     5 And in their mouthes was founde no guile: for they are without spot before the throne of God.
                  
                     6 Then I saw another Angell flie in

the midst of heaven, having an everlasting Gospell to preach vnto them that dwell on the earth, and to every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people.
                  
                     7 Saying with a lowd voice, feare God, and giue glorie to him; for the howre of his Iudgement is come: and worship him that made heaven, and earth, and the sea, and the fountaines of waters.
                  
                     8 And there followed an other Angell saying Babylon that great cittie is fallen, it is fallen: for shee made all nations to drinke of the wine of the wrath of her fornication.
                  
                     9 And the third Angell followed thē saying with a lowd voice, If any man worship the beast, and his image, & receiue his mark in his forehead, or on his hands;
                  
                     10 The same shall drinke of the wine of the wrath of God yea of the pure wine, which is powred into the cup of his wrath, and hee shall bee tormented in fire and brimstone before the holy Angels, and before the Lambe.
                  
                     11 And the smoake of their torment shall ascend ever more: and they shall haue no rest day nor night, which worship the beast and his image, and whosoever receiveth the print of his name.
                  
                     12 Here is the patience of Saints: here

are they that keepe the commaundements of God, and the faith of Iesus.
                  
                     13 Then I heard a voice from heaven saying vnto me, write, The dead which die in the Lord are fully blessed. Even so saith the spirit: For they rest from their labours & their workes follow them.
                  
                     14 And I looked, and beholde a white clowde, and vpon the clowde one sitting like to the sonne of man, having on his head a golden crown, and in his hand a sharp sickle.
                  
                     15 And an other Angell came out of the Temple, crying with a lowd voice to him that sate on the clowde, Thrust in thy sickle and reape: for the time is come to reape; for the harvest of the earth is ripe.
                  
                     16 And he that sate on the clowd, thrust in his sickle on the earth, and the earth was reaped.
                  
                     17 Then an other Angell came out of the the temple, which is in heaven, having also a sharpe sickle.
                  
                     18 And another Angell came out from the altar, which had power over fire, & cried with a lowde crie to him that had the sharpe sickle, and said, Thrust in thy sharpe sickle, & gather the clusters of the vineyard of the earth: for her grapes are ripe.
                  
                     
                     19 And the Angel thrust in his sharpe sickle on the earth and cut downe the vines of the vineyard of the earth, and cast them in to that great wine presse of the wrath of God
                  
                     20 And the wine presse was troden without the citty, and bloud came out of the wine presse vnto the horse bridles, by the space of a thousande and sixe hundreth furlongs.
               
            
            
               The Exposition.
               1 After that God had made me to see the dominion of the Bishop of Rome figured by the second beast, hee shewed Iesus Christ vnto me having the governement of his Church: and with him a great multitude of the faithfull of every tribe, and people, which had the marke of the people of God, which is the true profession of the faith, and Christianitie.
               2 And I heard a voice from heaven as the sound of many waters, and like a clash of thunder, and to mixe pleasantnes with this maiesty, after this voice, I heard a melodious cōfort, as it were of harpers playing vpon harps, and a heavenly harmony.
               3 And they sang a new thanksgiving

containing the redemption manifested by the new covenant, in the presence of God and his Angels, and the Patriarches, and Apostles. And no man can conceaue what this thanksgiving was, and howe God ought to be praised for this redemption, but only the truely faithfull, chosen out of every tribe, and nation; which were saued, and redeemed by Iesus Christ, out of the whole Masse of mankind, that was lost & corrupted.
               4 These faithfull did abstaine from al fleshly fornication, & from spirituall too, which is Idolatrie; for they are chast. They follow the commandment of Iesus Christ, and suffer themselues to be led whither it shall seeme good to him. They were redeemed out of the whole stocke of mankind for to be consecrated vnto God, and to Iesus Christ, as the first fruites of his creatures.
               5 And there was no guile found in their mouthes, nor no dissembling words, for they did appeare pure and innocent before the throne of God.
               6 After that I saw a faithfull Minister of the Gospell rise out of the corruption of this papall kingdome, and passing

through the midst of the church to preach conformitie to the everlasting Gospel; & God raised him vp to preach vnto the mē that dwell vpon the earth, and to every nation.
               7 And he cried out saying, Feare God & giue him the glory, for the houre of the last iudgement is at hand; worship no creatures any more, nor the reliques of Saints nor their images, nor the Pope, nor the Host, nor any other creature; but worship him which hath made heauen and earth, and the bottomelesse deepe, whence the rivers arise.
               8 And another faithfull minister of the Gospell came after him saying, for certaine Rome is fallen, because she made all nations drunke with her furious Idolatry.
               9 And a third minister came after these two saying stoutly, if any one worship the Pope, or yeeld himselfe subiect to the Empire, which he hath formed anew, according to the image of the ancient Roman Empire, professing himselfe to be a Roman, or of the Latin Church, or giue him a hand of fealtie, and obedience;
               10 This man shall also drinke of the wine of the wrath of God, yea of the pure

wine, powred into the cup of his wrath, that is to say, he shall tast of Gods displeasure to the end, and shall bee cast into hell in the presence of Iesus Christ, and the Angels there to bee burnt everlastingly.
               11 And the smoake of their torment shall ascend evermore. And they shall enioy no rest, which doe worship the Pope, and the Empire which hee hath formed anew according to the image of the Romā Empire, & whosoever doth professe himselfe to bee a Roman, or of the Latine Church.
               12 Here is the patience of the faithful to be seen, in this it is that they appeare which keep the commandements of God, and the faith of Iesus.
               13 Then I heard a voice from heaven saying, happy are they which die in the faith of our Lord Iesus. From that time, of a truth (saith the spirit) they rest from their labours, and they shall receaue the reward of their good workes.
               14 Afterward I looked, and behold, a white cloud appeared vnto me, and vpō this cloude there sate an Angel, like to a man: which had a crowne of gold vpō his head, as who had the dignitie of an Arch-Angel,

and power over many spirits, & in his hand a sharpe sickle, for to execute the iudgements of God.
               15 And another Angell came out of the assembly, and Church of the Saints, which speaking vnto the Angel that was vpon the cloude, gaue him commandement from God saying: Exercise iustice now vpon the earth; for the houre of displaying Gods iudgements is come, because the causes which drawe the iudgements of God downe (to wit the sinnes of men) are come to their full measure.
               16 Then the Angell that sate vpō the cloude, threw downe the chastisements ordained of God vpon the earth, & a multitude of men were destroyed, and many of the wicked cut of, as eares of corne which is reaped.
               17 And after this Angell God sent out another from amongst the company of his Saints, and of his heavenly Church, having also a sharpe sickle for to doe the like execution, and to exercise the iudgements of God vpon the earth.
               18 And after this second Angel, there went a third Angel out from before the presence of Iesus Christ (whose crosse is

the only altar) to whome God did vse to commi
                     •
                   the executions of his iudgements by fire. This Angell cried with a lowd voice to him which had the sharpe sickle, saying vnto him, reveale the iudgements of God forthwith, and punish the sinnes of men; for their sinnes are growne to maturitie.
               19 Then the Angel did that which was commanded him, and did exercise iudgement vpon the earth, and slewe the nations of the earth, and 
                     •
                  rod vpon them as we vse to tread grapes in a wine presse.
               20 And this iudgement of God was executed without the Church of God, which is the holy Ierusalem: which was exempted from this Iudgement. And the blood of this slaughter was so great, that there ran a river of blood from the place for the space of twentie leagues, & so deep that the horses stood vp in it even to the bridles.
            
            
               The proofe and cle
                     •
                  ring of this Exposition.
               THis Chapter is an admonition of the evils and afflictions represented in the

13. Chap. and a consolation to temper the hardnesse of the Churches servitude vnder the Papall kingdome, vnder which although the Church lye hid, yet the holy Ghost saith in the first verse of this chapter, that God had an hundreth, fortie, and foure thousand faithfull remaining still amidst this corruption; according as when Elias in the kingdome of Israel thought that hee only had beene left, 
                     
                        •
                     9. God told him that hee had 7000 men more which never bowed the knee to Baal. Now the number of a hundreth fortie & foure thousand is not without a mysterie. For besides that this number is a cubicall number cō
                  sisting of twelue times twelue, (God therby intending to signifie that the number of his elect is perfect, and prescribed with great wisdome, and which may not be diminished) there is yet more in it, to wit, that God doth hereby shewe that this nū
                  ber shall bee taken indifferently out of all people and nations: like as in the 7. chapt. this very number is taken equally out of the twelue tribes of Israel. For that by the 144000. all the Church of the Elect is here vnderstood, it appeares by that in the third verse, where it is said, that these were

bought from the earth.
               The foure beasts, which are mentioned by the way in the 3. verse, are described exactly in the 4. Chapter of this booke. And this vision is taken out of the first of Ezekiel, which makes mee to vnderstand these 4 beasts in the same sense as they are vnderstood by Ezekiel, to wit, for the Angelicall vertues standing before the thron of God: Wherefore Ezekiel giues them wings also which signifie their readinesse to ob
                     •
                  y. And they haue diverse faces for to shew the diversitie of their vertues. The one hath the face of a Lyon▪ for to shewe their courage, the other of an oxe, for to shew their strength, the other the face of a man, for to shew their wisdome, the other resembleth and eagle, which witnesseth their speech, and readinesse.
               The 24 beasts are the twelue Patriarks of the old Testament, and the twelue of the newe, which are the 12 Apostles, by whom we are to vnderstand al the church of the glorified Saints. Which we may easily knowe by the 9 verse of the fift chapt. where these 24 Elders do praise the Lamb because he redeemed them vnto God by his blood, out of every kindred, & people

and tongue, and nation. Now if the 24 Elders doe represent the whole Church of the glorified Saints, and speake in their name, by the like reason is it also agreeable, that these 4 beastes should represent the whole companie of Angelicall spirits.
               The praises wherewith they did extoll God for revealing the mysteries of our redemption, cannot be vnderstood by fleshly and sensuall men, to whome the Gospell seemeth folly, as our Saviour saith to Peter. Mat. 16. Flesh and blood hath not revealed this vnto thee, but my father which is in heaven. Of these 144000. which represent the whole company of the faithfull, S. Iohn saith that they are not defiled with women, for they are virgins. Doubtles a continent, and chast virginitie both of body & mind is a great perfectiō: it keeps out all wicked thoughts from entrance; it frees the soule from care, and giues much libertie to the service of God. Yet for all this I cannot bee perswaded that S. Iohn doth here speake of bodily virginity, or of continuing in a single state of life: For thē we should exclude the Prophets, and the Apostles out of the number of the faithfull which follow the Lambe, and which

were redeemed from amongst the inhabitants of the earth. This makes mee thinke that as Idolatrie is infinite times called fornication, & adulterie in holy scripture, so this chastitie and virginitie here spokē of is nothing else but an abstaining from the service of Idols, which are as it were the Concubines with whome Idolatours doe commit fornication, and breake the spirituall bond with which they had tied themselues vnto Christ.
               They which are thus chaste and continent, are by the iudgement of the spirit of God in the fift verse pronounced to bee without spot; I confesse that in the most holy whilst they are in this flesh there is ever some infirmity remaining, and the remainders of sin abiding. David acknowledgeth himselfe to be a sinner, Psa. 51. & 130. & 143. and his life confirmes it. The Apostle S. Paul confesseth that sinne dwelleth in him, and that he doth the evill which he would not do. Rom. 7. We all of vs faile in most things as S, Iames saith. Neverthelesse the faithfull are said to bee iust, and without spot, because the bloud of Iesus Christ doth wash them from all their sins, 1. Ioh. 1. and because the righteousnesse of

Iesus Christ is ours, wherefore he is also called the Lord our righteousnes, Ier. 23. ver. 6. & 1. Cor. 1. v. 30. & 2. Cor. 5. ver. 21. Hee is also saide to bee without deceipt, whose repentance is serious, and his heart without hypocrisie, as Nathanael in the 1. chap. of S. Ioh. v. 47. And they whose charity and faith is without counterfaiting, Rom. 12.9. & 1. Tim. ver. 5. albeit their charity and faith bee weake and imperfect.
               In the 6.8. and 9. verses the Angels sent for to preach the gospel, are Ministers & Pastours of the Church. For God sendeth not his Angels to preach in the church but his Ministers, which are often called Angels, in the second and third Chapters of this very booke. Which is also vsuall in the old Testament; especially in the 5. of Ecclesiastes, v. 6. And the Prophet Malachie seemes to haue taken his name from this. For Malachie signifies The Angell of the Lord.
               
               From the 6. verse, to the end of the cha. the spirit of God doth reveale an admirable history, and discovers many secrets vnto vs, for hee describeth at large what the condition of the poore Church shall

be vnder the government of Poperie, till the time that the day of iudgment shal be at hand. From the 6. verse to the 13. he tels of 3. Angels that went before, which one after another at diverse times did preach the gospell, seeking to turne men from Idolatrie, and to make them cast of the Romish bondage. The rest of the chapter is spent in describing the punishmēts which God inflicteth vpō men because they did not obey their preaching, and because they did conspire against God: and therefore as he doth produce 3. Angels which at diverse times did preach the gospell in the midst of Papistry, so doth he send 3. Angels to execute Gods iudgementes, which at severall times doe punish the rebellion of men. And as the third Angell that preached the gospell, did preach it with more perspicuitie, and greater fervē
                  cie then the two former, so the third Angell sent to revenge the hardnesse of mēs harts, doth exercise more dreadful iudgements, and doth mow down men as eares of corne, and tread on them like grapes in the wine presse.
               Whosoever will open his eies, and dispell the clowd of hatred, & passion, which

dazels the iudgement, shall finde (by that which hath fallen out within these few ages, and by that which we see at this day) the accōplishment of this admirable prophecie: that is to say, 3 severall publications of the gospell amidst the darknesse of Papistrie, and these publications backt by exemplarie iudgements, men stil persevering in their obstinacie.
               
                  
                     The 1 Angel
                  In the yeare of our Lord, 1039. Idolatrie being much encreased, and the Papall Empire greatly exalted, God raised vp Berenger Archdeacon of Angers, for to oppose himselfe against the abuse of the Papacie, especially against the errour of Transubstantiation, & the Popes Supremacy: who taught so powerfully that Fraūce, Spaine, Italie, and Germanie, were full of men holding the same confessiō with Berenger: as Gulielmus Neobrige
                        •
                     sis witnesseth in the 2. book & 13. chap. of his English 
                     In the yeare of our Lord. 1063. history, where he saith that their number was as the sand of the sea. And this Berenger, was a holy man, and of great learning. The Archbishop Antoni
                        •
                     
                   in the 2. part of his Chronicle & 16. book doth commend him for his honestie, and humility, and for distributing his goods

amongst the poore. Which is confirmed by Platina in the life of Iohn the 15. It appeares (saith he) that at that time there was Oder Abbot of Clunie, and Berenger of Tours, in estimatiō noted men both for their learning and religion. A little after he saith that after he had given all his goods to the poore, hee got his owne living by the labour of his hands. It is true indeed that appearing at Rome in a councel there assembled, hee was constrained for feare of loosing his life, to subscribe to that which the Pope would haue him. But being returned into Fraunce he protested that he did this by compulsion, and perseuered in maintenance of his former doctrine even to his dying day: vpon whom the Bishop of Ments named Hildebert, made an Epitaph, wherein he bewailes him as a great light that was extinguished, and as a man of incomparable zeale, and learning. The Popes to suppresse this truth, did spare for no subtletie nor crueltie, and did stirre vp kings to persecute these poore religious men. Whereat God also being enraged, sent out great plagues, and did execute rigorous iudgements vpon the people of the Church of Rome. For in the year 1076

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
(which is about the time of Berenger's death) there arose a quarrell betweene the Emperour Henry the fourth, and Pope Gregory the 7 surnamed Hildebrand, who brought many divisions into the Roman Church, and Empire, during which there were more then 40. bloudy battels fought insomuch that every place did streame with blood, to speake nothing of the pestilence, inroads, & pillages, that did wast Christendome. Behold here the first preaching of the Gospell, which God did raise vp even in the midst of Poperie, and after this preaching the Angel throwing down the sickle of Gods iudgements vpon men.
               
                  
                     The 2. Angel
                  But this darknesse still thickning more and more, and the truth being opprest as it were by force: Behold about the yeare 1130 God made this truth to grow vp a fresh againe, by the industrie of certaine servants of his which were the Disciples of Berenger, amongst which was Peter de Bruis, & Henry de Thoulouse, & a little after thē, Iohannes de Waldo of Lyons, which began to shew himselfe in the yeare 1158 and translated the holy Scripture into the vulgar tongue, whose life was an example of sanctitie. In hatred of whom they

begā to call the truly faithful the Waldenses. These faithful spok iust as this 2. Angel doth in the eight verse of this chapter calling the Church of Rome Babylon, and exhorting every one to goe out of her. Against whom Pope Innocent the 3. caused the Croisadoe to be preached, and within a fewe moneths made aboue 200000 of them to be slaine in Provence, Languedoe, & Guyenna; as it is reported in the history of Iohn Chassanion translated out of the Albigean tongue; & all the Authors both of that time, and of after ages sticke not to affirme asmuch. So God for to punish the rebellion of men threwe downe his sickle the second time; and did execute more grievous punishments vpon them then the former. For then the quarrels betweene the Empire, and the Papacie (which had slept for a long time) began afresh, vnder Frederick Barbarossa that generous Emperour, and patterne of vertue: who was constrained to keepe many armies afoot, to defend himselfe against the enimies which the Pope had incensed against him. What man is able to expresse the horrible slaughters, the sackings of townes, the pight battels, greater & more

in number then those vnder the Henries, till the yeare 1177. When Pope Alexander the third, trod vpon this Emperours neck on the steps of S. Markes Church in Venice? and in the meane space the Moors and the Sarrasins wasted Spaine, massacring all the Christians thereabout, & the Saladin destroyed the Kingdome of Ierusalem, that had cost vs more then twelue hundreth thousand men to conquere: which was brought to ruine in the yeare 1187, not without an vnvtterable desolation; for the repairing whereof all the nobilitie, and men of courage that were in France, Germanie, Flaunders, England, & Italie, tooke the Crosse vpon them in the time of Philip Augustus, and Lewis the 9. But of all this innumerable multitude, there came not the tenth part back again, so that in Fraunce, and all the neighbouring Countries, there was nothing as it were to be seene, but widows & orphans. Amidst these confusions, and this generall disaster, the Church of God did subsist miraculously, and notwithstanding all the Popes persecutions against it, did, and still doth continue to this day, and in the year 1508. the Churches wrongfully called the

                  Waldenses wrote their confession, & sent it to Ladislaus king of Hungarie, which confession is like vnto ours: & when God in this last age did readvance the standard of his truth, these Churches ioined themselues with ours, and suffered persecutions together with vs for the faith of Iesus Christ. So behold the second Angel preaching the Gospell in the midst of Poperie, and at the same time the destroying Angel sent, for 
                     •
                  o punish the rebellion of men the second time, which did obstinatly withstand the word of God.
               Last of all the third preaching Angel is come in our daies,
                     The 3. Angel
                   opposing himselfe against the Papall Empire. That is to saie, that God for this third time hath raised vp certaine faithfull preachers of the gospell, for to withstand the Papacie. This hath hapned in our time, wherein God hath raised vp certaine faithful Ministers, which haue lighted the taper of truth againe, and drawne this candle from vnder a bushell: Hence come the great breaches that we haue seene to be made in Papistrie, & the gaping creuises in the temple of the Idole thorough which a man may discerne Idolatrie frō without. Hēce

come so many churches to bee planted in Germanie, England, Scotland, Fraunce, Flaunders, Denmarke, Switzerland, Poland, & Hungarie, with which when God shall haue bin sufficiently served by their giuing testimony to his truth, and that the malice of the contradicting shall begin to oppresse the truth, then shal the third Angell throw downe his sickle, to reape and 
                     •
                  ut downe the enimies of God, and to execute the last effects of his wrath, which are here represented by a river of bloud▪ an hundred leagues large, and so deepe▪ that the horses of the enimies ranged in battell against God shall hath themselues in the bloud of their Mast
                     •
                  rs, and stand in it vp to their bridles; for as this third preaching Angell spake more cleerely, & boldly, then the two former did, so the obstinacie of men against this so great a light, shal be punished with a more feareful punishment. They haue persecuted vs by massacrings and burnings: They haue disgraced vs with odious titles, calling vs Huguenots, Zuinglians, Lutherans, & Calvinists, although our relligion be the auncient Christian religion, and the religiō of the Apostles▪ & that we are vrgēt, that the

people might haue the sight of the scripture, & that the fashion of saying the commō service in a strange tonge might be abolished: complaining of this that we cā
                  not haue a free councell, where we might be heard, & where our adversaries might not be our iudges: In steed of the Councell of Trent, where the Pope condemned vs without euer hearing vs speake for our selues: and whether wee could not haue gone safely, by reason of that rule mainetained in the church of Rome, that mē are not to stand to those promises, though ratified by oaths, which they plight to Heretickes; a rule practised vpon Iohn Hus & Hierome of Prague, which were burnt notwithstanding the faithfull promise that they had of a safe conduct. For these, and such like causes we doubt not (& wee speake it with feare, not desiring the ruine but the conversiō of our adversaries) that the third destroying Angell shall ere long throw downe his fickle vpon the earth, & display the iudgmentes of God vpon the Church of Rome, for the third time.
               Hereby it appeares that the prophecie of this chapt. is accomplished as touching the 3 Angels that were sent to preach the

Gospell, but as for the 3 destroying Angels which were sent to execute the iudgments of God, that the two former of the is already come, and that the third is not yet come, but is neere at hand.
               That which hath beene saide alreadie may suffice for the exposition of this prophecie. But vpon the 6. verse where there is mention made of an Angel holding the everlasting Gospell, I cannot omit that which Matthew Paris relateth in the year 1256. and Platinae in the life of Alexander the 4. Matthew Paris reporteth that William de S. Amore with other choice men of the Vniversitie of Paris were cited to Rome for complaining of a booke that was made by the Iacobin preaching Friars the which was intituled the Everlasting Gospell. And Platinae in the life of Alexander the fourth saith that this booke did teach, that the state of grace did proceede, non à lege Evangelis, sed à lege spiritus, not from the law of the Gospell but from the law of the spirit, for so did they call their dreams & revelations. The mark at which this booke did aime, was to suppresse the Gospel of Christ. A sinne so hainous, as might deservedly haue made

their whole order to haue beene rooted out,
                     Precepit Papa vt novus ille liber quē Evangelium aeternū nominant secreto & si possit fieri sine fratrum scandalo combureretur.
                  , neverthelesse Matthew Paris telleth vs that Pope Alevander did content himselfe with only commanding the book to be secretly burnt, & (if it might be) without offending the fraternity. And not long after he made it manifest that he condemned thē by cōstraint, & because it was a shame for him to do otherwise, for hee droue away the said William de S. Amore, and made him to be banished, who hath written a book of this matter for the iustification of himselfe.
               The thirde verse is read diversly in the Greeke text. For there bee some copies which haue the point before the word 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , others put it after. The translation of the Church of Rome turnes it as if the point were before, trāslating it thus, Beat
                        •
                     mort
                        ••
                      qui in domino moriuntur. A modo iam dicit spiritus vt requiescant a laboribus suis, which seemes more smooth to me and more suitable to the Greeke phrase, then if the point were put after the worde A modo. Beda expounds this place thus, As hee saide that the wicked shoulde never haue any rest: so on the contrary he teacheth that the faithfull being assisted by their good

workes, doe rest from hence forth, that is to say, from the time of their death. For this word 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   doth not only signifie hereafter, but also from henceforth, as in the 13. chapt. of S. Iohn, v. 19. and in the 14. chap. v. 7. Howsoever it be, & in whether sense of the two you take this worde, or vnderstand this verse, it doth vtterly extinguish the imaginarie fire of Purgatorie.
               In the 14. verse hee which sitteth vpon the cloude hauing the shape of a man, cā
                  not be Iesus Christ seeing that in the verses following the Angels command him, and declare the will of God vnto him.
               In the 16. verse and those which follow the iudgements of God are compared to an harvest, and a vintage. A fashion of speech vsuall in Scripture; as in the 13. of S. Matthew, the harvest is the ende of the world, and the reapers are the Angels. And in the 76. Psalme, it is said that God doth vintage, or cut of the spirits of Princes, & that hee is torrible to the Kinges of the earth.
            
         
         
            
            THE PROPHECIE CONTAIned in the 17. Chap. of the Apocalyps. CHAP. 6.
            
               
                  
                     1 Then there came one of the 7. Angels which had the 7. Vials, and talked with mee, saying vnto me, Come; I will shew thee the damnation of the great Where that sitteth vpon many waters.
                  
                     2 With whō the kings of the earth haue committed fornication, and the inhabitants of the earth are drunke with the wine of her fornication.
                  
                     3 So hee carried me away into the wildernesse in the spirit, and I saw a woman sit vpon a scarlet coloured beast, full of names of blasphemie which had 7. heads and tenne hornes.
                  
                     4 And the woman was araied in purple and scarlet, and gilded with gold, & precious stones, and pearles, and had a cuppe of gold in her hand, full of the abomination, & filthinesse of her fornication.
                  
                     5 And in her forehead was a name written, A mistery, that great Babylon, that mother of whoredomes, and abominations of the earth.
                  
                     
                     6 And I saw the woman drunken with the bloud of Saints, and with the bloud of the Martyrs of Iesus, and when I saw her, I wō
                     dred with great marvell.
                  
                     7 Then the Angell said vnto me. Wherfore marveilest thou? I will shew thee the misterie of that woman, and of that beast that beareth her, which hath seaven heads and ten hornes.
                  
                     8 The beast that thou haste seene, was, and is not, & shall ascend out of the bottomlesse pit, and shall go into perdition, and they that dwell on the earth shall wonder (whose names are not written in the booke of life frō the foundation of the world) when they behold the beast that was, and is not, and yet is.
                  
                     9 Here is the minde that hath wisdom. The 7. heads are 7. mountaine
                        •
                     , whereon the woman sitteth: they are also 7. kings.
                  
                     10 Fiue 
                        〈◊〉
                     , fallen, and one is, and an other is not yet 
                        〈◊〉
                     : and when he commeth he must continue a long space.
                  
                     11 And the beast that was and is not, is even the eighth, and is one of the 7. & shal goe into destruction.
                  
                     12 And the 10. hornes which thou sawest, are 10 kings, which yet haue not received

a kingdome, but shall receiue power as kings at one hower, with the beast.
                  
                     13 These haue one minde, & shall giue their power, and authority vnto the beast.
                  
                     14 These shall fight with the Lamb. & the Lambe shall overcome them; for hee is Lord of Lords, and king of kings: and they that are on his side are called faithfull, and chosen.
                  
                     15 And he said vnto me, The waters which thou sawest, where the whore sitteth, are people, and multitudes, and nations, and tongues.
                  
                     16 And the 10 hornes which thou sawest vpō the beast, are they that shall hate the whore, and shall make her desolate, and naked, and shall eate her flesh, and burne her with fire.
                  
                     17 For God hath put in their hearts to fulfill his will, and to doe with one consent for to giue their kingdome vnto the beast, vntill the words of God be fulfilled.
                  
                     18 And that woman which thou sawest is that great citty which reigned ouer the kings of the earth.
               
            
            
               The Explication.
               1 Then came one of the 7. Angels to

mee which were sent from God to powre downe 7 sorts of his iudgments vpon mē; and this Angell spake vnto mee saying, Come I will shewe thee the damnation of Rome that great Idolatrous citty, which ruleth over many people; For by the citty, not the buildings, but they which beare sway therein, are vnderstood.
               2 By whose suggestion the kings of the earth haue plaid the Idolatours, and she hath made the inhabitāts of the earth drunken with her Idolatrie.
               3 So then the Angell tooke me, and carryed me aside into a secret place, and I saw the citty of Rome represented vnder the forme of a woman, which bore rule over an Empire, the chiefe governors wher of were clad in scarlet, and did assume many blasphemous titles, and prerogatiues. And this Empire seated vpon 7. hils had 7 sorts of divers successiue governments, & was composed of tenne realmes, & principall parts.
               4 And this citty (that is to say the rulers of it) was clad in purple & scarlet, having a crowne of gold vpon her head, and a crosse of gold vpon her feet, and vpon her crowne, and on her hands, many pretious

stones, with a mantle embrodered with pearle; and through her great magnificence she made all the people to drink of the puddle of her Idolatrie,
               5 And made profession of great mysteries in her doctrine, being indeed the great Babylon, the headspring of Idolatrie; and of the abominations of the world.
               6 And I sawe this citie glutted with the blood of the faithfull, raising vp persecutions, and making the martyrs to bee massacred, and hauing seen this, I was striken with feare, and stood amazed.
               7 Then the Angel said vnto me, why dost thou wonder? I will shewe thee the interpretation of the vision, and will tell thee what the beast represented by a woman meanes, & what the Empire is, that is figured by a beast hauing 7. heads, and ten hornes.
               8 The beast which thou sawest is the Empire of Rome, which did continue for a long time, but now is no more, being vā
                  quisht, and driven from Rome, and Italie by the Lumbards: but shall rise vp againe from a low place, and bee restored by the Papacie, till the time that God at last shall

destroy it. And the inhabitants of the earth, which haue not beene enrolled frō the foundation of the world amongst the number of the Elect, shall wonder seeing the Empire of Rome, which was at Rome but was driven thence by the Lumbards, and neverthelesse doth nowe growe vp againe, and is reerected by the Papacie, so that a man may say that the Roman Empire is, and is not; that it is not because the Roman Emperours are no more; that it is because the Pope doth in a manner set vp the Empire againe although it bee vnder another name and forme.
               9 Here is need of wisdome to vnderstand this matter. In this vision of the beast which hath 7 heads and 10 hornes, by the 7. heads wee are to vnderstand 7. hills, vpon which the cittie of Rome is situate.
               10 As also 7. sortes of soueraintie or gouernement which must beare rule at Rome one after another, to wit, the kings the Consuls, the militarie Tribunes, the Decemvirs, the Dictatours, the Emperors and the Popes. The 6. is nowe, to wit, the Emperours: And the 7, (to wit, the Popes those Pontificall earthly monarchs) is not

yet come, and when it shall come, it shall continue for a certaine time.
               11 And also by the Roman Empire, which was and is now no more, the Empire of Charlemaigne, and his successours, is to be vnderstood, which did governe at Rome for a time before the Monarchie of the Popes was fully perfected; which Emperours although they be an 8 head, doe yet neuerthelesse beare the name of one of the 7. to wit of the Emperours.
               12 But by the 10 hornes of this beast which is the Roman Papall Empire, are vnderstood 10 kings which haue not as yet begun to raigne, but shall raigne together with the Roman Papal Empire.
               13 The counsells of these kings are ruled by the councel of the Papal Empire, and they lend assistance vnto this Empire with their power.
               14 They shall fight against Iesus Christ, but Iesus Christ shall overcome them because he is Lord of Lords, & king of kings, and they which are his, are called elect and faithfull.
               15 After he said vnto me, the waters which thou sawest, ouer which Rome the Idolatresse hath dominion, doe signifie

people, and multitudes, and nations of divers languages.
               16 And the 10 hornes which thou sawst this Empire to haue, are the same 10 kings, which in the ende shall conspire against it, and consume it, and burne it.
               17 For God hath inclined their harts that they should do his will in executing his iudgements, and that they should lay their heads together, and should aid this Papall Empire with their forces, only vntill the time of its continuance appointed by God bee accomplished.
               18 And this womā which thou sawst is Rome that great city, which commands the realmes of the earth.
            
            
               The first part of this Prophecie.
               
                  1 Then there came one of the 7 Angels which had the 7 viols, and talked with mee saying vnto me; come I wil shew thee the dā
                  nation of the great where that sitteth vpon many waters.
            
            
               The Exposition.
               Then came one of the 7 Angels to mee

were sent from God to powre downe 7 sorts of his iudgements vpon men, & this Angel spoke vnto me saying; Come I will shew thee the damnation of Rome that great Idolatrous citie, which ruleth over many people, for by the citie not the buildings, but they that beare sway there
                     ••
                   are vnderstood.
            
            
               The Proofe.
               This Chapter is easie to be vnderstood, for the 6. first verses are expounded by those which follow, and all the tearmes which the Angel vseth are sutable to the stile of the Prophets. They compare the Church to a womā, calling her the daughter of Sion, the spowse of our God: and so in the Apocalyps, chap. 12. he hath represented the Church vnder the forme of a woman: it is no marvaile therefore, if the enimie of the Church, and the head of the Church opposite to God, bee figured by a woman.
               The same Prophets doe call our covenant with God a marriage, and the purity of our service to God by the name of chastitie, and by a consequent they call Idolatrie

which doth violate this marriage, adulterie, and spirituall fornication.
                     Ier. 3.9. 
                  Ieremy saith, that Iuda hath committed fornication with stones and stooks. According to this manner of speech doe they vse to call the people, and cities that are giuen to Idolatrie, by the name of harlots, & strumpets. Isaiah in his 1. Chap. v. 21. How is the faithfull citie become an harlot? The 16. of Ezechiel is full of examples in this kinde. Nahum speaketh thus of Niniuie, The harlot that selleth the people through her whordome,
                  
                     Nahum 3.4. which wordes are as it were all one with the words of S. Iohn here in this prophecie.
               Where wee are diligently to note that the Prophets and S. Iohn by the cities doe not vnderstand their walles, but those which dwell in them, and more especially such as are in authoritie, and are set over them. For S. Iohn saith that this citie reigneth over many people, and that she doth seduce the kings of the earth, which cannot agree to the walls, and houses, nor yet to the people of the citie of Rome, but only to such as gouerne there.
               Now that this citie of which S. Iohn speakes is Rome, there is no man that

doubteth, and our aduersaries themselues acknowledge it. For what citie can there bee which hath 7 hils, which reigneth over kings, which is an Idolatresse, whose gouernours are clothed in skarlet; doubtlesse there is no other of this nature but Rome; And from S. Iohns time there hath beene no other citie hauing 7 hills that did reigne ouer the earth. Bellarmine in his 3 booke De Pontifice Romano, & 13 Chap.
                     Secund
                           •
                         dici potest & meo iudicio melius per meretricem intelligi Romam.
                   
                  We may say, and that better in my iudgement, that by the whore Rome is vnderstood. The Iesuites Ribera, and Viega say the same in their expositions of this Chap. Tertullian in his booke against the Iewes,
                  
                     Babylon apud Iohannē nostrum Romanae vrbis figuram portat, proinde & magnae, & regno superbae, & sanctorum debellatricis.
                   
                  Babylon in S. Iohn doth represent Rome, being as great, and as prowde of her dominions, & as tyrannising over the Saints as ever Babylon was. The like vnto which he saith in his 3 booke and 8. chap. against Marcion. S. Hierome in the 11. question to Algasia, According to the Revelation of S. Iohn in the forehead of the queane clad in purple there was a name of blasphemy written, to wit, Rome the everlasting, and in his 17. Epist. to Marcella, 
                     Et hic puto locus sanctior est Tarpeia rupe quae de coelo saepius fulminata ostendit quod domine displiceret. Lege Apocalypsin Iohan. & quod de muliere purpurata cantetur contuere.
                   
                  This place of Bethlehem▪ I am perswaded is more holy then that Tarpeian rocke (that is to say then

the Capitoll of Rome) which by being often strooke with thunder from heaven did shew that it did not please God. Read the Revelation of S. Iohn, and see that which is there foretold of the whore clad in purple, and of the blasphemie written in her forehead, and of the 7. hils, and of manie waters, and the destruction of Babylon. Bellarmine doeth confesse this, but saith that S. Iohn speakes of heatbenish Rome, and not of Christian Rome, such as it is now adaies. Which is altogither incoherent; 1. For heathnish Rome did not reigne over kings, seeing that it did put downe kings. 2. Heathnish Rome did not seduce the kings by flatterie, and perswasion, seeing that it went downe rightly to worke, and conquered thē by opē force. 3. Moreover here is mention made of the finall ruine of Rome, so that it shall never be built vp againe, which yet never befell heathenish Rome; when therfore this destruction foretold of shall arriue, it shall not light vpon the citty whilest it is heathenish, but after that Paganisme is abolished. And indeed S. Hierom in the Epistle to Marcella formerly alleadged, albeit he say that Rome by the confession of Christ

hath defaced the name of blasphemy; neverthelesse he spares not in the same place to recite the threatnings in the Apocalyps against it as not yet come, & doth exhort Marcella to goe out of Babylon, which were absurd if these threatnings had been pronoūced only against heathnish Rome.
               I would also know what sins should be the cause of the finall destructiō of Rome. Is it likely that it shall bee destroyed for the sinnes committed by Nero or Domitian 1500 yeares since? So it is cleere that it shall be destroyed for the sinnes founde in it vpon the time of its destruction. Nor may wee omit that which the King notes as very fitting to this purpose, to wit, that S. Iohn giues vs to vnderstand that his intent is to speake of thinges to come, but heathnish Rome and the idolatrie thereof were present in S. Iohns time. To cōclude, the truth is so cleere on our side, that the Iesuits thēselues which haue written cō
                  mentaries vpon the Apocalyps, to wit, Ribera, and Viega, take our parts, and speake for vs.
                     Ribera in Apoc. ca. 14. num. 42 De Roma intelligendum non solùm qualis sub Ethnici
                           •
                         imperatori
                        
                           •
                        us olim suit sedetiā qualis in fine seculi futura est.
                   
                  Ribera saith, We are to vnderstād this not only of Rome as it was heretofore vnder the Emperours, but also as it shall be a
                        •
                      the end of the world. Viega after

the same manner. 
                     Viega in 17. Apoc. com. 1. Sec. 3 omnia quae in his capitibus commemorā
                        tur in Romanam vrb
                           •
                        m apertissime quadrant.
                   
                  All that which is spoken in these chapters doth manifestly agree to Rome. As for the name of Babylon it is to be applyed to Rome which served Idols before euer it did receiue the faith of Christ, & to Rome as it shall be a little before the time of Antichrist.
               
               
                  
                     De praescriptione adversus Hermogenem Foelix ecclesia cui t
                           •
                        tam doctrinam Apostoli cum sanguine suo pro suderunt.
                   
                  Tertullian (I must confesse) saith that the Church of Rome is happy, to which the Prophets did powre out their doctrine togither with their bloud. But he speakes this to the church and not to the citty, that is, to a few of the faithfull which lay hid amidst the corruption of this great cittie, which seemes to be never the purer nowe a daies for all its outwarde profession of christianity: but if the preaching of Iesus Christ in Capernaum
                  ▪ and in Ierusalem did not exempt these townes from the curse of God, why should the presence of Saint Peter at Rome bee able to exempt it for ever from malediction.
               Some of the auncient were of opinion that this great whore did signifie the whole body and assembly of the wicked, and the citty of the divell: which is refelled hereby, because S. Iohn saith, that shee raigneth over the nations: for if this exposition

were true, then shee must needes reigne over her selfe; shee that reigneth cannot be the same thing with those over whom shee reigneth. Herevnto adde that the 7 hils and the 7 kings, and the habit of scarlet, cannot be applyed to this meaning.
               That to sit vpon many waters, doth signifie to raigne over many people, S. Iohn himselfe doth say in the 15 verse, and wee haue proued it in an other place more at large.
            
            
               The second part of this prophecie.
               
                  2 With whō the kings of the earth haue committed fornication, and the inhabitants of the earth are drunke with the wine of her fornication.
            
            
               The Exposition.
               By whose suggestion the kings of the earth haue plaid the Idolatours, and shee hath made the inhabitantes of the earth drunken with her Idolatrie.
            
            
               
               The Proofe.
               The Papal Empire being not of strēgth sufficient to abolish the kings, doth make them drunke, and lay them asleepe. It is the Pope that doeth abuse the bounty of our kings, and vngratefully forgetting what benefactours they haue beene vnto him hath taken the third part of their land from them, and the fifth part of their subiects, over whom he boasteth that he hath absolute power, to giue and take away their crownes at his pleasure, & receiues homage, and an oath of alleageance frō them, and in way of recompence paies thē with trifles, sending thē some holy Beads, some Indulgences, or certaine supposed reliques: and giues them the priuiledge of communicating vnder both kinds, that is to say, he permits them, by a speciall favour, to obay Iesus Christ, & giues them that by way of a priuiledge, which Iesus Christ did grant to al Christiās. Likewise it is to gratifie kings that hee doeth suffer them to hold his horses bridle, and when his Holinesse is reading the Masse in his owne person, to hold the bason vnto him

on their knees, as if they were subdeacons.
               It is the Pope that hath taken from our kings the divine seruice in the language of their natiue countries; and hath giuen them the Romane language in token of subiection; Which hath taken the French liturgie from them, and given them another to be sung after the Romish fashion; which hath takē away wiues from priests: which hath brought vp images, and established transubstantiation, the feast God, the adoration of the Sacrament, & which hath wrested the holy scripture out of the hands of the people.
            
            
               The third part of this prophecie.
               
                  3 So he carried mee away into the wildernesse in the spirit, and I saw a woman sit vpon a scarlet coloured beast, ful of names of blasphemie which had seaven heads, and ten hornes.
            
            
               The Exposition.
               3 So then the Angell tooke me, and carryed me aside into a secret place, and I

saw the cittie of Rome represented vnder the forme of a woman, which bore rule over an Empire, the chiefe governors wher of were clad in scarlet, and did assume many blasphemous titles, and prerogatiues. And this Empire seated vpon 7. hils had 7 sorts of divers successiue governments, & was composed of tenne realmes, & principall parts.
            
            
               The Proofe.
               By the woman (saith S. Iohn) verse 18 the citie is to be vnderstood having seauē hills, that is to say, Rome. Now by the citie wee are not to vnderstand the walles, seeing that hee saith that this citie doth reigne ouer the people, and vseth flatterie to make the kings of the earth drunke: which cannot agree to the buildings, but only to the gouernours of the citie, that is to say, to the Pope & his consistory. This woman therefore is mounted on a beast hauing 7 heads and 10 hornes, that is to say, she doth reigne ouer the Roman Empire, which is fained to haue 7 heads because of the 7 hills on which Rome is situate, and because of the 7 sorts of soueraigntie

which haue borne rule over that place successiuely, as rhe Angel doth expound it in the 9 and 10 verses, and wee haue shewd it at large in the exposition of the 13. chap. & 1. verse. She is also clad in skarlet, for this is the Popes habit, not only by custome, but by expresse rule: as the third booke of holy ceremonies saith in the 3 sect. and 5. chap. Ruber color propriè ad Papam pertinet; The red colour doth properly appertaine to the Pope. and in the 
                     Planum totum cū magno scabell
                           •
                         coopertum e
                           •
                        it panno 
                           •
                        occin
                           •
                        o.
                   1. booke, 1. chap. and 9. sect. it is said that the Popes chaire, and the place vpon which it stands must be couered al ouer with cloth of skarlet. There is none of his apparell, even downe to his stockings, and shooes, that is not of skarlet, as it is said in the 
                     Caligis rubei
                           •
                        , sandaleis rubeis aureâ cruce orna
                           •
                        is
                   Chap. of the 1. section of the first booke. this is also the colour of the Cardinals habit, as euery mā seeth. Nay which is more, by the ordinance of Pope Paulus the 2. the Cardinals mules must be couered ouer with skarlet, as Platina reporteth in his life. Being willing it seemes that this prophecy which representeth the head of this Empire mounted vpon a beast couered with skarlet, should also agree to euery Cardinall apart.
               
                  As for the names of blasphemy which this Papall Empire doth assume, see that which hath beene said of this vpon the 5. verse of the 13. chap.
            
            
               The 4 part of this Prophecie.
               
                  4 And the woman was araied in purple and scarlet, and gilded with gold, & precious stones, and pearles, and had a cuppe of gold in her hand, full of the abomination, & filthinesse of her fornication.
            
            
               The Exposition.
               4 And this citty (that is to say the rulers of it) was clad in purple & scarlet, having a crowne of gold vpon her head, and a crosse of gold vpon her feet, and vpon her crowne, and on her hands many pretious stones, with a mantle embrodered with pearle; and through her great magnificence she made all the people to drink of the puddle of her Idolatrie,
            
            
               The Proofe.
               This proposition is drawne from experience

knowne to every man, and from the rules of the Church of Rome published by our adversaries. The 6. Chap. and first section of the first booke of holy ceremonies hath these words; They put red stockings on his legs, and red shooes vpon his feet adorned with a crosse of gold; and a little after, He is apparelled with a long Albe, a girdle,
                  
                     Stolam orn
                           •
                        
                        tam cum per lis pendent
                           •
                         à collo.
                   
                  and a stole hanging vpon his necke all embost with pearle.
               
               Whereas it is added that this whore doth giue her false doctrines vnto men in a cup of gold, the meaning thereof is that she giues them with pompe, and outward magnificence.
               The capitall letters of these words, Poculum Aureum Plenum Abominationum, being put together make vp Papa: VVhether it be that it falls out so by chance, or rather that God would hereby giue vs an advertisement. And that which makes this observation the better worthie the noting, is that it is found in Latin, which is the language of the Church of Rome.
               What these abominations are of which Rome makes the people to drinke I haue already shewed throughout my whole second booke.
            
            
               
               The 5. part of this prophecie.
               
                  5 And in her forehead was a name written, A mystery, that great Babylon, that mother of whoredomes, and abominations of the earth.
               
                  6 And I saw the woman drunken with the bloud of Saints, and with the bloud of the Martyrs of Iesus, and when I saw her, I wō
                  dred with great marvell.
            
            
               The Exposition.
               5 And made profession of great mysteries in her doctrine, being indeed the great Babylon, the headspring of Idolatrie, and of the abominations of the world.
               6 And I sawe this citie glutted with the blood of the faithfull, raising vp persecutions, and making the martyrs to bee massacred, and hauing seen this, I was striken with feare, and stood amazed.
            
            
               The Proofe.
               Wee haue shewed in the exposition of

the 13. chap. and 16. verse that according to the stile of the Prophets and the Apocalyps, the marke in the forehead signifies the profession of religion; in this place therefore, to haue the name, Mysterie, written in the forehead, signifies to make profession of abstruse, and hidden mysteries, such as all the mysteries of the Masse are▪ of which Pope Innocent hath written 6. books, wherein he finds great mysteries in all the attire, and euery action of the Priest; The seuerall habits of the Priest are enigmaticall, and all his gestures allegoricall, the priest turnes his backe to the people, because God said vnto Moses 
                  
                     Ex. 33 23 
                  thou shalt see my backe parts. Hee which reads the Epistle, goes in at one side of the pulpit, and out at another, because it is written, 
                     Mat. 2.12 
                  They were warned from God to turne another way. Hee which serues the priest and beares vp his traine, doth turne and apply his body to euery motion of the priest, because it is written, Where I am there shall my servant be. In the Episcopall Masse they kisse the Bishop on his shoulder looking vpon his face backward, because it is written, Videmus in aenigmate. The Priests follow the crosse being cloathed

in white surplisses, because it is written, They shall follow the Lambe being cloathed in white roabes. And all is done is a strange language, in words mumbled out softly, for feare (saith Pope Innocent) least the flies should tast the sweetnes of this ointment. But the greatest mysterie of all others is the doctrine of transubstantiation which makes God with fiue wordes, and restraines a human body within a point, that is to say, doth enclude that which is long, within that which hath no length, & placeth all the parts of a mans body vnder one only point, and doth at the same time make length to be in the host, & no length breadth, and no breadth.
               There is a mysterie also in their saying ouer the same prayer, 7, or 50 times precisely, according to the number of the beads of their bracelet, & in their making vertue to be in a number, so that if a man fail in reckoning, all the grace of the praier is gone, and the fruit thereof lost. Besides we haue shewed in our exposition of of the 2. chapt. of the 2. to the Thessalonians, that Poperie is wholy wouen together with a profound mysterie, and wonderfull craft.
               
                  Now although this bee the meaning of this prophecie, yet this letteth not but that the holy Ghost may haue a reference to the secret and mysticall name of the citie of Rome which she vseth in her ceremonies, and most secret mysteries. Which name being on a time vttered by Valerius Soranus, he was forthwith punnisht, as Plinie reporteth in his 3. booke & 5. chap. and Iulius Solinus in the first chapter of his first booke.
               
                  Ioseph Scaliger a man no lesse faithfull and honest, then learned, hath often told me that being at Rome with Mounsieur de Abin Embassadour for the king, amongst divers other things of S. Angeloes Castle, that were shewd them, they saw old plain miters, which had the worde Mysterium engraued on their front. And Brocard witnesseth as much in his notes vpon this place. If it be so, we need seeke no farther for any other interpretation.
               This same Rome, in regard of those which raigne there, is called Babylon, because of the resemblance betweene these two. Babylon did destroy the Temple, and this doth destroy the Church which is the Temple of God; Babylon did lead men into

                  Captivitie, and this doth detaine the Church captiue vnder the yoke of the Inquisition, and of tyrannie; Babylon did gather all the riches of the earth vnder herselfe, and this doth enrich herselfe by the spoiles of christianitie; Babylon was giuen to Idolatrie, and so is this too; Both cities were first built by theeues. The captiuitie of Babylon was a forerunning signe of the first comming of our Lord, and the captivitie of the Church vnder the Romish bō
                  dags, is a forerunning signe of the second comming of the sonne of God. The Fathers vnderstood it so. Tertullian hath told vs aboue that S. Iohns Babylon is Rome, and St 
                  Augustin in the 18 booke of the citie of God. chap. 2.22. saith, Babylon is the first Rome, and Rome is the second Babylon.
               
               As for the cruelties and persecutions, we which haue suffered them & in whose families the wounds are yet to bee seene, beleeue them without farther proofs. See what we haue said of this vpon the 7 verse of the 13 Chapter.
            
            
               The 6. part of this prophecie.
               
                  7 Then the Angell said vnto me. Wherfore

marveilest thou? I will shew thee the mysterie of that woman, and of that beast that beareth her, which hath seaven heads and ten hornes.
               
                  8 The beast that thou haste seene, was, and is not, & shall ascend out of the bottomlesse pit, and shall go into perdition, and they that dwell on the earth shall wonder (whose names are not written in the booke of life frō the foundation of the world) when they behold the beast that was, and is not, and yet is.
            
            
               The Exposition.
               7 Then the Angel said vnto me, why dost thou wonder? I will shewe thee the interpretation of the vision, and will tell thee what the beast represented by a woman meanes, & what the Empire is, that is figured by a beast hauing 7. heads, and ten hornes.
               8 The beast which thou sawest is the Empire of Rome, which did continue for a long time, but now is no more, being vā
                  quisht, and driven from Rome, and Italie by the Lumbards: but shall rise vp againe from a low place, and bee restored by the

Papacie, till the time that God at last shall destroy it. And the inhabitants of the earth, which haue not beene enrolled frō the foundation of the world amongst the number of the Elect, shall wonder seeing the Empire of Rome, which was at Rome but was driven thence by the Lumbards, and neverthelesse doth nowe growe vp againe, and is reerected by the Papacie, so that a man may say that the Roman Empire is, and is not; that it is not because the Roman Emperours are no more; that it is because the Pope doth in a manner set vp the Empire againe although it bee vnder another name and forme.
            
            
               The Proofe.
               For the vnderstanding of this prophecie we are to note that S. Iohn in this 8. v. doth followe the stile of the Prophets, which is to speake of things to come as if they were present, or past; & to transport his spirit beyond future ages, as if they were already gon. For S. Iohn in this place doth speake as if he were liuing at the time wherein (the Roman Empire being ruinated by the Lumbards) the Pope did

cast about to compasse a temporall Monarchie, and to reerect the Empire in his owne person: The vnderstanding of this cleereth the prophecie, for larger proofes whereof turne backe to that which wee haue said vpon the 1 & 3 verses of the 13 Chapter.
               That which is said at the ende is plaine enough of it selfe, to wit, that the Pope is Emperour vnder another title, and another forme of Empire. For we haue shewed, how he hath drawne the rights, & dignities of Emperours vnto himselfe; Although the forme of his gouernement be diuers from theirs. For the Emperours did raigne by force, but he by fraud; In the ancient Empire the spirituall power was only a dependance of the temporall, but in the papacie the Temporall power doth depend vpon the spirituall.
            
            
               The 7. part of this prophecie.
               
                  9 Here is the minde that hath wisdom. The 7. heads are 7. mountaines, whereon the woman sitteth▪ they are also 7. kings.
               
                  10 Fiue are fallen, and one is, and an other is not yet come: and when he commeth

he must continue a long space.
               
                  11 And the beast that was and is not▪ is even the eighth, and is one of the 7. & shal goe into destruction.
            
            
               The Exposition.
               9 Here is need of wisdome to vnderstand this matter. In this vision of the beast which hath 7 heads and 10 hornes, by the 7▪ heads wee are to vnderstand 7. hills, vpon which the cittie of Rome is situate.
               10 As also 7. sortes of soueraigntie or gouernement which must beare rule at Rome one after another, to wit▪ the kings the Consuls, the militarie Tribunes, the Decemvirs, the Dictatours, the Emperors and the Popes. The 6. is nowe, to wit▪ the Emperours: And the 7▪ (to wit, the Popes those Pontificall earthly monarchs) is not yet come, and when it shall come, it shall continue for a certaine time.
               11 And also by the Roman Empire, which was and is now no more, the Empire of Charlemaigne, and his successours, is to be vnderstood, which did governe at Rome for a time before the Monarchie of

the Popes was fully perfected; which Emperours although they be an 8 head, doe yet neuerthelesse beare the name of one of the 7. to wit of the Emperours.
               This exposition doth proue it selfe, and experience speakes for it without any proofe. Besides as concerning the 7▪ hills; and 7 sorts of soveraigntie, we haue spokē of them at large in the 13 chap. & 1. verse.
            
            
               The 8 part of this Prophecie.
               
                  12 and the 10. hornes which thou sawest, are 10 kings, which yet haue not received a kingdome, but shall receiue power as kings at one hower, with the beast.
               
                  13 These haue one minde, & shall giue their power, and authority vnto the beast.
               
                  14 These shall fight with the Lamb, & the Lambe shall overcome them; for hee is Lord of Lords▪ and king of kings: and they that are on his side are called faithfull, and chosen.
            
            
               The Exposition.
               12 But by the 10 hornes of this beast which is the Roman Papall Empire, are

vnderstood 10 kings which haue not as yet begun to raigne, but shall raigne together with the Roman Papal Empire.
               13 The counsells of these kings are ruled by the counsel of the Papal Empire, and they lend assistance vnto this Empire with their power.
               14 They shall fight against Iesus Christ, but Iesus Christ shall overcome them because he is Lord of Lords, & king of kings, and they which are his, are called elect and faithfull.
            
            
               The Proofe.
               In this number of 10 kings doth the euidence of this prophecie principally appeare. We shall see anon in the exposition of the 7 chap. of Daniel, how that a little before the Pope came to bee an earthly Monarch, the ancient Roman Empire was devided into 10 kingdomes, and cut out into 10 peeces. We haue also seene vpon the 1 verse of the 13 chap. that the Roman Empire, whilst it was in its flourishing estate, did consist of 10 provinces & principall parts. But here mention is made of Kings that the Pope shall subiect vnto

himselfe and which shall vnite themselues 
                     •
                  n a bond of amitie with the Pope. Gregory the 7 surnamed Hildebrand was he that did first exalt the Papacie to the 
                     An. 107
                        •
                     . heigth of glory, and worldly greatnesse: Now at the same time 10 kingdomes did serue Papisme, first The Empire of Germanie, 2. Fraunce, 3. England, 4. Scotland, 5. Denmarke, 6. Polonie, 7. the kingdome of Spain 8. the kingdome of Navarre. 9. The kingdome of Hungarie, 10. the kingdome of Naples, and Sicilie. Yea and in the memorie of our forefathers Pope Leo the 10, being as yet in his full force, a little before the wound which hee receaued, Papistrie held 10 kingdomes in possession. 1. The Empire of Germanie. 2. Fraunce. 3. England, 4. Scotland, 5. Denmarke. 6. Polonie, 7. Hungarie. 8. The realme of Arragon, Naples, and Sicilie. 9. The realme of Castile. 10. The realme of Portugall. For the realme of Bohemia is a fiefe of the Empire of Germanie, and an Electorate of the Empire. Moreouer it is said that these kings shall begin to raigne together with the beast, because (as the King of great Brittaine hath truely noted) all the realmes as it were of Christendome, as well as the

Papal Monarch (if we looke back to their first originall) tooke their beginning from the division of the Roman Empire. Since therefore by this so cleere an exposition it is evident that the King of England is one of those which S. Iohn speaks of, and that his predecessours of England and Scotland did make vp two hornes of this beast what pleasure is it vnto this so great a King to read himselfe mentioned in these diuine reuelations? or who cā better diue into the meaning of this prophecie, then he which makes vp a part of the prophecy
            
            
               The 9 part of this prophecie.
               
                  15 And he said vnto me, The waters which thou sawest, where the whore sitteth, are people, and multitudes, and nations, and tongues.
               
                  16 And the 10 hornes which thou sawest vpō the beast, are they that shall hate the whore, and shall make her desolate, and naked, and shall eate her flesh, and burne her with fire.
               
                  17 For God hath put in their hearts to fulfill his will, and to doe with one consent for to giue their kingdome vnto the beast, vntill

the words of God be fulfilled.
               
                  18 And that woman which thou sawest is that great citty which reigned ouer the kings of the earth.
            
            
               The Exposition.
               15 After he said vnto me, the waters which thou sawest, ouer which Rome the Idolatresse hath dominion, doe signifie people, and multitudes, and nations of divers languages.
               16 And the 10 hornes which thou sawst this Empire to haue, are the same 10 kings, which in the ende shall conspire against it, and consume it, and burne it.
               17 For God hath inclined their harts that they should do his will in executing his iudgements, and that they should lay their heads together, and should aid this Papall Empire with their forces, only vntill the time of its continuance appointed by God bee accomplished.
               18 And this womā which thou sawst is Rome that great city, which commands the realmes of the earth.
            
            
               
               The Proofe.
               That which is propheticall in these 4. verses is not yet accomplisht, but the accomplishment of the prophecies precedēt, doth make vs presume of the certaintie of this, and is a token that it shall bee accomplisht ere long. It lies kings vpon to set themselues forward to serue God in this so great a worke. Blessed shall hee bee (saith the 
                     Ps. 137 Psamist) which shall dash the children of Babell against the stones. These children of Babell are the false doctrines. This stone is Iesus Christ, a chosen, tried stone, the foundation stone of the Church 
                     Es. 28.16. & 8 14. Mat. 21. vpō which stone whosoeuer falleth shall be broken.
            
         
         
            THE PROPHECIE CONTAIned in the 18. Chap. of the Apocalyps. CHAP. 7.
            
               
                  
                     1 And after these things I sawe another Angel come downe from heavē, hauing

great power, so that the earth was lightned with his glorie.
                  
                     2 And hee cried out mightily with a lowd voice, saying, it is fallen it is fallen, Babylon that great citie, & is become the habitation of divels, and the hold of foule spirits, & a cage of every vncleane, & hatefull bird.
                  
                     3 For all nations haue drunken of the wine of the wrath af her fornication, and the kings of the earth haue committed fornication with her, & the marchants of the earth are waxed rich of the abūdance of her pleasures.
                  
                     4 And I heard an other voice from heaven saying goe out of her my people, that yee be not partakers of her sinnes: and that yee receaue not of her plagues.
                  
                     5 For her sinnes are come vp into heaven, and God hath remembred her iniquities.
                  
                     6 Reward her even as shee hath rewarded you, and giue her double according to her workes: and in the cup that shee hath filled to you, fill her the double.
                  
                     7 In as much as she glorified her selfe, and liued in pleasure, so much giue yee to her torment and sorrow: for she saith in her heart I sit being a queene, and am no widowe, and

shall see no mourning.
                  
                     8 Therefore shall her plagues come at one day, death, and sorrow, and famine, shee shall be burnt with fire: for that God which condemneth her, is a strong Lord.
                  
                     9 And the kings of the earth shall bewaile her, and lament for her, which haue committed fornication and lived in pleasure with her, when they shall see that smoake of that her burning.
                  
                     10 And shall stand a farre of for feare of her torment, saying, Alas, alas that great citie Babylon, that mightie citie, for in one houre is thy iudgement come.
                  
                     11 And the marchants of the earth shall weepe, and waile over her: for no man buyeth their ware any more.
                  
                     12 The ware of gold, and siluer, and of pretious stones, and of pearles, and of fine linnen, and of purple, and of silke, and of skarlet▪ and of all manner of sweet wood, & of all vessels of yvorie, and of all vessels of most pretious wood, & of brasse, and of iron, & of marble.
                  
                     13 And of cinamon, and odours, and ointments, and frankincense, and wine, and oyle, and fine flowre, and wheate, and beasts, & sheep, and horses, & chariots, & seruants

and soules of men.
                  
                     14 And the apples that thy soule lusted after are departed from thee, and all things which were fat and excellent are departed from thee, and thou shalt find them no more.
                  
                     15 The merchants of these things which were waxed rich, shall stand a farre of from her, for feare of her torment, weeping & wailing.
                  
                     16 And saying alas, alas, that great citie, that was clothed in fine linnen, & purple, and skarlet, and gilded with gold, and pretious stones, and pearles. How could so great riches come to desolation in one houre?
                  
                     17 And every shipmaster, and all the people that occupie ships, and ship men, and whosoever trafficke on the sea shall stand a farre off,
                  
                     18 And crie, when they see that smoke of that her burning, saying, what citie was like vnto this great citie?
                  
                     19 And they shall cast dust on their heads, and crie, weeping and wailing, & say, Alas, alas, that great citie, wherein were made rich all that had ships on the sea by her costlinesse: for in one houre she is made desolate.
                  
                     20 O heaven reioice of her, and the holy

Apostles, and Prophets: for God hath punnished her, to bee revenged on her for your sakes.
                  
                     21 Then a mightie Angel tooke vp a stone like a great milstone, and cast it into the sea, saying, with such violence shall that great citie Babylon be cast, and shall be found no more.
                  
                     22 And the voice of harpers, and musitians, and of pipers, and trumpeters shall be heard no more in thee, and no crafts-man of what craft soever he be, shall bee found any more in thee: and the sound of a milstone shal be heard no more in thee.
                  
                     23 And the light of a candle shall shine no more in thee: and the voice of the bridegroome, and of the bride shall bee heard no more in thee: for thy merchants were the great men of the earth: and with thine inchantments were all nations deceaved.
                  
                     24 And in her was found the bloud of the Prophets, and of the Saints, and of all that were slaine vpon the earth.
               
            
            
               The Explication.
               1 Afterward I sawe another Angell come downe from heauen, to wit, the son

of God, being armed with soveraigne power.
               2 Who cried out with a lowd voice, saying, she is fallen, she is fallen, that great citie of Rome, because she is become the habitation of divels, and the hold of deceitfull spirits, and of all sortes of orders distinguisht by their habits, as of strange birds.
               3 For all nations haue beene made drunke with the intoxicating wine of her Idolatrie, and the kings of the earth did cleaue vnto her Idolatrie: and the merchandize of benefices, pardons, annates, taxes, dispensations, indulgences, and absolutions, did enrich an infinite number of persons that did liue by her trafficke.
               4 Afterward I heard the voice of God from heauen saying, yee my people go out from the Church of Rome, and from Poperie; for feare least yee bee defiled in her superstition, and perish together with her.
               5 For her sinnes being linckt together in a long chaine haue raught vp to the heauenly throne of God, there to bee iudged of him, and God is resolued to pū
                  nish her iniquities.
               6 Yee people and kings whome shee

hath tyrannized over, and held captiues, reuenge your selues vpon her, & giue her double: and serue her as shee hath serued you, euen to the double.
               7 Giue her asmuch affliction as shee hath had glory, that shee may weepe as much as shee hath ioyed in her delicious sportes and dissolutenesse. For shee said in her heart. I rule, and am queene, and mother of all churches, which cānot be iudged of any. I am the spowse of Christ, and shall neuer fall. For I cannot erre in the faith, nor euer be cast of, nor left by Christ.
               8 For these causes shall these plagues come vpon her at once, to wit, death, and sorrow, and famin, and she shall bee burnt with fire, for God is able to doe her iustice.
               9 And there shall bee 
                     To wit, the Kings that will not ioin themselues with others which shall conspire against her.
                   kings of the earth, which hauing committed Idolatry with her, and hauing had a part in her dissolutenesse, shall lament & take on, seeing her consumed by fire.
               10 And they shall stand a farre of, without lending her any succour, saying, Alas; Rome, thou great and mightie citie, how is thy destruction come vpon thee so suddainely?
               
                  11 Likewise the Prelates, great penitentiaries, bullists, dataries, notaries, & protonotaries Apostolicall, Factours, and Banckers, which helpe men to the remission of their sinnes by letters of exchange, all these shall bewaile the destruction of Rome, and not they only but all sorts of merchants too shall take on, because no man thencefoorth shall buy any more of their wares.
               12 Because no man shall buy any more gold, nor siluer, for to make crucifixes, chalices, covers for cups, candlesticks, and other moueables of the Church: Nor pretious stones, to set them in the Popes triple crowne, and in Bishops rings, & for an ornament of the caskets that containe reliques; Nor pearles to hang about the Popes mantle, and to adorn
                     •
                   the Roman Courtizans: Nor silke, nor skarlet, nor any kind of rich stuffe, for to cloath their images, and their Cardinals, and to make Copes for priests, and Banners for processions: Nor other pretious thinges, for to embellish the palaces of Cardinals, and other Prelats, and officers of the Pope, as marble and pretious wood; Nor brasse, nor yuorie, to make deskes, boxes, &.
               
                  13 Nor odours and perfumes, to perfume the Church, or for the priuate delights of Prelats, & officers of the Ecclesiasticall court. Nor wines & choice fruits for their tables. Nor riding horses, nor coach horses, for the Popes traine and his Cardinals. Nor captiues and servile consciences, nor mens soules, which were bought and sold, but this traffick shall be abolisht, by the destruction of Rome.
               14 (For ô wretched citie, al this worldly prosperitie, all this riot of luxurie shall be taken away from thee, and thou shalt enioy them no longer)
               15 All such therefore as shall bee enricht by this trafficke, and which haue preyed vpon the people vnder the shewe of Religion, shall forsake her in her neede, fearing to be wrapt in the same ruine, and shall bewaile her with great lamentation.
               16 Saying, alas Rome, thou so mighty and stately a citie! whose gouernours were cloathed in silke, and purple, & skarlet, and crowned with gold, and pretious stones, how couldst thou fall from al these riches in so short a space?
               17 The Pilots themselues, and the marriners, which did serue to carry the

foresaid marchandize, shall withdrawe themselues without lending her any aide.
               18 And seeing the smoake of her burning shall cry out saying, what city was like vnto the city of Rome?
               19 And shall cast dust vpon their heads, and shall crie out weeping, and lamenting, and say, alas, alas! that great city in which all those that did trafficke were made rich by her wealth, howe shee is become desolate in an instant!
               20 O yee heavenly spirits, which doe reioyce at the conuersion of one only sinner, reioyce at her ruine; yee holy Apostles also and Prophets: For it is for your sakes that God hath taken vengeance of her.
               21 Then I saw a mightie Angell take vp a great stone like a milstone, and cast it into the sea, saying. So shall Rome be cast into the deepe, and abolisht euerlastingly and shall apeare no more then a milstone cast into the sea, which neuer riseth vp againe to the top of the water.
               22 23 And all sorts of delights, and pleasures, of ornaments, commodities, & recreations, are past from thee. Whereas before the factours of Rome did liue like Princes, and the people and nations were

                     〈6 pages missing〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
the Latin Church is nothing else but a shop, with a table of mony changers standing in the midst of it, which Christ shall overturne the second time, when the prophecie contained in this chapter shall bee accomplished.
            
         
         
            THE PROPHECIE CONtained in the 7. chapter of Daniell. CHAP. 8.
            
               
                  
                     1 In the first yeare of Belshazzar king of Babell Daniel saw a dreame, and there were visions in his head, vpon his bed: then he wrote the dreame, & declared the summe of the matter.
                  
                     2 Daniel spake and said, I saw in my vision by night, and behold the 4 windes of heaven stroue vpon the great sea.
                  
                     3 And 4 great beasts came vp from the sea one divers from an other.
                  
                     4 The 1 was a Lyon and had Eagles wings: I beheld till the wings thereof were pluckt off, & it was lifted vp from the earth and set vpon his feete as a man, and a mans heart was given him.
                  
                     
                     5 And behold, another beast which was the second, was like a Beare, and stoode vpon the one side: and hee had three tuskes in his mouth amongst his teeth, and they said thus vnto him, Arise and devoure much flesh.
                  
                     6 After this I beheld, & lo there was an other like a Leopard, which had vpon his backe 4 wings of a fowle: the beast had also 4 heads and dominion was given him.
                  
                     7 After this I saw in the visions by night, and behold the fourth beast was fearefull, and terrible, and very strong. It had great iron teeth, it devoured, and brake in peeces, and stamped the residue vnder his feet: & it was vnlike to the beasts that were before it, for it had 10 hornes.
                  
                     8 As I considered the hornes, behold there came vp amōg thē another little horn, before whom there were 3 of the first horns pluckt away: and behold in his throne there were eies like the eies of man, and a mouth speaking presumptuous things.
                  I beheld till the thrones were set vp, and the ancient of daies did sit, whose garment was as white as snowe, and the haire of his head like the pure wooll: his throne was like the fiery flame, and his wheeles like burning fire.
                  
                     
                     10 A fiery streame issued, and came forth from before him: thousand thousands ministred vnto him,, and ten thousand thousands stood before him: the iudgement was set, and the bookes opened.
                  
                     11 Then I beheld, because of the voice of the presumptuous words which the horne spake: I beheld even till the beast was slaine, and his body destroyed, and giuen to the burning fire.
                  
                     12 As concerning the other beasts, they had their dominion taken away: yet their liues were prolonged for a certaine time and season.
                  
                     13 As I beheld the visions by night, behold one like the sonne of man came in the clowdes of heaven, and approached vnto the ancient of daies, and they brought him before him.
                  
                     14 And he gaue him dominion & honour, and a kingdome: that all people, nations and languages should serue him: his dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall never be taken away, and his kingdome shall never be destroyed.
                  
                     15 I Daniel was troubled in my spirit in the midst of my body, and the visions of mine head made me afraid.
                  
                     
                     16 Therefore I came vnto one of them that stood by, and asked him the truth of all this: so he told me, and shewed mee the interpretation of all these things, saying,
                  
                     17 These 4 great beasts, are 4 kinges which shall arise out of the earth.
                  
                     18 And the Saints of the most high shall receaue their kingdome, which they shal possesse for ever, even for ever and ever.
                  
                     19 After this I would knowe the truth of the fourth beast, which was so vnlike to al the others, very fearefull, whose teeth were of yron, and his nayles of brasse: which devoured, brake in peeces, and stamped the residue vnder his feet.
                  
                     20 Also to knowe of the 10 hornes that were in his head, & of the other which came vp, before whome three fell, and of the horne that had eies, and of the mouth that spoke presumptuous things; whose looke was more stout then his fellowes.
                  
                     21 I beheld, and the same horne made battell against the Saints, yea and prevailed against them.
                  
                     22 Vntill the ancient of daies came, & iudgement was giuen to the Saints of the most high: and the time approached that the Saints possessed the kingdome.
                  
                     
                     23 Then he said, the fourth beast shall be the fourth kingdome in the earth, which shall be vnlike to all the kingdomes, and shall devoure the whole earth and shall tread it downe, and breake it in peeces.
                  
                     24 And the 10 hornes are 10 kings that shall rise out of this kingdome, and another shall rise after them, and he shall be vnlike to the first, and he shall subdue 3 kings.
                  
                     25 And shall speake wordes against the most high, and shall consume the Saints of the most high, and think that he may change times and lawes, and they shall be giuen into his hand vntill a time, and times, and halfe a time.
                  
                     26 But the iudgement shall sit, & they shall take away his dominion, to consume and destroy it vnto the end.
                  
                     27 And the kingdome, and dominion, and the greatnesse of the kingdomes vnder the whole earth shall be given to the holy people of the most high, whose kingdome is an everlasting kingdome, and all power shall serue and obay them.
               
            
            
               The Exposition.
               1 In the first yeare of Belshazzar king

of Babel Daniel saw a dreame, and lying vpon his bed, had his head troubled with visions, the matter of which dreame hee did afterward commit to writing.
               2 And behold here what hee hath written of it. I had a vision by night, and it seemed vnto mee that the windes comming from the foure quarters of the world blew vpon the sea, that is to say, that the people and nations (whom the holy scripture doth often compare to the sea) had many divers and contrary tumults to disturbe them.
               3 And out of the midst of these people, and nations came fowre great beastes of different shapes, figuring 4 great diverse Empires, which should reigne in the world.
               4 The first beast which did represent the first Empire, to wit, that of Babylon, was like vnto a Lyon, to note his noblenesse, and valour, and had the wings of an Eagle, to note the speedy atchieuements of his conquests. And I beheld till this actiue vigour was taken from him, and that being spoiled of his bestiall fiercenesse, he learned the lesson of obedience, and was taught to abstaine from blood, that so hee

might liue with humanitie like a man, and not with crueltie like a beast.
               5 After this Empire succeeded the Empire of Persia, figured by a bear, which lay along vpon one side, either because his cōquests did stretch from east to west, or else because he was like a beare resting himselfe, which never lyeth farre of from the prey which hee hath seized vpon. And this beare amongst many other teeth had 3 great teeth or tuskes, signifying that amongst many other kingdoms which this Empire should possesse, hee should haue 3 great and mightie kingdoms: that of Persia, that of Media, & that of Babylon. And God being incensed against men sent out this beare to make them dye.
               6 After the fall of this Empire, behold a third Empire rose vp, to wit, that of the Macedonians, figured by a Leopard, because of its crueltie, subtiltie, and celerity, represented by the 4 wings. And this Empire was forthwith divided into foure kingdoms, which are the kingdoms of the Seleucidae in Asia maior, the kingdome of Antigonus in Asia minor, the kingdome of the Ptolomies in Egypt, and the kingdome of Greece, and God gaue vnto this

Empire to raigne over the earth.
               7 After this Empire there arose another Empire figured by a most dreadful & mightie strong beast. It had mighty kingdomes and provinces vnder it; it did scatter and ruinate, tyrannizing over those whom it did not slay. And this Empire was differing in force and power from the Empires that went before, and had 10 parts and principall provinces vnder it, & as it fell to decay, ten kingdomes also did arise out of the division thereof.
               8 As I stood wondring at the greatnesse of this Empire from which 10 kingdomes did arise, behold a Monarch growing like a little horne amidst the other, that sprang vp from betweene these kingdomes, which for his share did possesse such a portion of this Roman Empire, as there is of 3 to 10, that is to say, well neer the third part, and had the eies of humane vnderstanding, having contrived the building of his kingdome by wonderfull policie, and spoke prowdly and arrogantly, boasting that he could not erre, that hee was the supreme iudge in matters of faith and religion, that he was a vice-God, and God vpon earth, King of kings, the head

and spowse of the Church, his holynesse, and a disposer of kingdomes.
               9 I considered with my selfe howe this Bishop did advance himselfe, & continue, vntill the thrones mounted vpon wheeles, were set in their proper places, that is to say, vntill the day of iudgement were well onward, and hard at hand, and the Lord God sat down vpō these thrones who is called the Ancient of daies, because he is from before all time, & from before all antiquitie, and hee was cloathed with the light, and had a head all hoary gray, to signifie his age, his throne was like the flame, and the wheeles of his throne were as burning fire.
               10 His iudgments like a fiery stream went from before his presence. An infinite number of Angels stood before him, waiting his pleasure. So he sate him downe to iudge the world: and that hee might proceed with equity, all his bookes were opened. To wit, the booke of the sinnes of men mentioned in the 65 chap. of 
                     Esa. 65. v. 6 Behold it is written before me: I wil not keepe silence.
                   
                  Esay, and in the 20. of the Apocalyps; as also the booke of the afflictions of the faithfull, mentioned in the 
                     Ps. 56. v▪
                      8 Thou purest my teares in 
                           •
                        o thy bottle, are they not in thy regi
                        
                           ••
                        er?
                   56 Psalm; & the booke of life wherein the elect are registred, mē
                  tioned

in the 13 of the Apocalyps, and 17.
               11 And I beheld with admiration, how this sonne of perdition spoke prowd words, till at last his Empire was destroyed, and the body of this Roman Monarchie abolisht, & the keyes thereof thrown into everlasting fire.
               12 And al dominion was taken from the other beasts, albeit they had continued for a long time in the world.
               13 As I was ravisht by night with the contemplation of this vision, I saw the sonne of God our Lord Iesus, which came downe from heauen, carried vpon the clouds, and hee approached vnto God his father which sate vpon the throne. And his father made him sit on his right hand to iudge the world.
               14 Giuing him a name aboue all names, and all power both in heaven and in earth, so that every knee shoulde bowe before him, and all people should giue him glory, and praise. His dominion is an everlasting dominion which shal not pass away, and his kingdome shall not bee destroyed.
               This was the vision of Daniel, the meaning whereof when he required, it was giuen

him by one of the Angels that stood by in these words,
               17 These 4 great beasts are foure kings that shall arise out of the earth.
               
               18 And the Saints of the most high shall receaue the kingdome, which they shall possesse for ever, even for ever and ever.
               
            
            
               The Exposition.
               
                  17 These 4 great beasts signifie foure Realmes or Monarches, that shal arise out of the earth.
               
               
                  18 Who being once abolisht, God shall giue his faithfull servants the kingdome of heauen, which they shall enioy everlastingly. This exposition having not satisfied Daniel concerning that which he desired most to know, to wit, what was meant by the fourth beast that had tenne heads, and the little horne that grew out, the same Angel doth expound it more at large vnto him, saying,
               
               
                  23 The fourth beast shall be the fourth kingdome in the earth, which shall be vnlike to all the kingdomes, and shall devoure the whole earth, and shall tread it downe, and breake it in peeces.
               
                  24 But the 10 hornes are 10 kings that shall rise out of this kingdome, and another

shall rise after them, which shall be vnlike to the first, and he shall subdue 3 Kings.
               
                  25 Hee shall speake words against the most high, and shall consume the Saints of the most high, and think that he may change times and lawes, and the Saints shall be giuē into his hand vntill a time, and times, & half a time.
               
                  26 But the iudgement shall be held, and they shall take away his dominion to consume and destroy it vnto the end.
               
                  27 That the kingdome, and dominion, and the greatnesse of the kingdomes vnder the whole heaven, may bee given to the holy people of the most high; the kingdome of which people is an everlasting kingdome, and all the powers shall serue and obay them.
            
            
               The Exposition.
               23 The fourth beast signifies the fourth Empire on the earth, which shall differ from the other Empires in greatnes and violence, and shall conquer all the earth, and subiect it, and wast it.
               24 But the 10 horns which shal arise out of it, are 10 kingdomes which shall spring vp from the dissipation of this Empire, & shall divide it into 10 peeces. But after that these kingdomes shall bee erected amongst

them, whose Empire shall bee altogether divers from the others, to wit, the Bishop of Rome: for hee shall 
                     •
                  ule vnder the shew of religion, & spiritual power; and shall possesse well neere the third part of the provinces of the ancient Empire, and keepe them vnder him.
               25 He shall speak blasphemy against God, and persecute the Church, and take vpon him to change the course of the year and make the daies holy or prophane at his pleasure: hee shall take vpon him also to change the law in cutting off the secōd commandement, and denying that it is sinne to transgresse the last, and dispensing with other commandements, & prescribing lawes of equall authority with the law of God, yea and of more authoritie, and the Church shall bee held captiue vnder him for the space of 1260 yeares.
               26 But the day of iudgement shall come: and Iesus Christ comming into the world shall take his dominion from him, and shall destroy him vtterly.
               27 To the end, that a soueraigne dominion over all worldly greatnesse may be giuen to the Church of God, which is the assēbly of the Saints, to which church

God hath given an euerlasting kingdome and all power both of men and diuels shal be subiect vnto it.
            
            
               The Proofe.
               Albeit this exposition doe explaine it selfe, and be full of perspicuitie: yet to remoue all difficulties, I will cleere 6. points in which the whole proofe of our exposition doth consist, and will shew.
               1 That the Roman Empire falling to decay in the West, and the East, was divided into parts or kingdomes, which Dan. v.7. and 24. saith are vnderstood by the 10 hornes of the fourth beast. II. That the Bishop of Rome doth possesse well neer the third part of the ancient Roman Empire. III. That the Bishop of Rome doth chāge times and the law. IV. What the meaning of a time, times, and halfe a time is, during which tearme, the Saints shall bee made slaues, and the church kept in bondage. V. What this Empire & dominion is that is giuen to the Saints. VI. That vpon good reason by the fourth beast we vnderstand the Roman Empire, and by the little horn the sonne of perdition, which is called Antichrist

by the Ancient, as likewise by our aduersaries.
               1 The diuision of the ancient Empire into tenne partes is most euident. Danie
                     •
                   makes 10 kingdomes to bee borne out o
                     •
                   the dispersing of the Romā Empire, and amidst this a little horn to spring vp & grow out. To find the accomplishmēt therefore of this prophecy, we are to look whether a little before the Pope became an earthly Monarch (for Daniel saith that these hornes here doe signifie Realmes) the Roman Empire were not diuided into tenne Realmes. We haue shewed already that in the yeare 755 the Pope began to lay the foundation of his earthly Empire, and of a Bishop to become a Monarch. Nowe a little before, (that is to say in the seauenth age) the Roman Empire was diuided into 10 peeces or kingdomes. 1, There was the kingdōe of the Frēch, which held France & a part of Germanie. 2. The kingdome of the English Saxons, which held great Brittain. 3 The kingdōe of the Visigots which held Spaine. 4. The kingdome of the Lumbards in Italie. 5. The kingdome of the Sclavonians which held Illyria, and the countries thereabout▪ 6. The kingdome of

the Huns and the Avarians in Hungarie & Austrich. 7. The kingdome of the Bulgarians reigning in Bulgaria and Seruia, &c. 8. The kingdome of the Sarasens of Damascus that held Syria, and reigned in the East. 9. The kingdome of the Sarasens of Barbarie that reigned in Affricke, which about this very age did inuade Spaine and passe into Fraunce. 10. To which if yee ad that which as yet was held in possession by the Emperour of Constantinople, yee shall find 10 Realmes, euery one possessing his part of the ancient Roman Empire: and this, a little before that this little horne shewed himselfe, that is to say, before the Pope began to take his place amongst Princes, and to lay the foundations of his Roman Monarchie.
               2 That the portion of the Roman Empire, which the Pope hath vnder him, hath such a proportion in respect of the whole extent of the Empire, as there is of three to ten, that is to say, that hee doth possesse little lesse thē the third part thereof: this is easily proued to bee true, if it please any to take but a map, and a payre of compasses, or else only to measure the countries of the Empire with his eies. The

Pope did never possesse any thing, nor never had any dominion over Greece, Asia, Syria, Arabia, Egypt, or Affrick. For as for the incursions of our French into Syria, Egypt and Constantinople, they were nothing else but violēt motiōs, which lasted but for a small time, and did rather shew thē plant the Popes dominion in the East. Now all these countries being put together make vp a little more then two thirds of the Roman Empire, the rest hath beene vnder the Pope, wherein hee hath planted his Monarchie: wherevnto moreouer hee hath added certaine prouinces that were never subiect to the Ancient Roman Empire, as Polonie, the north part of Germanie, Denmarck, and Swethland, and nowe of late a part of the Indies. But Daniel lookt not to these adiunctions, for hee speakes only of the diuision of the Roman Empire.
               3 As for the changing of times, and the law, it is the Pope that takes vpon him to make the yeares shorter or longer. It is not long since that Gregorie the 13 did contract the yeare by 10 daies: it is the Pope that makes holy daies of common daies, which can if it please him, transport

the month of Iuly into Ianuarie; taking the authoritie vpon him of the ancient priests of Rome instituted by Numa, who proclaimed the holy daies, and thrust in odde days into the yeare at their pleasure. It were a needlesse labour for me to shewe more particularly howe hee changeth the law, seeing that my whole second booke is spent in declaring howe the Pope doth oppose himselfe against the word of God. Seeing also that hee boasteth that hee can dispense with oathes and vowes made to God, that he can dissolue compleat marriages, although they bee not violated by adulterie: that hee can dispense with children for obaying their parents in honest things, and with subiects for being faithfull to their Prince. That he can giue a mā leaue to marry his own neece contrary to the commandement of God. That hee can keepe Princes from reading the holy scripture, contrary to an expresse commandement that is giuen them in the 17 of Deut. v. 18. Whereupon his Doctours also say and write in their glosses vpon the Decrees of the Church of Rome, and in their bookes of controuersies, that the Pope cā dispense against the Apostle, and against

the old Testament. And that hee can dispense with the commandement of the Lord wherein he saith, Doe workes worthy of repentance: as hee doth indeed dispense with it by his Indulgences.
               4 Next followes the exposition of these words, A time, times, & halfe a time, which is the tearme during which, Daniel saith, the Saints shall be kept in bondage, and the church held captiue. These words at the first seeme strange, but being compared with other places where there is mention made of the continuance of the dominion of Antichrist, are easie to be vnderstood. We haue seene in the 13 Chapt. of the Apocalyps, v. 5. that the Romā Empire after the healing of its wound by the Papacie, must continue 42 months, which make 3 yeares and a halfe, that is to say, 1260 mysticall daies, which amount to so many yeares, according to the stile of the Scripture: as we haue shewed by many examples in the exposition of the said passage of the Apocalyps. Now 3 yeares and a halfe, are one yeare, two yeares, & halfe an yeare, so that the spirit of God by an admirable correspondency of the Prophecies doth say the same thing in diuers

words, and doth tell vs before hand that the kingdome of Antichrist and the bondage of the Church vnder his dominion must continue 1260 yeares, which as wee haue shewed by vndoubted proofes, must begin in the yeare of our Lord, 755.
               5 As concerning the kingdome, and dominion over all things which God giueth to his Saints, and the faithfull, although they seeme servants and strangers in this world, Daniel herein speakes according to the stile of the Scripture, which calleth them Kings, Apoc. 1. v. 6. & 5. v. 10 He hath made vs kings and priests vnto God his father. And in the 1. Epistle of S. Peter Chap. 2. the faithfull are called a Royall Priesthood. Now they are kings, both because they raigne already in Christ, which is one body with vs, so that the kingdome which he now possesseth ouer all things is ours: as also because that in the last day of iudgement, the faithfull shall iudge the world, and the Angels; as the Apostle S. Paule saith in the 1. to the Corinth. Ch. 6. That is to say, that they shall bee the assessours of the sonne of God, and approuers of the iudgment which he shall pronoūce against the wicked, and against the divels.

As also because that in the glory to come after the last day, they shal be aboue those which reigned over them, and shall bee kings whilst the mightie ones of this world, which were enimies to the church, shall be made slaues.
               6 It remaines that we see, whether they that hold that there is no mention at all made in this Chap. of the Roman Empire, nor of Antichrist, but only of the kingdome of the Seleucidae: and of Antiochus Epiphanes, can be excused.
               The ancient Doctors hold with vs, that in this chapter Antichrist is spoken of, as Hierome, and Theodoret vpon this place, S. Cyprian in his booke of exhortation to martyrdome. S. Austin in the 23. chap. 20. booke of the citie of God. And our adversaries are of the same opinion. They of the Ancient which by a little horne vnderstand Antiochus Epiphanes, doe withall vnderstand Antichrist by the same horne, for they hold that Antiochus was a figure of Antichrist▪ and that which is said of the one, agrees also to the other.
               As for mine owne part I finde this Prophecie so cleere, that it is hard to doubt of the meaning; and indeed amongst all the

chapters of holy scripture, this did ever seeme excellent vnto me, and I could never satisfy my selfe with admiring it. What deepnesse of wisdome there is in it! what cleerenesse of Prophecies! how many remarkeable circumstances! what excellent accord with the reuelation of S. Iohn! yee shall find the same stile in both places in the same matter. Whosoever shall take this prophecie from Christians to appropriate it vnto the Iewes only, goes about as it seemes to mee, to stop vp a great window, at which God doth let in his light vnto vs, and to take away no small stay & comfort from our faith: besides that they doe shut their eies of set purpose, and contest against experience. Yet let vs heare what they alleage.
               They lay for a foundation, that the 2. chap. and the 7. speake both of one and the same thing, and that the vision of the foure beastes hath the same signification with the image that had his head of gold, his breast of siluer, his belly & his thighes of brasse, his legs part of yron and part of clay. That is to say, that both of these visions doe signifie foure Monarchies, vnder which the Iewish Church was held in captiuitie;

I doe not deny but that the 3 first Monarchies are the same, in the 2. and 7. chap. But the fourth Empire here called the fourth beast, is altogether divers from the feet of the image in the second chapter.
               1 For this fourth beast is described here as more able and strong then the 3. former, and his lookes are said to be more stout then his fellowes, v. 20. On the contrary the fourth kingdome in the 2. chapt. is made to be farre weaker then the other. For Daniel in the 42. verse saith, that it shall be partly strong, and partly broken, and makes it so farre inferiour to the former monarchies, as yron & clay are in respect of gold and silver.
               2 Likewise when Daniel saith that the third Monarchy (which is that of the Macedonians) had 4 heads, who sees not that hereby he vnderstands, that the Empire should be divided into 4 kingdomes? As Daniel himselfe also doth expounde himselfe in the 8. chapt. v. 22. The kingdome of the Seleucidae being one of the 4 kingdomes into which the Empire of Alexander is divided, what probability is there that in the verse following hee shoulde

make these very Seleucidae a diverse beast, which but in the verse going before, hee had made to bee one of the heades of the beast? To salue the matter, they tell vs of diuers confusions within the kingdome of Aridaeus, Antipater, and Cassander, where they seeke for 4 kings opposing one an other at the same time, but cannot finde them; and say they should, yet is it likely that Daniel should rather speake of the diuisions that fell out in a little corner of Alexanders Empire, then of those that fell out in the whole Empire, being that these were the greater of the two without all comparison? Or who will thinke that Daniel in this place doth speake onlie of the diuisions of the country of Macedon, which had nothing cōmō with the Iewes, and omit those of Syria where the church dwelt?
               3 Nor are they lesse troubled, if not more, to finde 10 Seleucidian kings, after whom they will haue Antiochus Epiphanes to rise. For they are faine to thrust in the Ptolomies to make vp this number, which did invade or ouerrun Syria. But Daniel saith that these 10 kings shall arise out of the decayed Empire, and it cā
                  not

be said that the Ptolomies did rise out of the kingdome of the Seleucidae, seeing that they did rise against the Seleucidae. They speake therefore▪ as if I shoulde saie, that Brennus did rise out of the kingdome of Romulus, or the Tarquins, whereas he did rise vp against their state, & posterity. And last of all, should we grant them that which they would haue, yet can they not make vp their number. For they make this Antiochus to bee the tenth of these kings, contrary to the expresse words of Daniel, which saith that this little horne shall rise vp after the ten kings: he is none of the ten therefore.
               4 And they are as much out in the acceptiō of the word, kings, which throughout this whole chapt. doth not signifie the person of kings, but the kingdomes, or Monarchies. As it appeareth by the 17. verse in these words, the 4 beasts are foure kings, where they themselues cōfesse that by the word kings, we are to vnderstande Monarchies.
               5 Besides, I know not how they can finde that fulfilled in Antiochus, which Daniel saith in the 22. verse, to wit, That he shall subdue 3 kings; for histories report

no such thing of this man.
               6 Herevnto adde that, if (as they would haue it) the third beast doe signifie the Empire of Alexander only, & not that of the Seleucidae; too, then this Empire must continue but 6. yeares, which is manifestly opposit to that which Daniel saith verse 12. That the liues of these beasts were prolongued, for a certaine time and season.
               
               7 Nor can it be said, with what violence they wrest the words of the 13 ver. where Iesus Christ is described comming in the clowdes of heauen. They would haue this not to be spoke of his comming at the last day, but would haue it to be vnderstood of his incarnation, when neuerthelesse it cannot be said without absurditie, that he came down from heauen vpon the clowdes.
               8 But to what ende shoulde Daniel speake so often of the glorification of the Saints, and of their heauenly kingdome, if hee spake but only of the humiliation of Iesus Christ, and not of the last iudgement?
               9 The space also of three yeares and an halfe, exprest by a time, two times, and halfe a time, can not agree to Antiochus.
                  
For in the 8. chapt. ver. 14. where this Antiochus is manifestly spoken off, it is saide that hee shall wast the Sanctuarie for the space of two thousand▪ three hundreth mornings & evenings, which amount to more then 6 yeares. And note that these words, mornings, & euenings, are purposely added, to shew that he speaketh of common and ordinarie daies, and to distinguish thē from the three mysticall yeares, and an halfe, spoken of in this chapt.
               10. On the other side all their obiectiōs against this explication, aime at this chiefly, to shew that the Roman Empire is not spoken off in the 2. chap. of Daniel, which we do not deny; but this lets not but that it may be spoken off in this chapt.
               11 And, to say truth, they presuppose without reason that Daniel speakes this here but only for the Church of the Iews. For what inconvenience is there if we say that God did reueale something to his prophet concerning the Christiā church? Seeing that in the 12 chapt. he doth apparantly prophecie of the resurrection, and euerlasting life; And do not they contradict themselues, being that they woulde haue Daniel in the 6. verse speake of the

confusions that hapned in Macedō, where the Iewes had no interest, and which did not concerne them at all?
               12 Last of all I say, that the vision mentioned in the 2. chapt. had beene repeated in vaine in the 7. if there were no diuersitie in them, and if the second apparition of the same vision did not teach vs some thing that was not contained in the former.
            
         
         
            THE PROPHECIE CONtained in the 11. chapter of the Apocalyps. CHAP. 9.
            
               
                  
                     1 Then was given me a reede like vnto a rod, and there stoode an Angell by, which said vnto me, Rise, and mete the temple of God, and the altar, and them that worshippe therein.
                  
                     2 But the court that is without the tē
                     ple cast out, and mete it not: for it is given vnto the Gentiles, & the holy city shall they tread vnder foot 42 moneths.
                  
                     3 But I will giue her vnto my two witnesses, and they shall prophecie a thousand 3
                     
hundreth, and threescore daies clothed in sack-cloth.
                  
                     4 These are two oliue trees, and two candlestickes standing before the God of the earth.
                  
                     5 And if any man will hurt them, fire proceedeth out of their mouth, & devoureth their enimies: for if any man will hurt them, thus must he be killed.
                  
                     6 These haue power to shut heavē, that it may not raine in the daies of their prophecying, and haue power over the waters to turne them into bloud, to smite the earth with all maner of plagus as often as they will.
                  
                     7 And when they shall haue finished their testimony, the beast that commeth out of the bottomlesse pit, shall make warre against them and shall overcome them, & kill them.
                  
                     8 And their dead bodies shall lie in the streetes of the great cittie, which spirituallie is called Sodome, and Egypt, where our Lord also was crucified.
                  
                     9 And they of the tribes, and people, and tongues, and nations, shall see their dead bodies three daies and an halfe, and shall not suffer their carkasses to bee buried in graues.
                  
                     10 And they that dwell vpon the earth

shall reioice over them, and be glad, and shall send gifts one to an other: because that these two prophets vexed them that dwelt vpō the earth.
                  
                     11 But after these 3 daies, & an halfe, the spirit of life comming from God, shall enter into them, and they shall stand vpon their feete, and great feare shall come vpon them, which saw them.
                  
                     12 After this they shall heare a great voice from heaven; saying, Come vp hither. And they shall ascende vp to heaven in a clowde, and their enimies shall see them.
                  
                     13 And at the same howre there shall be a great earthquake, and the tenth part of the citty shal fall, and in the earthquake shal be slaine 7000 men in nūber, and they which remaine shalbe sore afraid, and giue the glorie to God of heaven.
                  
                     14 The second w
                        •
                      is past, and beholde the third wo will come anon.
                  
                     15 And the seaventh Angell blew the Trumpet, & there were great voices in heaven, saying, The kingdomes of the world, are our Lords, and his Christs, & he shal reigne for evermore.
                  
                     16 Then the 24 elders which sate before God on their seats, fell vpon their faces,

and worshipped God.
                  
                     17 Saying, we giue thee thankes o Lo
                        ••
                      God Almightie, which art, and which wa
                        •
                      and which art to come, for thou hast receiued thy great might, and hast begun th
                        •
                      raigne.
                  
                     18 And the Gentiles were angry, 
                        〈◊〉
                      thy wrath is come, and the time of the dead that they should bee iudged, and that th
                        ••
                      shouldst giue the reward vnto thy servants the Prophets, and to the Saints, and to them that feare thy name, to small and great, and shouldst destroy thē which destroy the earth.
                  
                     19 Then the Temple of God was opened in heauen, and there was seene in his Tē
                     ple the Arke of his covenant: and there were lightnings, and voices, and thundrings, and earthquakes, and much hayle.
               
            
            
               The Explication.
               1 It seemed vnto me in a vision, that God put a long reed into my hand like a measure. Afterward an Angel sent from God said vnto mee; with this measure, which is Faith, measure, & learne to know the greatnesse of the Church of God exactly, the excellency of the sacrifice of Iesus

Christ, and the state of the faithfull, which serue God in his Church.
               2 But measure not that which is without the Church, neither make any reckoning of it. For these are the nations, and people, which are out of the covenant of God, which shall tread vpon, and tyrannize ouer the Church of God, for the space of a thousand, two hundreth & sixty yeares.
               3 But I will giue place in my house to some few faithfull pastours, which shal giue witnes to the truth, during the 1260 yeares, all which time the enimies of the Church shall beare sway, which faithfull Pastours shal preach the truth with humilitie, and strictnesse of life, and much affliction.
               4 These Pastors are like to oliue trees which bring tidings of peace, and yeeld that comfortable oyle, which is the word of God, that glads the soule, and like two candlesticks, that giue light in the church in the presence of God.
               5 But if any one resist them, or persecute them, the word shall bee like a fire, which shall consume their adversaries, & turne them into condemnation.
               
                  6 These faithfull witnesses shal 
                     〈◊〉
                   a drought to be vpon the earth, and 
                     〈◊〉
                   the waters to be corrupted, and raise vp mortalitie, as often as they shall prea
                     ••
                   the truth, and shall not be heard. For Go
                     •
                   for their sakes shall visit men with divers plagues.
               7 And when they shal haue continued preaching the ful time which God hath prescribed vnto them in his secret coūsell, then the beast which is the sonne of perdition, shall raise vp a great persecution against them, and shall haue the vpper hand and make them to die.
               8 And their martyrdomes shall bee seene through all places, and quarters of the Popish Church, which is called Sodome by a mysticall tearme, because of the vice which raignes in the most eminent place of that Church; and Egypt because of the bondage of Gods people, which are kept in captivitie vnder Poperie. Where Christ also hath beene, and stil is persecuted in his members.
               9 And the people and nations that are kept in error shall see their persecutions and their martyrdomes, for the space of halfe the time of the continuance of

Poperie, and shall cast their bodies out in
                  
                     •
                  o the streets, and shall let them bee dryed vp vpon Gibbets, without ever being buried.
               10 This persecution enduring, the enimies of the Church shall reioice at the death of the faithful witnesses of the truth and be glad thereof, and send presents one to another, because they shall see themselues deliuered from the sollicitations & reprehensions of the faithfull ministers, which would not let them to be quiet.
               11 But this time being once expired, they shall reviue in their successours, God raising vp others in their place hauing the same spirit, which shall stand vpright, that they may speake the more couragiously. Whereat the people that are their enimies shall be greatly astonisht.
               12 After this, a voice shall come frō heauen, which shall say vnto these faithful servants of God, come vp into heauen: And God shall take them vp into heauen, with evident testimonies of his fauour, as their very enimes shall acknowledge.
               13 At this very houre, the people of the earth shal be smitten with a trembling feare. And God shall sende out a plague,

which shall kill the tenth part of the people of the Church of Rome: and this suddaine feare shall swallow vp a great number of them; they which remain shal stand amazed, and giue the glory to God.
               14 This woe shall bee the second after that of the Locusts, after which there is a third also to come.
               
                  
                     Apoc. 9. v. 12 One woe is past, and behold yet two woes to come after this.
                  15 For after this, comes the time wherein God will display his iudgments, for the seaventh and last time. So there were voices heard in heauen, saying, Now the kingdome of God is establisht, and of Iesus Christ his sonne ouer euery creature for to raigne euerlastingly.
               16 Then the Patriarchs and Apostles representing the whole Church of the Saints, which stand before God, & raigne with him, fel downe vpon their faces, and worshipped him.
               17 Saying, wee giue thee thankes, Lord God Almightie, and everlasting, because thou hast made knowne thy great might, and hast begunne to establish thy kingdome.
               18 It is true that the nations & people were incensed against thy church, but thou hast punnisht them in thy wrath, and

at length the time of the last iudgement is come, wherein thou wilt giue a reward vnto thy seruants, the ministers of the Gospell, and to all the faithful which feare thy name, both great and smal, and wilt destroy the destroyers of thy Church which is vpon earth.
               19 Then was the entrance into Paradice fully laid open, and God heretofore figured by the Arcke, called the Lord, was manifested in heauen. But he let loose his choler vpon earth, with glory & great power.
            
            
               The Proofe, and cleering.
               The three first chapt. of this book, containe nothing, but familiar instructions, with certaine representations of the maiestie of God and Iesus Christ, without any predictiō. In the sixth chap. S. Iohn begins to foretell of future euents, and to draw out his propheticall revelations, in which he follows the order of the time, beginning at the nativitie of Iesus Christ, & holding on till the approaching of the last iudgement, which is spoken of at the end of this 11. chapt.
               
                  All this time is first of all diuided into the opening of the 7. seales, which are as so many reuelations of the hidden counsel of God a little after into the 7. soundings of the trumpets, which signifie seauen seuerall executions of the iudgementes of God vpon the earth, which are also signified by the 7. viols of Gods wrath thrown vpon men.
               How many years euery seale must last, & how many, euery trumpet, this is another question; and which doth not appertaine directly to the See of Rome. Only wee are to note, that the two witnesses must be slaine by the beast vnder the sixt trumpet, and afterward be brought to life againe by the power of God, and at last be called from heauē, to come vp thither, & that after this the 7 trumpet must soūd, as it appeares by the 13. verse of the ninth chapter, & by the 15 verse of the 11 chap. Whence it is manifest that vnto vs (which liue now vnder the sixt trumpet) as wee will demonstrate, one part of these things is accomplisht: but that the whole is not yet accomplisht. Which is the cause of the obscurity of this prophecie, that troubled many mens heads, whilst they sought for

the fulfilling of thinges to come in ages past.
               And this doth not only shew me a waie to the cleering of this prophecie, but also giues me a reason why I should expounde this chapt. out of his order, and put it last. For whosoeuer shall read the Revelation diligently, shal finde that from the beginning of the sixth chapter to the end of the eleauenth, S. Iohn doth follow a continual course of prophetical history from time to time, vntill the day of iudgement. But that the 12. chapt. he doth begin the same historie againe after another fashion, beginning at the birth of our Sauiour, and following the historie of the church euen to the end of the booke, which hee concludes with the last iudgement, and with the heauenly glory, of the church of God. Wherefore we could not choose but expound this 12 chapt. and those which follow, before the 11. chapt. that wee might follow the order of the time. Moreouer there being but one part of this chapt. accomplisht, reason bids that we should end with that which is not as yet come to passe; But as for that which is come to passe, the exposition which I giue of it,

seemes in my opinion, to be easie and naturall.
               The meting of the holy Citie, which is the Church, seemes to be taken out of the 40. chap. of Ezekiel, where by a reed, or cane to measure, the holy Ghost giues Ezechiel to vnderstand, that he would learn him an exact knowledge of his Church. In the 2. verse, in saying that the Court which is out of the Temple, is giuen to the Gentiles, he doth glaunce at the mysticall reason of the building of the Tabernacle, which had three parts. 1, The court where the people stood. 2. The holy place, into which the Levits and priests entred, where the candlesticke was, the shew bread, and the altar of perfumes. 3. The Sanctuarie where the Arke surnamed the Lord stood, whither none might enter but the high Priests: The way to goe into the holy place was through the Court, and into the Sanctuarie through the holy place. The Court represented the nations which are out of the Church. The holy place represented the Church, where the word of God doth illighten and nourish vs, and where the benefit of Iesus Christ is a continuall perfume before God. The Sanctuarie

figured heauen, where our high Priest is gon in alone by his own power, to bring vs thither also. So the Court was a figure of the state of nature, the holy place of the state of grace, the Sanctuarie of the state of glory. And none euer entred into the second but through the first, nor into the last but through the second. Vpon good reason therefore is it that the Court here is assigned vnto the nations, which do not knowe God, seeing that it was out of the holy place, which was a figure of the church of God. And this is farther confirmed by the renting of the vaile, (which did divide the holy place from the Court) at the death of our Sauior, whereby there was an open passage laid open, for the nations that were strangers from his couenant, to enter into the Church.
               Now here by the nations, not only the heathen are to be vnderstood, but all people that are enimies to the church of God. The terme of time, for which they must oppresse the church of God, is 42 months which make 3 yeares and a halfe, which amount to 1260 yeares, to take a day for a yeare: as wee haue shewed in the exposition of the fifth verse of the 13. chapter.

This is the time that is allotted to the Papall Empire to trample vpon the Church of God.
               As for the two witnesses, I take it that they signifie nothing else but a fewe witnesses, but yet sufficient enough to beare witnesse of the truth: whether it bee that the holy scripture doth vse these words of two or three, insteed of saying, very few; as when Christ doth promise, that where there shall be two or three gathered together in his name, he will be in the midst of them: and in the 32. of Deut. v. 30. two shall put ten thousand to flight, that is to say, a small number shall make a great multitude to turne their backs: and there is the like fashion of speech to bee found in the 17 of Esay, verse 6. Or whether it be that in the matter of witnesses, the number of two is put downe in Scripture, as sufficient, according as Christ saith that 
                     Deut. 17. v. 6. & 19. v. 15. Mat. 18. v. 16. 
                  by the mouth of two or three witnesses every word is confirmed. Or whether it be, that what number soeuer there bee of Pastours, yet all their testimonies being taken from the two testaments, which are the true witnesses of the will of God, it is not without good reason, that their testimonie

is reduced to the number of two, to the ende that they should not looke within the authoritie of men, nor seek after customes for a third testimonie. For it is not likely that God should haue but 2 faithfull pastours to oppose themselues against the Empire of the sonne of perdition, which shall be so powerfull, and last for so many ages. Now, as S. Iohn said, that the oppression of the Church must continue 42 moneths, which are three yeares & a halfe, so likewise doth hee say that the faithfull witnesses shal preach 1260 daies which make vp also three yeares & a halfe that is to say, that the dominion of the son of perdition shall neuer be without being contradicted by some fewe faithfull seruants of God, and that the gouernement of the one, and the reluctancy of the other, are of the same cōtinuance. We haue 
                     In the exposition of the 5. verse of the 13. Chap.
                   shewed how in this mysticall number a day is taken for a yeare, according to the stile of the Scripture, and that the Papall Monarchie must last 1260 yeares.
               These two witnesses are compared to two oliue trees, and to two Candlesticks: in imitation of the vision that appeared to Zachary chapt. 4. who saw a Candlesticke

of golde betweene two oliue trees, of which it is said at the end of the Chapter. These are the two oliue braunches that stande before the Lorde of the whole earth. Both because the oliue is a signe of peace, witnesse the doue, which carryed an oliue branch to Noah in his mouth in token of peace. As also, because the scripture doth attribute a property vnto oile of making glad. Psa. 104. Whence it is called the oile of gladnes, that is to say, that maketh glad, Psal. 45. ver. 8. Now the word is the gospell of peace; Ephes. 6.15. and maketh glad the heart, Psal. 19.9. that we may reioice in the light thereof, Iohn 5.35.
               But as this preaching is the sauour of life vnto such as beleeue, so is it the sauor of death vnto the rebellious, and doeth wound them mortally. Whence God also saith that this word kils, and that his prophets, and faithfull Ministers smite the earth with wounds by their preaching. It is said in 
                     •
                   
                  Hosea that hee did cut downe those of Ephraim by his prophets, & slaie them by the words of his mouth, and in Ieremie chapt. 5. v. 14. I will put my wordes into thy mouth like a fire, and this people shal be as wood, and it shall devour them. In this

sense it is, that these faithfull witnesses are said to shut heaven, and hinder the raine, and turne the water into bloud; For they are thought to do that, which God doeth do for their sakes. Notwithstanding there is a manifest allusion in this to the example of Elias, King. 1.17. which shut the floodgates of heauen, and made it not to raine for the space of 3▪ whole yeares, and to the example of Moyses, which turned the waters of Egypt into bloud. These two appeared to Iesus Christ in the moū
                  taine; and these also are they, that must returne into the world (as Hilarius thinks) to fight with Antichrist.
               After that the beast (which the Ancient, and our aduersaries themselues confesse to be Antichrist) shall haue slaine the two faithfull witnesses, S. Iohn saith that their bodies shal lie in the streetes of the great citty. He opposeth the great Cittie, to the holy Citty, which is the Church of God, of which he speakes in the seconde verse, to shew that the false church, which is at enmitie with God, shal be very great in respect of the church of God. For that by this word, city, we are not to vnderstād one only towne, it appeares by this, that

it is not only called Sodome, but Egypt also which is the name of a great Coūtry. For as in this chapt. by the holy citty wee doe not vnderstand one towne, but the whole Church, so neither by the city that is at enmity with the Church are wee to vnderstand one only town, but the whole body of the nations vnited against the Church of God.
               Now it is not without cause, that the Popish church is called Sodome, seeing that in the places where Papistrie is establisht without Contradiction, and especially at Rome, whence al this great body of the Romish church doth depend, this vice is familiar, and hath euer beene so even from the time of the 
                     Rom. 1.27. Apostle S. Paul. The Roman authors of this time, boast of it, and glory in it. Plutarch a Graecian borne, but one that liued at the court of Rome, a graue author and full of good instructions, in his booke of the education of children, saith that he dares not to condemne this kinde of loue, and thinks it to befit philosophy. And it is not without a mystery that this word Amor being written backward makes Roma, because that there is the seat, and place of residence, of

this vnnaturall and preposterous loue, or if it fell out so by chance, it hits so happily that it may seeme to haue beene intended purposely. Nor is it without example, that a towne or countrie should be called by the name of Sodome, because of their conformity in manners. Esay in his 
                     v. 10. first chapt. speaks thus to the princes and people of Ierusalem; Heare the word of the Lord O yee princes of Sodome, harkē vnto the law of God O people of Gomorah.
               In this Sodome and Egypt, the holie Ghost saith (in the 8. v.) that Iesus Christ was crucified, either because Iesus Christ was and is persecuted there in his mēbers; which is confirmed by the last verse of the 18. chap. where speaking of Rome (as our aduersaries confesse) it is said that in her was found the blouds of the Saints and of all that were slaine vpon the earth, not because all were slaine within the Citty, but by her perswasion, and counsell: or els because that Rome (as the King hath verie well noted to the purpose) did crucifie Iesus Christ in his owne person, for as much as it was done by the Romanes, that were sent out of Rome into Iudaea. For if anie one stand stifly to maintaine that this cittie

where Iesus Christ was crucified is Ierusalem, I doubt how he cā make it good, since that Christ was not crucified in Ier
                     ••
                  salem, but out of the cittie on mount Calvarie.
               In this great citty therefore, which is the false church, God saith by S. Iohn, that the faithfull witnesses shall be slaine, and their bodies cast out into the streets without buriall; which was done vnto vs in their last massacres, and persecutions, after which the tyrants did reioice, as who had got the victory, and eased themselues of a great burden. There were Bonfires made at Rome, in token of ioy for the death of Lewis of Burbon prince of Conde. In the Popes chāber of presence there is the massacre of Paris to be seene painted, as a victorie of the church, that the prophecie of Iesus Christ might be fulfilled; Verily, verily, I say vnto you that yee shall weepe and lament,
                  
                     Ioh. 26. v. 20 
                  but the worlde shall reioice.
               
               This being so, it appeares by this prophecie that the church of God must be opprest, and stifled as it were for a time, and that her enimies shall reioyce hereat, as if it were their doing. And this Ecclypse of

                  
                     •
                  he sun of the Gospell must last for three daies, & a halfe, which once expired, God shall raise vp other witnesses of his truth, so like those that went before in power & zeale, that one may say they are the same, according to the stile of holy Scripture, which cals S. Iohn Baptist Elias, because that hee was cloathed with the vertue and spirit of Elias. Matt. 11. v. 14. And Iesus Christ himselfe was called Iohn Baptist, & Elias, of those which did take him to bee nothing but a Prophet. After this manner of speech, Ezechiel calleth Iesus Christ David. chap, 34. v. 23.
               As for the time of three daies & a halfe, during which, the bodies of the faithfull witnesses shall be cast out through all the quarters of the Romish Church, it is manifest that S. Ioh. doth hereby shew vs how long the persecution of the Church vnder the Roman Hierarchie must continue. For to know how long this time shall endure, and to how much the three daies and an halfe come, wee are to note that 3 daies and an halfe make halfe a weeke, which giues vs to vnderstād that the holy Ghost here vnder the name of a weeke doth cō
                  prehend the whole time of the beastes

raigne, and that he doth advertise vs that the persecution shall last halfe the time of this raigne. Since therefore he shal raigne 1260 yeares, as we haue shewed in the exposition of the 5. verse of the 13 Chapter, and this 11 chap. doth confirme it, it followes that the Roman Hierarchie shall persecute the faithfull 630 yeares. Now I doe not find that the Church of Rome did begin to persecute, and to vse crueltie in generall against all that did withstand her doctrine, till Berengers time, whom Pope Nicolas the 2. compelled to recant by force, in the yeare 1059. And euer since the Popes haue persecuted such as haue maintained the same doctrine. If then you adde the 630 yeares to 1059 yeares, you shall finde that the persecution of the Church vnder the Pope, shall haue an end in the yeare 1689. This tearme once expired, the truth that was opprest shall lift vp her head afresh, and the faithfull witnesses shall be seene to stand vp againe, who shall astonish the Church of Rome for a short time. For the holy Ghost telleth vs vers. 12. that God shall take them vp into heauen with evident signes that hee hath gathered them vnto himselfe, and these
                     •
                  
                  
signes shal be made manifest euen to their very enimies.
               At this time the people shall be much moued, for this is signified by the earthquake. In this commotion, affrightment, & dissention of the people, the tenth part of the men of the Church of Rome shall be slaine, which number is exprest by the number of 7000, according to a fashion of speech vsuall in Scripture, which by 7000 men vnderstands a greater number then can be conceaued, as when Elias thought that he had beene the only faithfull man that was left in Israel, God told him that he had 7000 left yet, which never bowed the knee to Baal, that is to say, a greater number then he could imagin. At the sight of which plagues many being stricken with amazement, shall turne vnto God and giue him the glory.
               By all that which hath beene formerly said, it appeares that we at this time liue in the last half day of these three last daies and a halfe of persecution, which is the time also that goes next to the sound of the last trumpet, that is spoken of in the 15 verse, that is to say, the seaventh & last execution of Gods iudgementes, which

shall goe before the day of iudgement. 
                     Note that the 33 years in which Christ was in the world are to be taken away, and doe not fall vpon the trumpets.
                   But if you divide the time from the death of Christ vntil the yeare 1689, into six equall parts (for every trumpet hath a certaine space of time) you shall knowe how many yeares the seaventh trumpet must take vp. And if you compare the whole summe with that which wee haue said in the exposition of the 13 Chapt. vpon the 5 verse, you shal find great agreement betweene them, and in probabilitie gather the time well▪ neere of the comming of our Saviour, the sonne of God, blessed for ever.
               There remaines one difficultie to cleer concerning these two witnesses, which our adversaries say are Enoch and Elias, whome they would haue to returne into the world againe to withstand Antichrist, and to preach, one to the Gentiles, the other to the Iewes, for this is the taske that they haue laid vpon them by their magistral authoritie without the word of God, and would pul them from the place of rest where they abide in happynesse, to thrust them into frayes, and of glorious and immortall persons, make them weake and mortall. It would haue beene hard for me

to haue added any thing to that which his Maiestie of England hath learnedly and diligently noted vpon this question, were it not that Bellarmine and Coeffeteau go to snap at his discourse, and being not able to say any thing of themselues, take delight only in contradicting. This therfore deserues to be examined.
            
            
               Of the Translation of Enoch and Elias. Of the place where they are. Who these two witnesses be. The booke of the King defended against false calumnies.
               
                  Moyses in the 5. chapt. of Genesis saith, that Enoch having lived 365 years (which is a yeare of yeares) was seene no more, for God tooke him away. This translation of Enoch being done in the body, did exempt him from death, as the Apostle saith in the epistle to the Hebrewes, chap. 11. v. 5. Enoch was translated that hee should not see death, neither was he found, for God had translated him.
               
               The like befell Elias in the 2. chapt. of the 2. booke of Kings, where he is rapt vp

to heauen in a whirlewinde.
               This seemes to me to haue fallen out, by the secret counsell of the wisdome of God. For as the world is diuided into 3. ages, to wit, into the time before the law, into the time vnder the law, and into the time vnder the gospell, so it pleased God that in every one of these ages there should one man be taken vp to heauen in his body, Enoch before the law, Elias vnder the law, Iesus Christ vnder the Gospel; to the end that the souls of the Saints that liued either before the law, or vnder the law, or vnder the gospell, and are now in heauen, should haue a man in that age of theirs that should be an image of the future estate after the day of iudgement, and a pledge of the resurrection of the bodie. For euen as Moyses and Elias did appeare vnto Iesus Christ on the mountaine, for to signifie that the law and the gospell gaue testimony vnto him (as the King hath excellent well noted in his booke) so I am perswaded that these 3 were as so manie witnesses of the resurrection vnto the Saints that liued before the law, vnder the law, and vnder the gospell.
               To these two seruants of God, Enoch
                  
and Elias, the curious spirits of men haue assigned diuers habitations. There bee some that lodge them in the aire, which is a place that the holy Scripture hath appointed for the diuels, Eph. 2. v. 2. Others thinke to pleasure them more by making them to be in an earthly paradise, which (as they say) is sixteene cubits higher thē the highest hils, that so it may be one cubit 
                     Gen 7.20. Fifteene cubits vpward did the waters prevaile when the mountaines were covered.
                   higher then the flowd. And it is credible that Enoch (which as then was there all alone) seeing the waters to come with in a cubit of his feet, thought himselfe not sufficiently secured. All these are fables that smell of the Iewish Cabalisticall traditions, which it hath pleased our aduersaries to follow in this point, and which Moyses hath cleerely confuted. For he describes the garden of Eden to be in Mesopotamia, and makes the riuer Euphrates to passe thorough it, painting out the course that it runs, and naming the coūtries that it scoures, and the nature of the land is set downe by him, in that hee saith that it yeelds Gold and Bdeliū, and Onyx stone: which are most certaine proofes that hee speaks not of any fantasticall regiō. Now there are none but know that Mesopotamia
                  
is a plaine even country and that the riuers do alwaies overflow the vallies and lowest places. Whence it followes that if the deluge did couer the highest hils, by a farre greater reason must it couer, and wast the champion of Mesopotamia.
               
               All this overbusie curiosity of this people, proceeds from their neglecting to read the word of God, which decides this question saying in expresse tearmes, that, Elias went vp by a whirlewind into heaven. He was therefore taken vp▪ into heaven, and there is no reason to place Enoch any where else, since that he was equally translated in body. But if the faithfull that are in heaven be with Iesus Christ, Iohn 17. v. 24. Philip. 1. v. 23. Why should these so excellent servants of God, haue an inferiour blessednesse allotted vnto them? this translation had beene no favour done vnto them, but a punnishment. But if the thiefe crucified with Iesus Christ entred into Paradise 40 daies before the ascension of our Lord, what should hinder but that Enoch and Elias might haue free accesse into the same place before his ascension? Iesus Christ I confesse saith in the 3 of S. Iohn, v. 13. No man ascendeth vp to heauen,

but he that hath descended from heaven, the sonne of man that is in heavē. But he speaks according to the Hebrew fashion, which by going vp into heauen, and descending downe thence, vnderstand, the bringing of the knowledge of heavenly thinges to men from on high: and so doth the Apostle take it in the 10 to the Romans. ver. 6. as it appeares by the drift of the discourse. Iesus Christ therefore in this place meanes to tell Nicodemus only thus much, that none can bring vs the knowledge of heavenly things, but only the sonne of man that came downe from heauen. Nor may we thinke it strange that God gaue them a speciall priuiledge to be exempted from death, since that the scripture pronounceth as much not only of Enoch, but also of all those that shall liue vpon the earth at the comming of our Lord. For seeing that all the Saints doe already stand possest of heavenly glory, what haue these two committed, that they only should be shut out thence, and kept in a place of expectation apart, to be subiect to death stil? And besides I would knowe of M. Co
                        •
                     ffetau
                  ▪ if hee would make a conscienee to invoke Enoch and Elias; if he do invoke thē,

he presupposeth that they doe already enioy the presence of God, if he doe not, hee sinneth against the Church of Rome, which in their Letanies call vpon all the Prophets and Patriarchs in generall.
               Since then that their abode is in heauē with Iesus Christ, let vs see what reason these men haue to pull them out thence, for to make them come downe vpon the earth againe, and condemne them to die.
               As concerning Enoch our adversaries produce no place out of the Canonicall Scriptures, only they allege Ecclesiasticus in the 44 chapt. v. 16. a passage that runs thus according to the Greek which is the Originall.
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . 
                  Enoch pleased the Lord God, therefore was hee translated for an example of repentance to the generations. Is there ever a word in all this either of the translation of Enoch into an earthly paradise, or of his returning hither to fight with Antichrist? Therefore Bellarmine thought it better to alleage the common translation cleane contrary to the Text, which hath translated it falsly, after this manner. 
                     Enoch placuit deo & translatus est in paradisum vt det gentibus poetitentiam.
                   
                  Enoch pleased God, and was translated into Paradice to giue repentance to the Gentiles. The word Paradice, and the word Gentils
                  
are falsly thrust in; & yet when all is done we must bee faine to suppose that this Paradise is earthly. Let the reader iudge whether this opinion be not built vpon good grounds, which hath nothing brought to maintaine it, but only a false passage, and that out of an Apocryphall booke too. These people therefore doe much wrong to Enoch in keeping him 5000 yeares frō the presence of God, and stripping him of his immortalitie, to send him downe hither for to be slaine by Antichrist, as if God had not other men enough in that age to employ. Nor may we omit, that the men which liued before the floud, were giants, and that our stature is dwarfish in respect of theirs: if Enoch therefore should come into the world in his old stature, he would be thought a kind of monster, and men would bee frighted with the bignesse of his personage.
               The fable of Enoch being once confuted, that of Elias vanisheth with the same breath; for these squires must of necessitie seeke elsewhere for their two witnesses if one of them faile: neuerthelesse let vs see that which they produce for Elias.
               
               They finde these wordes at the end of

                  
                     Malach. 4. v. 5.6. 
                  Malachie. Behold I go hence to send Eliah the prophet before the comming of the great and fearefull day of the Lord. And hee shall turne the harts of the fathers to the childrē, & the harts of the children to their fathers, least I come & smite the earth with cursing. To this the King answeres that there is no better interpreter of Malachies wordes then Iesus Christ himselfe, who doth assure vs that this Elias promised by Malachie is Iohn Baptist. If (saith he) yee will receiue my saying, this is that Elias which was to come, Mat. 11.14. And yet more plainly in the 17. chapt. he hauing said that Elias was already come, and that they did not know him; S. Matthew addes that his disciples vnderstood him to speak of Iohn Baptist. Iesus Christ indeed had saide before that Elias must come, speaking in this (as the King hath well noted) according to the common opinion, but to the ende that this might not be vnderstood of any other but Iohn Baptist, he annexeth immediatly, But I say vnto you that Elias is already come, & they haue not knowne him. Good cause therefore had his Maiestie to accuse Bellarmine of falshood, for alleaging these words of Christ, Elias shal come
                  
without alleaging the words that follow, But I say vnto you that Elias is already come.
               
               Now here the point of the question is, whether Malachie and the Apostles obiecting to Christ that Elias must come, do speake of an Elias that must goe before the first, or second comming of our Saviour. As for Malachie hee begins this discourse from the beginning of the 3 chapt. in these words. Behold I goe hence to send my messenger, and hee shall prepare the way before me, and the Lord whom yee seeke shall speedily come to his Temple. Wordes that cannot agree to the second comming of Christ, when hee shall neede no preparing of his way, & the earth shall thē be his temple no more. This appeares also out of the 7. chapt. where Malachie saith that this Elias shal turne the hearts of the fathers vnto the childrē, which are the very words of the 
                     Luk. 1.17. Angell vnto Zachary declaring the office of his sonne. To the same purpose also serue these words, For feare least I come and smite the earth. For how can it be said that these two witnesses shall come for to hinder the comming of Christ to iudgement, and to keepe him

from smiting the earth? Seeing that his comming is inevitable, and that the faithfull shall long for it? & pray that the kingdome of God may come, saying with S. Iohn Apoc. 22.20. Even so, come Lorde Iesus.
               
               As for the 17. chapt. of S. Matthew, it is manifest that the second cōming of Christ is not meant in that place, but onlie the first. For the Apostles either ravisht with the glory of his transfiguration, or rather perswaded by the many powerfull miracles of Iesus Christ, to beleeue that hee was the Messias, neverthelesse found thē
                  selues vnable to solue the obiectiō of the Scribes, which did proue that Christ was not the Messias by this argument, because that Elias was not yet come. Doubtlesse these Scribes did not contest about the day of iudgement, but about the manifestation of the promised Messias, which (as they thought) was not yet come.
               To this they oppose the words of Malachie, which calleth this day a great and fearefull day
                  ▪ which seemes ill befitting the gentlenesse, and humilitie of Christs first comming. His Maiesties answer is that the day of the Lords passion was full of horror

and astonishment. The sun was darkned, the vaile of the Temple was rent, the earth trembled, the stones were cloven, the monuments were opened, the dead were raised. Or wee may say that the first comming of the Messias although it were in humilitie, was yet for all that very fearfull. For hee was sent to bee a stumbling blocke vnto many, and drew a totall destruction vpon the Iewes. God a little after (according to the prediction of Malachie) hauing smitten their land as accursed. Besides we find that 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . iom hunnora in Hebrew may signifie an wonderfull and honourable day as well as a terrible day. Aretas in the 30. chap. of his cō
                  mentarie vpon the Apocalyps, turnes it, dies Domini magnus & manifestus, and the translation of the Septuagint renders it, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , diem Domini magnam & illustrem.
               
               The passage that is alleaged out of the 48 of Ecclesiasticus. vers. 10. is of no force, for the booke is Apocryphall, & the translator thereof craues pardon in the Prologue if hee hath chanced in some places not to expresse his Authors meaning so significantly. And yet the place is falsly alleaged

too. Behold the true here; Elias was appointed to reproue in due season,
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . 
                  & to pacifie the wrath of the Lords iudgement before it kindled, and to turne the hearts of the fathers vnto the children, and to set vp the tribes of Iacob. Where is there in al this the least word of comming backe into the world, of being slaine, or of fighting with Antichrist? To be short, although all that they faine of the returning of Elias were true, yet this makes nothing for the two witnesses, till they haue proued as much of Enoch, of whome they haue nothing at all to say.
               In one thing they cannot choose but be much cumbred, to wit, in this, when they say that these two witnesses shall bee sent to fight with Antichrist for the space of three yeares and an halfe, at the ende of which, Antichrist shall slay them. By this reckoning Antichrist must be in the world before them, and stay in the world after them, yea & be in the heigth of his strēgth after he hath slaine them, seeing that there by he shall become victorious. And by a consequent he must be in the world aboue three yeares and a halfe; what becomes then of their assertion, wherein they affirme

that Antichrist shall continue but 3 yeares and a halfe? Surely it must needes be that these two witnesses and Antichrist must come into the world in the same day and die in the same day.
               The fathers are of divers opinions concerning this, and resolue vpon nothing certainely.
                     Tom. 9. Dabo duobus testibus meis, 1. testamentis. Duo candelabra ecclesia est, sed pro numero testamentorum.
                   
                  S. Austin in his 8. homily vpon the Apocalyps, I will giue vnto my two witnesses, that is, vnto the two Testaments: and a little after. The two Candlesticks are the Church, but according to the number of the testaments. Primasius saith the same in his 3. book, & Beda vpon the Apocalyps. Lactantius in the 17. chap. of his 7. booke (after many fancies with which that book is stuft) saith, that towards the last times there shall come a great Prophet, which must be slain by a king that came out of Syria, & was begotten by the Divell. For 
                     Bellarmine in the thirde booke of his Apologie against the King chap. 1. where he names many fathers without alleaging their words.
                   
                  Bellarmine belyes Lactantius when hee maketh him to say that Elias shall come againe. Hilarie in the 20 Canon of his cō
                  mentarie vpon S. Matthew, recites divers opinions of his time, in these words. 
                     Apparui
                           •
                         cum gloriae suae habitu, Moyse & Elia in mont
                           •
                         comitantibus & h
                           •
                        s quid
                           •
                         eosdem prophetas duos praevenientes adventum eius intelligimus, quos Apocal. Iohannis ab Antichristo perimend
                           •
                        s esse dicit, licet variae vel de Enoch vel d
                           •
                         Eliâ plurimorum extiterint opiniones.
                   
                  Iesus

appeared in the forme of his glory vpon the mount, Moyses and Elias accompanying him. And these are the two prophets (as wee conceaue) which must come before his comming, and which the Apocalyps of S. Iohn telleth vs, must be slaine by Antichrist, albeit there haue beene divers opinions of many, touching Enoch, or Ieremie, one of which must die as Elias. Irenie in his 5 booke saith that Elias and Enoch were translated into Paradise, & ibi manere vs
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ad consummationem conspicantes incorruptionem: and that they remaine there till the ende of the world, beholding incorruption. If they remaine in Paradise still vntill the ende or consummation of the world,
                     Enoch iustiss
                           •
                        mum, non circumcisum 
                           〈◊〉
                         sabbatizantem de hoc mund
                           •
                         transtulit, qui nedum mortem 
                           〈◊〉
                         vt aeternitatis cā
                        didatus iam 
                           〈◊〉
                         ostenderes nos quo
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         sine legis onere Moys
                           •
                        s, Deo placereposse.
                   they shall not come down hither vpon earth to fight with Antichrist before the consummation thereof. This is his Maiesties observation of England, and is most fit to the purpose. Tertullian in the 1. Chap. of his booke against the Iewes, saith that, Enoch an vpright man, was translated by God, although he were not circumcised, neither yet did obserue the sabbaoth, who hath not to this day tasted of death, to the end that hee which did aspire to eternitie, might shew vnto vs that we might please God without the burden of

Moyses law. A passage which Bellarmine clips in the 6. chap. of his 3 booke de Pontifice, where hee seemes not to vnderstand the place well: for Tertullian calls Enoch aeternitatis candidatum, that is to say, one that did aspire to eternitie, not because he aspires vnto it now, but because hee aspired vnto it, whilst hee lived here vpon the earth. For the intent of Tertullian is to make it appeare vnto the Iewes, that a mā may attaine vnto eternall life without the Ceremonies of the law, by the example of Enoch which without ever keeping of these, did not desist to aspire to immortality; And wheras he saith that he is not as yet dead, this doth not enforce that hee must die, no more then if I should say that the divel hath not as yet destroied the church or that there could no lie as yet bee found in the Gospell, doth inferre that either of these two things must come to passe. 
                     Enoch 
                           〈◊〉
                        . status est in car
                           ••
                         Et Elias Carneus raptus est in coelū, necdū mortui, & Paradistiam coloni, habēt membracum quibus rapti sunt at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         trā
                        slati Quod nos imitamur i
                           •
                        iuni
                           •
                        , illi posside
                           ••
                         consortio.
                   
                  S. Hierome to Pammachius against the errors of Iohn of Ierusalem, Enoch was translated in the flesh, Elias was rapt vp to heaven in the flesh: being not as yet dead, they are already made inhabitants of Paradise. They haue the same members with which they were taken vp and translated. That

which we imitate by fasting, they enioy by their coniunction with God. Note that they are in heaven, and ioyned with God, contrary to our adversaries tenent. As also that they are already in Paradise, that is to say, that the condition of others is such that they cannot be there in body till after the day of iudgement, to the end that none might imagine that hee speaks of an earthly Paradise. Aretas in the 29. chapt. of his commentarie vpon the Apocalyps, vpon these words of the Angel to S. Iohn, 
                  
                     Apoc. 10. v. 11. 
                  Thou must prophecie againe, 
                  
                     Opinantur multi beatū hunc. virum vs
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         ad seculi consummationē vivere, ae venturū esse circa tē
                        p
                           •
                        ra Antichristi, cum Enoch & Eliâ.
                   saith, that many were of opinion that S. Iohn liveth vntil the end of the world, and that he shal come in the time of Antichrist with Enoch and Elias. Hippolytus Martyr saith the same in his book de consummatione seculi; To be briefe, there is nothing more divers, then they are in their opinions.
               Our aduersaries themselues disagree about this. Arias Montanus speakes after this manner vpon the 4 of Malachie:
                  
                     Ac diem hunc magnū & terribilē non iudicii extre
                           •
                        i sed Messiae advenientis tē
                        pusantiqui Scribae sopiē tèr interpretabantur, id
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         a Christ
                           •
                         probatum & confirmatum est. Mat. 17▪
                   
                  The ancient Scribes by this great and fearefull day did wisely vnderstand, not the day of the last iudgement, but the time of the comming of the Messias: which interpretatiō of theirs was approved off, and confirmed by Christ in

the 17. of Matthew. Bellarmin in the 6. chapt. of his 3. book de Pontifice, wonders what Iansenius bishop of Gaunt dreamt off, when he said that the comming of Elias againe into the worlde could not bee gathered out of the 48. chapt. and 10. ver. of Ecclesiasticus. The Iesuit 
                     Tam apertam rem esse Moysen & Eliam veturos esse, vt nemo id non solùm sine temeritate, sed nec sine impudentia negare possit.
                   
                  Maldonate in his commentarie vpon the 17. of Saint Matthew saith, that it is so cleere a case that Moyses and Elias must come, that no man can deny it not only without being rash, but also without being impudent. In the iudgement of this Iesuit, Bellarmin is impudent, seeing that he denies that Moyses shall come, & would haue it to be Enoch. The Iesuit Pererius in the 7. booke of his commentarie vpon Genesis, in the disputation 
                     Qu. 1. num 137. touching Enoch doth refute their proofe of this taken out of the 16 verse of the 44 of Ecclesiasticus, and expounds the place as we do.
               The cause of this error (which the King with good reason calleth an idle dreame, and an old wiues tale) came from the corrupt Greeke translatiō of the Septuagint, which puts a word into that place of Malachie, which is not in the Hebrew, for whereas in the Hebrew it is only, Beholde

I go hence to send you Elias, the Greek trā
                  slation turnes it, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . A translation which Chrysostome followed in his 58 Homilie vpon S. Matthew, and which made him to be of the opinion that Elias should come back againe into the world.
               This matter might haue beene ended, were it not that hereby his Maiestie takes an occasion to complaine of the wrongs that the Church of Rome hath done vnto the old and new Testament, which may probably be thought to be meant by these two witnesses, seeing that these are they which beare witnesse of Iesus Christ. The Kings complaints are. 1. That the Church of Rome doth revile the holy Scripture. 2. That she doth prefer her corrupted translation before the Originals of the Greeke, and Hebrew. 3. That she doth make Apocryphall books to bee of equall authoritie with the Cononical. 4. That she doth apply the psalter of David to the virgin Mary, by putting out Gods name, & placing hers insteed thereof. 5. That shee doth deny the people to read the Bible, and will not suffer it to be translated into their vulgar tongue, and yet for all that,

will suffer them to haue fabulous, and ridiculous legends.1 Point, that the church doth revile the scripture
                  
               
               1 In the first place the King doth challenge them for calling the Scripture a nose of wax, a dead letter, a leaden, or Lesbian rule. Coeffeteau aunsweres, that such blasphemies are not found in the writings of the Doctours that they approue off; Bellarmine on the contrary doth confesse it, but saith that nothing else is meant by this, but only that Hereticks do make the scripture a nose of wax, a Lesbian rule, &c which is refuted by the learned Bishop of Elie, in his answer to the Cardinals Apologie, where he cites Eckius, Luthers Antagonist, in his booke de fide & iustificatione, cap. 73. 
                     Eckius, efficacior quā scriptura est traditio.
                   
                  Tradition is more powerfull thē the Scripture, and in the same book.
                     Traditio certissima est veritatis regula ad quā Scripturam expendere oporteat, Evangelistarū non f uit hoc in scribendo consitium, vt sua illa scripta praeessent nost
                           •
                        ae religioni & fidei sed subssent potius
                   
                  Tradition is a most certaine rule of the truth, by which wee ought to examine the Scriptures. The ende that moued the Evangelists to write, was not because they would haue their writings to rule over religion and faith, but rather that they should bee subiect vnto it. Coster saith the same in his Enchiridion of Controuersies. And in the 71. chap. 
                     Sunt enim scripturae velut cereus quidā nosus qui sicut horsum illorsū
                        
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         trahise permittit &c.
                   
                  The Scriptures are as a nose of wax, that suffers it selfe to be turned this way, and that way,
                  
he saith that they are; and not that they are made to be. He alleageth Hosius also, which maintaines against Brentius, that his words which said that the Scriptures without the authoritie of the Church are no more to be esteemed then Esops Fables (p
                        •
                     tuisse pio sensu
                        •
                     ici) might bee spoken in a godly sense. And 
                     Turrianus Si Scripturā s
                           •
                        lam fidei regulā Christus reliquisset in Eccles
                           •
                        a quid aliud quàm gladium Delphi cum haberemus?
                   
                  Turrianus who in the p. 250. saith, that if Christ had left no other rule of our faith then the Scripture, we should haue had nothing else but a Delphian sword, that is to say, a two edged sword that cuts vpon both sides. And behold here some of Bellarmines owne words (which are little better) in his 4. chap. and § Quarto 
                           •
                        ecesse. Etsi Scriptura di cat libros Prophetarū & Apostolorum esse divinos, tamen non ce
                           •
                        tò id 
                           •
                        redam, nisi prius credider
                           •
                         Scripturam quae hoc dicit esse diuinam. Nā in Alcorano Mahumetis passim legim ipsum Alcoranum de coelo à Deo dimissum.
                   4. booke, Of the word not written; Although the Scripture say that the bookes of the Apostles, and Prophets are divine, yet I shall never beleeue it assuredly, if I doe not first beleeue that the Scripture which saith this, is divine. For we read as well in the Alcoran that the Alcorā was sent from heaven. This Cardinal would haue the testimony that the Scripture giues of it selfe to bee no more credited then that which the Alcoran giues of it selfe, and in the 10. chap. he saith § Ad
                           •
                        lla. Supra diximus Scripturas non fuisse absolutè necessarias.
                   that the

Scriptures are not absolutly necessary, and in the seauenth chapt. he is bold to affirm, § Sed omissi
                           •
                         Quaedā sunt traditiones maiores quoad obligationem quàm quaedā Scripturae.
                   
                  that there be some trad
                        •
                     tions which are greater then some of the Scriptures, as concerning the obligation, that is to say, that a man is bound more to beleeue them then the Scripture. In the 12. Chapt. § Respondeo Scripturae finem propriū & praecipuū non fuisse vt esset regula fidei, sed vt esset commonitorium quoddam vtile.
                   
                  The proper and principall end of the Scripture, was not that it should be a rule of faith, but that it should be a profitable admonition to make men entertaine the doctrine of preaching, And a little after.
                     Dico secundo Scripturā etsi non est sact
                           •
                         praecipuè vt sit regula fidei▪ esse tamen regulam fidei non totalem sed partialem
                   
                  I say that although the scripture were not made properly to be a rule of faith, yet it is a rule of faith, though not a totall rule, but a partiall.
               
               The famous Doctor Charron surpasseth them all. Behold how hee doth extoll the Scripture in his 3 Truth, a booke which France hath receaued with wonderful applause. In the second chapter, hauing said that the Church and the Scripture are iudges together, he addeth, But the church is primarily and principally, and with great preheminence. And a little after, The Scripture is not, nor cannot be the last rule, & soveraigne iudge of doctrine. In the 2. page of the 3. chap. Faith that is necessary to salvation comes from the Church speaking, & not

from the reading of the Scripture, without knowing of which after a sort, yea and without beleeuing or obaying it expresly, a thousand millions are saved—To be short, a man may be a Christian, and a good Christian, & bee saved, without the Scripture, but not without the Church. And a little after, How can one get out of contention by the scripture seeing that wee come into it by the Scripture? This is an open field for all quarrels; & as we vse to say, a sword for all hands; yea by this many come to be Atheists—it is like a forrest where all claime right to graze, yea even Atheists themselues. And in the same chapter, The scripture hath no auctoritie, waight, power over vs, but only as much as the church doth appoint, and assigne vnto it. Now every one knowes that by the scripture wee doe not vnderstand the paper or inke, but the worde of God contained therein, and none can deny but that the church is subiect to the word of God. But by these Doctours reckoning the word of God should be subiect to the church, and men should giue waight and authority to the word of God. In the 4. chapt. he saith vnto such as exact proofes out of Scripture for every point of faith, that this is a

wrongfull and vniust demand: for it is to require an impossible thing; because the Scripture doth not speake of all things: & in the same place, It is most false that Gods intent was to informe the world of his will, to plant the faith, and make Christians by the Scripture. What was therefore the end of those holy Scribes? It was (saith he in the same place) to write certaine particulars according as they saw occasion (de re natâ) A little after he saith, that to aske for scripture is to play the ill debtor, & the part of an vnhonest man, which will not pay his mony except he may first see his bond. Thou dost beleeue because thou dost read, thou art therefore no Christian, for a Christian beleeues before he read, & without reading.—A Christian beleeues at first without expecting a reason, with his eies close shut, & afterward hee seeth reason.—He that beleeveth because he hath read the bible▪ 
                     
                        •
                     his faith & beliefe is in a manner not Christian like: wee must call it by some other name, a humane, purchased, studyed faith, but not a Christian faith, neither is hee that shall professe it a Christiā. In briefe, vnder the shew of a respect towards the church (by which wee must alwaies vnderstande the Romane

church) these people doe persecute these two faithfull witnesses, and doe plant Atheisme vnder hand, whereof this Doctor Charron in particular is not a little conscious: as it appeares by many places in his booke of Wisdome. The Kings complaint therefore is iust, and had hee but held his peace, the matter would haue proclaimed it selfe.
               But aboue all the Cardinall of Perons booke seemes intolerable to his Maiesty, concerning the Insufficiencie of the Scripture; Coeffeteau answeres that this is an Imposture of the Minister Tilenus, which caused it to be printed at Rochel with this title. In all this Coeffeteau is ill informed. For Monsieur Titenus is not Minister to this day. Secondly although he did put this title before the booke, yet can he not in this respect be accused of imposture, because the booke being without a title, & being that there must one of necessity be put before it, he could not haue chosen any more fit to the purpose then out of the first line of the booke, which is this, The scripture is not sufficient without traditions. And that his Maiestie might know in what this insufficiency consisteth, the first

point is that there is no mention made of the immortality of the soule in the books of Moyses. Which yet is mentioned there very 
                     Gen. 5.2
                        •
                      
                     Gen. 49.18. Exod. 3.15 Num. 23.10 often. And although there were nothing said of it, yet these holy bookes being the religion of Gods people, they doe necessarily carry the immortality of the soule imprinted on their foreheads, & presuppose it by the title, because that without this, religion is nothing but folly, and an vnwieldy yoke.
               The seconde thing that his Maiestie findes faulte with,
                     II. Point. Of their preferring the corrupt translation before the original.
                   is that the Church of Rome doth preferre the vulgar Latin trā
                  slation (which is corrupted in a thousand and a thousand places) before the Originall text of the Greeke and Hebrew. And he saith this because the Coūcell of Trent in the 4 Session hath decreed 
                     Vt vetus & vulgata editio pr
                           •
                         authentica habeatur, & quòd 
                           •
                        am ne m
                           •
                         reiicere quovis pr
                           •
                        
                        textu audeat vel presumat
                   
                  that the old and vulgar edition be held for authenticall, & that none presume to reiect it vnder what pretext soever. Whence it followes that in all places where it is contrary to the Originall Greek and Hebrew, a man must beware how he reiect it, and that he must rather thinke that the Originall is false then the Copie. And indeed Bellarmin in the 7. chapt. of his 2. booke de verbo Dei speaks

thus of the Hebrew Bible, and of the New Testament in Greeke, In this, my opinion is that we are to hold that of the Greeke which I haue said already of the Hebrew bibles, to wit, that the Greeke Copies are not generally corrupted, and yet that their fountaines are not altogither pure. But if the Originals of the word of God be marr'd, what suretie then is there in religion? and if the springs bee troubled how can the streames runne cleere? Now amongst other corruptions of the Romish translatiō his Maiestie doth produce two. The first is in the 15 of S. Luke verse 8. where in steede of to sweepe the house, the vulgar translatiō hath turnd it, to overturn the house. The other is in the 21. chapt. of S. Iohn, ver. 22.23. where in steed of, If I will that he stay, the vulgar translation turnes it, I will that he stay so, vpon which corruption some haue groū
                  ded that idle conceipt of theirs, that Saint Iohn is not dead to this day. Coeffeteau saith these places haue beene corrected in the last bibles, meaning the Bibles newly printed by the authority of Clemēt the 8. But Bellarmin 
                  
                     Locus posterior non est mutatu
                           •
                        , quo
                           •
                        i
                           •
                        m hab
                           •
                        tur in omnibus Latinis codici
                           •
                        us.
                   contradicts him, and saith that the first place only is corrected & not the second. But the Bibles of Sixtus V.

printed but a little before haue nothing corrected in them: and before Sixtus, the Councell of Trent did approue of the vulgar translation in all things; seeing that it hath pronounced it to bee authenticall cleane through out, and hath forbidden any part thereof to bee refused: But the Pope doth correct the Councels, and the Popes his predecessours, and after this Pope Clement, there will some Boniface come, which shall vndoe that which Clement did.
               As for the impurity of the vulgar translation, it would be easier for a man to alter it cleane, and make a new one of it, thē to purge it. In the greatest part of the Psalmes and of the prophets, there is no more reason then there is rime: To bee short, it is cleane a diuers thing from the Original. The 13. Psalme which is the 14. in the Hebrew, at the 9. verse, where there are 10. lines added, which are not in the Hebrew. In the second psalme insteed of kisse the sonne, the Latin translation hath it, Apprehend discipline. In the 132. psal. v. 5. in steed of I will blesse her vitailes, this translation renders it, I will blesse her widdowes. In the 9. chap. of Esdras, v. 8. insteed

of paxillus, this translation hath pax illius, that is to say, his peace, for a naile. And in the verse following, where it is in the Hebrew for to giue vs a hedge in Iuda, this trā
                  slatiō hath it,
                     Spe
                           •
                         for sepem, cecinit 
                           •
                        udus for cecidit, lapides saeculi, for sacculi, ipsa mulier, for ipsum semen
                   
                  to giue vs hope in Iuda. In the 19. chapt. of the 1. of Samuel, verse 24. insteed of He fell downe naked, this translation turnes it, He sung all naked; In the 16. of the Prov. ver. 11. the Hebrew saith, the waights of the bagge, the translation, the waights of the time. These are ridiculous faultes, but they which follow are malicious. As the translating it in the 3. of Genesis, and 15. verse, shee (to wit the woman) shall bruise the serpents head; whereas it is, The seed of the woman shall bruise the heade of the serpent. Whence in the Virgins psalter this commendation, of having bruised the head of the Serpent is attributed vnto her. As also the translating it in the 99. psalm. Fall downe to his footstoole, whereas it is in the Hebrew, Fall downe towardes, or before his footstoole. A corruption that was in the time of S. Augustine, who did not know that they would in ages following ground the worship of creatures vpō this place. As also for omitting these wordes in the 11. chapt. and 6. verse of the Epistle

to the Romans, If it bee of workes it is no more grace, or else were worke no worke. I wonder much also howe it comes to passe that in the 11 of S. Luke the vulgar translatiō cuts off the fourth part of the Lords praier, omitting these words, which art in heaven, as also, Thy will bee done in earth as it is in heaven, as also these words, But deliver vs from evill. The vulgar translation (that it might bring in a diffidence & vncertainety of saluation) renders the first verse of the 9. of Ecclesiasticus after this manner. A man knows not whether he haue deserved loue or hatred, but all things are kept in vncertainety, for the time to come. Whereas the Hebrew hath only, No man knoweth either loue or hatred of all that is before them. We might note many more such like places, whence it appeares that his Maiesties complaint is most iust.
               The King complaines also that these two witnesses are wrong'd in this,
                     III. Point. Of their equalling the Apocryphall books with the Canonicall.
                   that mens writings called Apocryphall, are made of equal worth with thē. Which we haue proued to be against the authoritie of Iesus Christ, and the Apostles, and all the ancient church, and haue shewed that Coeffeteau doth alleadge a falsified Councell

of Nice, & abuse a place of S. Austin. See the 5. Article of my 2. book vpon this. And note besides that not only the Apocryphall bookes are set in the same ranck with the Canonical, but also that the Roman Decree in the 19. Distinction in the Canon In Canonicis, saith that the Popes Decretal Epistles are to be reckoned amōgst the Canonicall Scriptures. So behold with what good companiōs these two witnesses are matcht.
               The fourth Cōplaint that his Maiestie makes,
                     IV Point, Davids Psalter corrupted.
                   is of the horrible corruption, allowed off, and published in the church of Rome, in that they suffer a psalter, commonly called the psalter of S. Bonavēture made in honor of the Virgin Mary, where the psalmes of David are applyed to the Virgin, and her name put in the place of Gods name. And this worthy psalter hath beene translated into French, and printed at Paris in the year 1601. with the approbation of the faculty of the Diuines of Paris. In reading thereof you would say, See here the Psalmes of David, but only that the name of God is not called vpon in them. And it seemes that David doth invoke the Virgin Marie. The 131. psalme

begins thus. Memento Domina David, & omnium invocantium nomen tuum. Remember David, ô Lady, and all those which call vpon thy name. With the like grace, the Reuerende father Solier a Iesuite of Sainctes, hath lately set forth 3. sermons in praise of the Beatified Ignatius, in the first of which, page 33. he saith that Adā
                   sung these psalmes to comfort himselfe in his banishment. It may be also that Elias did read them at the Canonical houres of our Lady. Bellarmine in his Apologie against the King excuseth the matter, saying that Bonaventure did not change Davids Psalter, but only made another of it in imitation of Davids Psalmes, being moved therevnto by a goldly affection that hee bore to the holy Virgin. But that which is an impietie against God, can be no pietie toward the Holy Virgin. Shee doth not thinke her selfe honoured by the dishonour of God. For this prophane psalter is made as if one should apply the Lords praier to the Virgin Mary, in saying, Our mother which art in heaven, hallowed bee thy name, &c. Hee that should speak after this manner to the Virgin Mary, mought he excuse himselfe in saying that hee did not corrupt the

Lords prayer, but made another in imitation thereof, being moved therevnto by a godly affection that he bore to the holy Virgin? This Psalter is little better. The 109. Psalme begins thus. Dixit Dominus Dominae nostrae, sede mater mea à dextris meis. The Lord said vnto our Lady, sit down mother at my right hand. The Psalm 
                     Which is the 110. in the Hebrew.
                   129 De profundis clamavi ad te Domina: Domina exaudi vocemmeam. Out of the deepe places haue I called vnto thee ô Lady, ô Lady heare my voice. The 
                     The 91. in the Hebrew.
                   90 Psalme, which in our Psalters begins with, who so dwelleth in &c. is thus applyed to the Virgin Mary. Hee that committeth himselfe to the protection of the mother of God, shall rest secure vnder her shaddow, and safeguard. His enimies though they come against him shall not hurt him, and the arrow that flyeth through the aire shall not strike him. and in the 
                     The 94. in the Hebrew.
                   93 Psalme, hee makes as though hee durst not presume to speake to God, but it is to wrong him. The Lord is a God of vengeance, but thou ô mercifull mother art enclined to pitie and compassion; you would say that she were set to pacifie Gods anger, and to make him change his will. It was a hard matter therefore to get accesse

to God, before the birth of the Virgin, or before she was crownd queene of heaven; To conclude, all this whole Psalter is such and yet Bellarmine dares say that it was made with a holy and godly affection, & the facultie of the Divines of Paris, did not sticke to approue of it. And yet afterward they are bold to say that the worship of Latria appertaineth to God only, as if the Psalmes of David were no divine service.
               
                  
                     V. Point. the suppressing of the holy scripture.
                   On the complaint which his Maiestie makes in the 5 place of the suppressing of the Scripture, for feare least the people should come to see it, these Doctours say, that the reading of the Scripture is not absolutely denied vnto lay men, but that they are forbid to read it without hauing a speciall permission; (that is to say) that the Pope by a speciall priuiledge wil giue a man leaue to obay God, for God would haue the people to read the Scripture. Kings are Laymen, and yet for all that in the 17. of Deuter. they are commanded to read in the booke of the lawe all the daies of their life. And when the Apostle wrote to the people of the church of Corinth, of Rome, of Ephesus, did he not meane, that they to whome hee wrote should read his

Epistles? And when in the beginning of the Apocalyps it is said, Blessed is hee that readeth, & they that heare the wordes of this Prophecy, why should wee not, following the counsell of S. Iohn, apply our selues to the reading hereof, seeing that it is the next way to make vs happy? And yet this is one of the obscurest bookes in all the Scripture: how much more then are wee exhorted by this to read the books of the Gospell, so full of perspicuity and instruction? In the 17 of the Acts. ver. 11. they of Beroe are commended because that after they had heard S. Paule preach, they did dayly vse to examine his doctrine by the Scripture, to knowe whether it were so or no, and yet it is probable that the Apostle S. Paule did, at the least speake with as much certainety, as Curates and Bishops doe now adaies. Why then may not they which heare them (after their sermons ended) compare that which they heard with the Scripture▪ to see whether it bee truely alleaged or no? A strange case! These Doctors both in their sermons, and in their writings pretend Scripture commonly, but will not haue the people to see whether they deale truely or no. As if they

should say, S. Paul, or S. Iohn saith so, but doe not goe thither to see it. They send you to the holy Scripture, but stop you in the way; yea and in their ful sermons they alleage the Scripture in barbarous Latin, and interpret it according to such allegations, as if French were worth nothing except it were set in the taile of Latin. Iesus Christ many a time in the Scripture askes of those that stand about him.
                     Matt. 19.4. Luk. 10.26. 
                  haue yee not read, and, How readest thou? should Iesus Christ now adaies speak in the same manner to the people of the Church of Rome, they would answer him, wee haue not read, for the Popes Holynesse will not permit it, except it bee vnto some fewe which vnderstand Latin, and which haue speciall leaue from their Ordinarie. Certainely I dare maintaine that for a man to take vpon him to permit any one by his speciall favour & priviledge, to obay God or to be instructed in his word, is far worse thē if he should forbid him to serue God. For hee which doth forbid a man to serue God, doth onely oppose himselfe against God: but he which giues any one a priviledge to serue God, makes God to bee his inferiour, and his subiect, seeing that hee

cannot be served but by the permission of the Pope, and it will come to this passe at last, that God must doe him reverence, if he himselfe looke to be served. Herevnto adde that women, & the common sort of people which do not vnderstand Latin care not to sue for a permission to read it in Latin, which yet is the only tongue that is allowed of in the Church of Rome. But if you turne over all the histories of the Church, you shall never finde that any went about to hinder the reading of the Scripture, but certain monsters & tyrants, as Antiochus Epiphanes, & such like persecutours of the Church, whose example the Pope hath followed. For that there are some vulgar translations seen now adaies in France and Italie, this hath beene but of late, and without approbation: & our aduersaries are beholding to vs for it. For it is not yet a hundreth yeares since that you should assoone haue found an Alcoran, as a French or Italian Bible, amongst the people of the Romish church. And yet to this day at Rome, or in Spaine, to finde a Spanish, or Italian Bible with one of the people, is a burning matter, and a case of the Inquisition.
               
                  Yet iudge what tyranny this is. For the books of the old and new Testament, are our contract of marriage with our bridegrome Iesus Christ, and the testament of our heauenly father. The clauses of the Legacies and donations contained therein, do appertaine to the people as well as to the Priests: why then should anie one keep their fathers testament from the people? Why may not the Spowse be suffered to see her contract of marriage? Must I in this businesse rely vpon the trust of men that liue by my ignorance, and make their gaine by concealing the truth from mee? Why do they suffer me to read fables and prophane histories, and will not suffer me to read the will, and the ordinances of my father? Why do they make me to suspect the Holy scriptures as if they were dangerous bookes, and a knife to cut my throat with? Suffer vs at least to haue a good opinion of God, and she shall be bound vnto you for it. If you say, But many abuse thē; I answere that preaching is abused too, & so is the goodnesse of God, and yet for al this we are not to abstaine from them, or suspect them the more: And besides that there is more danger in a voluntary ignorance,

then in a desire to profit. And it shal neuer bee found that the people did hatch heresies by the reading of the holy Scripture, but all the Arch Heretickes haue bin men that haue had the charge of teaching which should therefore rather of the two be bar'd the holy Scripture. They say that it is for none but men of knowledge to read them; whereas I ever thought that a man did read them to get knowledge; but these men wil haue knowledge to be gotten before the reading of them: which is a most wicked assertion, to make a knoweledge in religion that may be without the scripture, & before the scripture. And yet if it were so, what shoulde become of a great company of the Priests, which are more ignorant then the most part of the people, to whō notwithstanding the reading of the Scripture is permitted?
               But if any be desirous to know the beliefe of the Ancient Church concerning this, and whether the people did read the holy scripture then or no, beholde here some of their testimonies. Chrysostome in his 3. Homilie of Lazarus speakes thus to his auditours, I do exhort you alwaies, and will never cease to exhort you that you bee

not only attentiue here to that which is spoken, but when you be at home also, that you would set your selus carefully to the reading of the holy Scripture. A thing which I haue not forborne to inculcat vnto thē, that haue spoken with me, in particular. For it is not fit that any should say vnto me, these words are but little gracious, and there be many other things to busie a man, I am tyed to attend at the Court, I mānage publike affaires, I haue my occupation, I haue a wife, I see to the bringing vp of my children, I looke to my family, I am mingled with the world, & therefore it is not for mee to read the Scriptures, but for those which haue bid Adieu to the world, whose dwelling place is vpon the tops of hils, there leading a more strict kinde of life. What saist thou ô Man? must thou not turne over the scriptures because thou art distracted with many businesses? But it lyes thee vpon rather to reade them then they which are more free: For they haue not so much neede of the assistance of the scripture as thou which art tost amidst the vvaues of businesses, &c. Till at last he sayth, that it is impossible, yea I say impossible that any should attaine to salvation, if hee imploy not himselfe daily in this spiritual reading. And

a little after. The graces of the spirit hath so ordered and fitted the scriptures, that publicans, fisher men, makers of tents, the Pastours and Apostles, the simple and ignorāt sort of people may bee saved by these bookes, that none of them hereafter may haue anie cause to complaine of the difficulty. To the ende that the thinges which are saide there might be easie to vnderstand, and that the Artizan, the groom, & the widdow woman, and he that is most vnlearned of all mē, may carry away some profit by the hearing of this read. To be brief the whole homily is spēt about nothing else. Hierome in an Epistle to Laeta concerning the instruction of her daughter Paula.
                  
                     Pro gē
                        
                           •
                        is & serico divin
                           •
                        s codices 
                           〈◊〉
                        , in quibus non auri & pellis Babylonicae vermiculata pictura, sed ad fidem place
                        
                           •
                        t emendata & erudita distinctio. Di scat primò psalterium, bis se cāticis 
                           •
                        v
                           •
                        cet—Ad Evangelia transeat, nū
                        quam ea positura de manibus, mandet memoriae Prophetas, caveat omnia Apocrypha.
                   
                  In steed of pretious stones and silke, let her loue the bookes of God, in which let her not loue the gold, nor the painting vpon the covers, but the scripture learnedly corrected, and distinguisht. Let her first learne the psalmes, let her solace her selfe with these songs. Let her learne how to liue well in the Proverbs of Salomon. Let her learne how to despise worldly things by Ecclesiastes. Let her follow the examples of vertue and patience in Iob. From hence let her passe over to the Evāgelists, & neuer lay them out of her hands. Let her learne the

Prophets by heart. Let her beware of al Apocryphall bookes. Then therefore the reading of the scripture was permitted, yea and commanded, even to young maides.
               
                  S. Austin in the 9. chapt. of his booke de Doctrinâ Christianâ, speaking of the Canonicall bookes, 
                     In his omnibus libri
                           •
                         timentes Deum, & pietate mans eti qu
                           •
                        runt voluntatē Dei. Cuius operi
                           •
                         & laboris prima observatio est (vt diximus) n
                           •
                        s se ist
                           •
                        s libros etsi nondum intellectum, adlegendo tamē m
                           •
                         vel mandare memoriae vel omninò incognitos non habere.
                   
                  In all these bookes, they which feare God, and are of a zealous disposition, do seeke after the will of God. In which worke and travel, the first taske that they haue to do, is to know these bookes: and although they cannot vnderstand them presently, yet in reading them over, either to learne them by heart, or at the least not to haue thē altogither vnknown vnto thē. The third booke begins with this. Homo timēs deum voluntatem eius in sanctis scripturis inquirit. A man fearing God seekes diligently for his will in the holy Scriptures.
               
               In a word, all this forbidding of the scripture to be read without a special permission, and the denying it to bee translated into any vulgar tongue, for feare least the people shoulde put their noses into it, is a thing neuer heard off in al ages, a new kinde of tyranny, & a manifest betraying of a bad cause. He that is loath to haue the law seen, acknowledgeth that it doth not

fauor him in his suite.
               The other complaintes of the King, as of the abuse of fabulous legends, of the traffick, which hath changed the spiritual keyes into keies of gold, & the fishermans boate into a merchants ship, these haue been proved in the 6. Article of my second booke, and in the exposition of the 18. chapter of the Apocalyps.
            
         
         
            
               PROPHECIES SCATTEred throughout the Apocalyps, speaking of the Pope and his seate, noted by the King of Great Brittaine. CHAP. 10.
               BEsides these prophecies formerly expounded, which describe the Popes seate, and his person, by a continued discourse of whole chapters; His Maiestie hath noted other places also to this purpose scattered here & there in divers places of the Apocalyps, which may not bee omitted. The first is in the 6. chapt. and 8. verse, Where the Popes seate is represented

by a pale horse, & his name that sa
                        •
                     e on him was death, and Hell followed after him, & power was givē vnto him over the fourth part of the earth, to wit over Europe. Hell followes him, because it is the reward for those which serue this seate.
               His Maiesty notes also that the Pope is the king called Abaddon, or Apollyon, that is to say, one that destroies, and wasteth soules, who is spoken off in the 9. chapt. v. 11. and is king over the Locusts which came out of the thicke smoake of the bottomlesse pit, v. 2.3. that is to say, which arose out of grosse ignorance that proceeded from hell and the diuell, and that, after that a starre fell from heaven, that is to say, by the meanes of one which hauing beene a light vnto the church for a time, tumbled downe, and fell away from heavenly things to earthly, of a spirituall Pastor becōming a Temporal Prince: which is altogither suteable to the Pope. This is confirmed by this, that the men which serue him are punished in the 20. verse for serving Idoles of Gold, of syluer, of brasse and of stone, to the end that no mā should apply this prophecie to the Turcks. For the Turcks haue all sorts of Images in detestation.

And the vices reckoned vp in the 21. verse do all agree to the Romane Hierarchie, as the King hath shewed most exactly and truely.
               He doth likewise apply the 16. chap. of the Apocalyps to the See of Rome, where God doth powre out 7 vials of his wrath, that is to say, 7 sorts of punishments vpon those which beare the marke of the beast in their foreheads, ver. 1. and 2. The three last are the worst. For in the fift, which is spoken off in the 10. verse, God powreth out darknes vpon the throne of the beast, and God smiting them from aboue, they blasphemed against him. But at the powring out of the sixt viall, verse 13. There came 3 vncleane spirits like frogs out of the mouth of the Dragon, and out of the mouth of the beast, & out of the mouth of the false Prophet, by which Frogs his Maiestie vnderstands, the Emissaries, and new religious orders, which the Pope sends out to seduce the people, and especially the Iesuits compared (as the King hath most wittily obserued) to Frogs, because as these liue by land and water, and are of a mixt nature, so the Iesuits are halfe Ecclesiastical, halfe lay creatures; men of the church, &

yet such as will thrust themselues into worldly affaires. And they are said to be 2, because (saith the King) of their threefold direction, being sent from those 3. mentioned v. 13. Which seemes to be cō
                  firmed by that which is annext in the 14. verse. These are the spirits that worke miracles, which goe vnto the kings of the earth, and of the whole world to gather them to the battell of that great day of God Almightie. For these men speake of miracles, and incite kings & people on to persecute the faithfull, but at the incounter God shall overthrow them in the day which he hath appointed, & doeth (as it were) expect them in battell.
               The place where the Adversaries shal be discomfited, is called Harmageddon in the 16. verse, which is an Hebrew word, and signifieth the mounetaine of Mageddo, neere to which, that is to say, in the neighbouring vallie, the good 
                     Chron. 35. v. 22. Herodotus in his 2 book called Euterpe speaking of this battle of Neco against Iosias. s
                           •
                        ith 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                         for Meguido 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . King Iosias was slaine by Neco king of Egypt. In the same place was Si
                        •
                     era, captaine of Iabins army king of Canaan, discomfited by Debora the Prophetesse; as it is to bee seene in the 15. of Iudges, ver. 19. whence it appeares that the holy Holy Ghost doeth heere allude

that discomfiture which was effected by contemptible meanes, to wit, by a woman attended but by a small company; to signifie, that the Popes throne, and they which follow him, shall be vanquished by the Church compared to a woman, and by contemptible meanes. Notwithstanding we are to note that this word Harmagaddon doth also signifie the overthrow of the prowd or haughtie: yea and that in Hebrew it signifies 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Roma subversio, the subversion of Rome, which fals out by an admirable occurrence.
               The 7 viall powred out in the 17 verse. Even to the end of the Chapter doth represent the plagues which must befall the Cittie of Rome, and the Romish Church, before her destruction. The great Earthquake, and the diuision of the great Citty into 3. parts. v. 19. doe foretell vs of the divisions and dissentions which shall trouble her a little before her final overthrow: which is toucht by the way in these words. And that great Babylon came in remembrance before God, to giue vnto her the cup of the wine of the fiercenesse of his wrath. This destruction of hers is described more at large in the 18. chap. which

we haue expounded.
               He that would be more fully informed in these thinges, let him read the Kings kooke; For all that we can doe herein, is nothing else but to follow his steps. Because the holy Ghost is more concealed in these last observations, then in the other Chapters which I haue expounded all along; Experience will make it more manifest, and posterity shall hereafter reckon this amongst one of Gods wonderfull workes, that hee did set such a great King vpō the Throne, to publish his secrets frō an high place, and to expose the truth to the sight of al mē. But especially the Kings and Princes of these and succeeding ages, will be admonisht hereby, and perceiuing that it is more then 1500 yeares since that God did speake of them, and that they do make a part of S. Iohns Revelation, wil apply themselues readily to execute his ordinance. To whō his Maiestie of England (towards the end of his preface) makes an exhortation, which deserues to bee written in letters of Gold, and which I haue put here for the conclusion of my booke, as a more delicate dish at the ende of a feast.
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
            
         
         
            
            THE CONCLVSION OF THE King of Great Brittaines Preface, containing an exhortation to all Christian Kings and Princes.
            My harty desire is that you would deeply consider, & weigh your cōmon interest in this Cause. For neither in all my Apologie, nor in the pretended Refutatiō thereof, is there any question made anent the Popes power ouer me in particular, for the excommunicating or deposing of me. For in my particular; the Cardinall doth me that grace, that hee saith, The Pope thought it not expedient at this time to excommunicate me by name; our questiō being only generall, Whether the Pope may lawfully pretend any temporal power ouer Kings, or no?
            That no Church men can by his rule be subiect to any temporall Prince, I haue already shewed you; And what Obedience any of you may looke for of any of them de facto, he plainly forewarneth you of, by the example of Gregory the Great his obedience to the Emperor Mauritius: not

being ashamed to slaūder that great Personages Christian humilitie & obedience to the Emperour, with the title of a constrained and forced obedience, because he might, or durst do no otherwise. Whereby hee not only wrongs the saide Gregory in particular, but euen doth by that meanes lay on an heauy slaunder & reproach vpō the Christian humility & patience of the whole Primitiue Church, especially in the time of Persecution: if the whole glorie of their Martyrdome and Christian patience shall be thus blotted with that vile glosse of their coacted & constrained suffering, because they could or durst doe no otherwise; like the patience and obedience of the Iewes or Turkish slaues in our time, cleane contrary to S. Paul and S. Peters doctrine of obedience for cōscience sake;
                  Rom. 13.6. 1. Pet. 2, 13. and as contrary to Tertullians Apologie for Christians, and all the protestations of the ancient Fathers in that case. But it was good lucke for the ancient Christians in the daies of Ethnicke Emperors, that this profane and newe conceit was then vnknowne among them: otherwise they would haue beene vtterly destroyed and rooted out in that time, & no man to haue

pitied them, as most dangerous members in a Common-wealth; who would no lō
               ger be obedient, then till they were furnished with sufficient ability and power to resist and rebell.
            Thus may ye see, howe vpon the one part our Cardinall will haue all Kings and Monarchs to be the Popes Vassals; and yet will not on the other side, allow the meanest of the Pope his vassals, to be subiect to any Christian Prince. But he no
                  •
                thinking it enough to make the Pope our Superior, hath in a late Treatise of his (called the Recognition of his bookes of Controversies) made the people and Subiectes of euerie one of vs, our Superiors. For hauing taken occasion to revisite againe his bookes of Controuersies and to correct or explaine what hee findeth amisse or mistaketh in them; in imitation of S. Augustine his retractions (for so he saith in his Preface) he doth in place of retracting any of his former errours, or any matter of substance; not retract, but recant indeede, I meane sing ouer againe, and obstinatly confirme a number of the grossest of them. Among the which, the exempting of all Churchmen from subiection to any Temporall

Prince, and the setting vp not only of the Pope, but euen of the People aboue their natural King; are two of his maine points.
            As for the exemption of the Clerickes; hee is so greedy there to proue that point, as hee denieth Caesar to haue beene Pauls lawfull Iudge:
                  Act. 25.10. contrary to the expresse Text, and Pauls plaine Appellation, and acknowledging him his Iudge; besides his many times claiming to the Roman priviledges,
                  Act. 22.2
                     •
                  
                  ▪
                and avowing himselfe a Roman by freedome; & therefore of necessitie a Subiect to the Roman Emperour
                  •
               . But it is a wōder that these Roman Catholickes, who vaunt themselues of the ancienty both of their doctrine and Church, and reproach vs so bitterly of our Nouelties, should not bee ashamed to make such a newe inept glosse as this vpon S. Pauls Text; which as it is directly contrary to the Apostles words, so is it without any warrant, either of any ancient Councell, or of so much as any one particular Father that euer interprets that place in this sort: Neither was it euer doubted by any Christian in the Primitiue Church, that the Apostles, or any other degree of Christians, were subiect to the Emperour.
            
               And as for the setting vp of the People aboue their owne naturall King, he bringeth in that principle of Sedition, that he may thereby proue, that Kings haue not their power and authoritie immediatlie from God, as the Pope hath his: For euery King (saith he) is made and chosen by his people; nay, they do but so trāsferre their power in the Kings person, as they do not withstanding retaine their habitual power in their owne hands, which vpon certaine occasions they may actually take to themselues againe. This, I am sure, is an excellent ground in Diuinitie for all Rebels and rebellious people, who are hereby allowed to rebel against their Princes; and assume liberty vnto themselues, when in their discretions they shal thinke it cō
               venient.
            And amongst his other Testimonies for probation, that all Kings are made & created by the People; he alleadgeth the Creation of three Kings in Scripture, Saul David and Ieroboam; and though hee bee compelled by the expresse wordes of the Text, to cōfesse, that God by his Prophet Samuel annointed both 1. Sam. 10 1. 
               Saul and 1. Sam 16.12, 13. 
               David; yet will he, by the post-consent of the

people, proue that those Kings were not immediatly made by God, but mediatlie by the people; though he repeate thrise that word of Lott, by the casting whereof he confesseth that Saul was chosen. And if the Election by Lott be not an immediate Election from God;
                  Actes 1. thē was not Matthias, who was so chosen and made an Apostle, immediatly chosen by God: & consequently, he that sitteth in the Apostolike Sea cānot for shame claime to be immediatly chosen by God, if Matthias (that was one of the twelue Apostles, supplying Iudas his place) was not so chosen. But as it were a blasphemous impietie, to doubt that Matthias was immediatlie chosen by God, and yet was he chosen by the casting of Lots, as Saul was: so is it well enough knowne to some of you (my louing Brethren) by what holy Spirit or casting of Lots the Popes vse to be elected; the Colledge of Cardinals, his Electors, having been divided into two mightie factions euer since long before my time; & in place of casting of Lotts, great fat pensions being cast into some of their greedy mouthes for the Election of the Pope, according to the partiall homours of Princes.

But I doe most of all wonder at the weaknesse of his memory: for in this place he maketh the post-consent of the people to bee the thing that made both these Kings, notwithstanding of their preceding inauguration & anointment by the Prophet at Gods commandement; forgetting that in the beginning of this same little booke of his, answering one that alledgeth a sentence of S. Cyprian, to proue that the Bishops were iudged by the people in Cyprians time, he there confesseth, that by these words, the consent of the people to the Bishops Election must be onlie vnderstood. Nor will he there any waies be moued to graunt, that the peoples power, in consenting to or refusing the Electiō of a Bishop, should be so vnderstood, as that therby they haue power to elect Bishops: And yet do these words of Cyprian seeme to bee farre stronger, for granting the peoples power to elect Church-men, then any wordes that hee alleageth out of Scripture are for the peoples power in electing a King. For the very words of Cyprian by himselfe there cited are,
                  Cyp. lib. 1. Epist. 4. That th
                     •
                   very people haue principally the power, either to choose such Priests as are worthy, or to refuse

such as are vnworthy: And, I hope, he can neuer proue by the Scripture, that it had beene lawfull to the people of Israel, or that it was left in their choise, to haue admitted or refused Saul or David at their pleasure, after that the Prophet had anointed them, and presented them vnto them.
            Thus ye see how little he careth (euen in so little a volume) to contradict himselfe, so it may make for his purpose; making the consent of the people to signifie their power of Election in the making of Kings: though in the making of Bishops, by the peoples consent, their approbation of a deed done by others must only be vnderstood. And as for his example of Ieroboams election to be King; hee knoweth well enough▪
               1. King. 12.20. that Ieroboam was made King in a popular mutinous tumult & rebellion▪ onely permitted by God, & that in his wrath, both against these two Kings and their people. But if he wil needs helpe himselfe, against al rules of Divinity, with such an extraordinary example for proofe of a generall Rule; why is it not as lawfull for vs Kings to oppose herevnto the example of Iehu his Inauguratiō to the kingdome;2 King. 9▪ 2, 3. who vpon the Prophets private anointment

of him, and that in most secret manner, tooke presently the Kings office vpon him, without ever craving any sorte of approbation from the people?
            And thus may yee nowe cleerely see, how deepe the claime of the Babylonian Monarch toucheth vs in all our common interest: for (as I haue already told) the Pope, nor any of his Vassals, I meane Church-men, must be subiect to no Kings nor Princes: and yet all Kings and their Vassals must not onely bee subiect to the Pope, but even to their owne people. And now, what a large libertie is by this doctrine lefte to Church-men, to hatch or foster any treasonable attempts against Princes; I leaue it to your considerations, since do what they will, they are accountable to none of vs: nay, all their treasonable practises must be accounted works of pietie, and they (being iustly punished for the same) must be presently inrolled in the list of Martyrs and Saints; like as our new printed Martyrologie hath put Garnet and Ouldcorne in the Register of English Martyrs abroad, that were hanged at home for Treason against the Crowne and whole State of England: so as I may

iustly with Isaiah, pronounce a Woe to thē that speake good of evill, and evill of good;
               
                  Isai 5.20. 
               which put light for darknesse, and darknesse for light;
               
                  Vers. 23. 
               which iustifie the wicked for a reward, and take away the righteousnes of the righteous frō him. For evē as in the time of the greatest blindnesse in Popery, though a man should finde his wife or his daughter lying a bed in her Confessors armes; yet was it not lawfull for him so much as to suspect that the Frier had any errande there, but to Confesse and instruct her: Even so, though Iesuits practising in Treason be sufficiently verified, & that themselues cannot but cōfesse it; yet must they be accoūted to suffer Martyrdome for the Faith, and their blood worke miracles, & frame a stramineum argumentum vpon strawes▪ when their heads are standing aloft, withered by the Sunne and the wind, a publike spectacle for the eternall commemoration of their treacherie. Yea, one of the reasons, that is give in the Printers Epistle of the Colonian edition of the Cardinall or his Chaplaines pamphlet, why he doth the more willingly print it, is; because that the innocency of that most holie and constant man Henry Garnet, is declared

and set forth in that booke; against whom, some (he knew not who) had scattered a false rumour of his guiltinesse of the English treason.
            But, Lord, what an impudencie or wilfull ignorance is this, that he, who was so publikely and solemnely convicted & executed, vpon his owne so cleare, vnforced & often repeated confession, of his knowledge & cōcealing of that horrible Treason; should now be said to haue a certaine rumour spred vpon him of his guiltinesse, by I know not who? with so many attributes of godlinesse, constancie and innocencie bestowed vpon him, as if publike Sentences & Executions of Iustice, were rumors of I know not who. Indeed, I must confesse, the book it selfe sheweth a great affection to performe, what is thus promised in the Preface thereof: for in two or three places therin, is there most honorable lying mention made of that strawe-Saint; wherein, though hee confesse that Garnet was vpon the foreknowledge of the Powder-Treason, yet in regard it was (as he saith) only vnder the Seale of Confession, hee sticketh not to praise him for his concealing thereof, and would gladly

giue him the crown of glory for the same: not being ashamed to proclaime it as a principall head of Catholique doctrine▪ 
               That the secret of Sacramentall confession ought not to be revealed, not for the eschewing of whatsoever evill. But how damnable this doctrine is, & how dangerously preiudiciall to all Princes and States; I leaue it to you to iudge, whom all it most highly concerneth. For although it be true, that when the Schoole-men came to bee Doctors in the Church, and to marre the old grounds in Diuinity by sowing in amongst them their Philosophicall distinctions; though they (I say) do mainetaine, That whatsoeuer thing it told a Cōfessor vnder the vaile of confession, how dangerous soever the matter be, yet he is bound to conceale the parties name: yet doe none of them, I meane of the old Schoolmen, deny that if a matter be revealed vnto thē, the concealing wherof may breed a great or publike danger; but that in that case the Confessor may disclose the matter, though not the person, and by some indirect meanes make it come to light▪ that the daunger thereof may be prevented. But that no treason nor devilish plot,

though it should tende to the rvi
                  •
               e or exterminion of a whole Kingdome, must be reuealed, if it bee tolde vnder Confession, no not the matter so farre indirectly, disclosed, as may giue occasion for preventing the danger thereof: though it agree with the conceit of some three or fowre new Iesuited Doctors, it is such a new and dangerous head of doctrine, as no King nor State can liue in securitie where that Position is maintained.
            And now, that I may as well proue him a lyar in facto, in his narration of this particular History; as I haue shewed him to be in iure, by this his damnable and false ground in Divinity: I will truely informe you of Garnets case, which is far otherwise then this Answerer alleadgeth. For first, it can never bee accounted a thing vnder Confession, which he that reveales it doth not discover with a remorse, accounting it a sinne whereof he repenteth him; but by the contrary, discouer
                  •
                it as a good motion, and is therein not disswaded by hi
                  •
                Confessor, nor any penance inioyned him for the same: and in this forme was this Treason revealed to Garnet, as himselfe confessed. And next, though he stood

long vpon it, that it was revealed vnto him vnder the vaile of Confession, in respect it was done in that time, while as the partie was making his Confession vnto him; Yet at the last he did freely confesse▪ that the partie reuealed it vnto him as they were walking, and not in the time of Confession▪ But (he said) hee delivered i
                  •
                vnto him vnder the greatest S
                  •
               ale that might be, and so hee tooke that he mean
                  •
                by the Seale of Confession; And it had (as he thought) a relation to Confession; in regard that he was that partie▪ Confessor
                  •
                and had taken his Confession sometimes before, and was to take it againe within few daies thereafter. Hee also said that hee pretended to the partie, that he would not conceale it from his Superior. And further it is to be noted, that hee confessed, that two diuers persons conferred with him anent this Treason; and that when the one of them, which was Catesby
               ▪ conferred with him thereupon, it was in the other parties presence and hearing & what a Confession can this be in the hearing of a third person? And how farre his last words (whereof our Answerer so much vaunts him) did disproue it to haue beene

vnder Confession, the Earle of Northhamptons booke doth beare witnesse.
            Now as to the other parties name, that reuealed the Powder-Treason vnto him, it was Greenwell the Iesuite; and so a Iesuite reuealed to a Iesuite this treasonable Plot, the Iesuite reuealer not shewing any remorse, and the Iesuite whom to it was revealed not so much as inioyning him any penance for the same. And that ye may knowe that more Iesuits were also vpon the partie, Owldcorne the other Powder-Martyr, after the misgiving and discouerie of that Treason, preached consolatory doctrine to his Catholike auditory; exhorting them not to faint for the misgiuing of this enterprise, nor to thinke the worse thereof that it succeeded not; alleadging divers Presidents of such godly enterprises that misgaue in like manner: especially, one of S. Lewis King of France, who in his second iourney to the Holy-land died by the way, the greatest part of his army being destroyed by the plague; his first iourney hauing likewise misgiuen him by the Soldans taking of him: exhorting them thereupon not to giue over, but still to hope that God

would blesse their enterprise at some other time, though this did faile.
            Thus see yee now, with what boldnes and impudencie hee hath belied the publikely knowen veritie in this errand; both in auowing generally that no Iesuite was any waies guiltie of that Treason, for so he affirmeth in his booke; and also that Garnet knewe nothing thereof, but vnder the Seale of Confession. But if this were the first lie of the affaires of this State, which my fugitiue Priests & Iesuits haue coined and spread abroad; I could charme them of it, as the prouerbe is. But as well the walles of divers Monasteries and Iesuites Colleges abroad, are filled with the painting of such lying histories, as also the bookes of our said Fugitiues are farced with such sort of shamelesse stuffe; such are the innumerable sorts of torments & cruell deaths, that they record their Martyrs to haue suffered here; some torne at foure Horses; some sowed in Beares skins and then killed with Dogges; nay, women haue not beene spared (they say) & a thousand other strange fictions; the vanities of all which I will in two wordes discouer vnto you.
            
               First, as for the cause of their punishment, I doe constantly maintaine that which I haue said in my Apologie: That no man, either in my time or in the late Queens, euer died here for his conscience. For let him bee neuer so devout a Papist, nay, though he professe the same neuer so constantly, his life is in no danger by the Law, if hee breake not out into some outward acte expresly against the wordes of the Law; or plot not some vnlawfull or dangerous practise or attempt; Priests & Popish Churchmen only excepted, that receaue Orders beyond the seas; who for the manifold treasonable practises that they haue kindled & plotted in this countrey are discharged to come home againe vnder paine of Treason, after their receauing of the said Orders abroad, and yet, without some other guilt in them then their bare home-comming, haue none of them bin ever put to death. And next, for the cruell torments and strange sorts of death that they say so many of them haue bin put vnto; if there were no more but the Law & continually obserued custome of England, these many hundreth yeares, in all criminall matters, it will sufficiently

serue to refute all these monstrous lies: for no tortures are ever vsed here, but the Manicles or the Racke, and these never but in cases of high Treason; and all sorts of Traitours die but one manner of death here, whether they be Papist or Protestant Traitors; Queene Maries time only excepted. For then indeed no sorts of cruell deaths were spared vnexecuted vpon men women and children professing our Religion: yea, even against the Laws of God and Nature, women with child were put to cruell death for their profession; and a liuing child falling out of the mothers belly, was throwne in the same fire againe that consumed the mother. But these tyrannous persecutions were done by the Bishops of that time, vnder the warrant of the Popes authoritie; & therefore were not subiect to that constant order and formes of execution, which as they are here established by our Laws & customes, so are they accordingly obserued in the punishment of all criminals. For all Priests and Popish Traitours here receiue their Iudgements in the temporall Courts, and so doe neuer exceed those formes of execution which are prescribed by the Law,

or approued by continuall custome. One thing is also to be marked in this case; that strangers are never called in question here for their religion, which is farre otherwise (I hope) in any place where the Inquisition domines.
            But hauing now too much wearied you with this long discourse, whereby I haue made you plainly see, that the wrong done vnto mee in particular, first by the Popes Breues, and then by these Libellers, doth as deepely interest you all in generall, that are Kings, free Princes, or States, as it doth me in particular: I will now conclude, with my humble prayers to God, that hee will waken vs vp all out of that Lethargike slumber of Securitie, wherein our Predecessors and we haue lien so long; and that we may first grauely consider, what wee are bound in conscience to doe for the planting and spreading of the true worship of God, according to his revealed will, in all our Dominions; therein hearing the voice of our onely Pastor (for his sheepe will knowe his voice, as himselfe saith) & not following the vaine,
                  Ioh. 10.27. corrupt and changeable traditions of men. And next, that we may providently look to the

securitie of our owne States, and not suffer this encroching Babylonian Monarch to winne stil ground vpon vs. And if GOD hath so mercifully dealt with vs, that are his Lieutenants vpon earth, as that hee hath ioined his cause with our interest, the spirituall libertie of the Gospell with our temporall freedome: with what zeale and courage may we then imbrace this work: for our labours herein being assured, to receiue at the last the eternall and inestimable reward of felicitie in the kingdome of Heaven; & in the meane time to procure vnto our selues a temporall securitie, in our temporal Kingdomes in this world.
            As for so many of you as are already perswaded of that Truth which I professe, though differing among your selues in some particular points; I thinke little perswasion should moue you to this holy and wise Resolution: Our Greatnes, nor our number, praised bee GOD, being not so cōtemptible, but that we may shew good example to our neighbours; since almost the halfe of all Christian people and of all sorts and degrees, are of our profession; I meane, all gone out of Babylon, even from Kings and free Princes, to the meanest

sort of people. But aboue all (my loving Brethren and Cosins) keepe fast the vnity of Faith amongst your selues; Reiect 1. Tim. 1.4 questions of Genealogies and 
                  Ibid c. 4.7 
               Aniles fabulas, as Paul saith; Let not the foolish heate of your Preachers for idle Controuersies or indifferent things, teare asunder that Mysticall Body, whereof yee are a part, since the very coat of him whose members we are was without a seam
                  •
               ; and let not our diuision breed a slander of our faith, and bee a word of reproach in the mouths of our aduersaries, who make Vnitie to be one of the speciall notes of the true Church.
            And as for you (my loving Brethren & Cosins) whom it hath not yet pleased GOD to illuminate with the light of his Truth; I can but humbly pray with Elizeus, that it would please GOD to open your eies, that yee might see what innumerable and invincible armies of Angels are euer prepared and ready to defend the truth of GOD; & with S. Paul I wish, that ye were as I am in this case; especially that ye would search the Scriptures,
                  Act. 26.29. & ground your Faith vpon your own certaine knowledge, & not vpō the report of others; since euery Man

must be safe by his 
                     〈◊〉
                   faith. But, leauing this to GOD his mercifull providence in his due time,
                  Abac. 2.4. I haue good reason to remember you, to maintaine the ancient liberties of your Crownes and Commonwealths, not suffering any vnder GOD to set himselfe vp aboue you; and therein to imitate your owne noble Preaecessors, who (even in the daies of greatest blindnesse) did divers times couragiously oppose themselues to the incroaching ambition of Popes. Yea, some of your Kingdomes haue in all ages maintained, and without any interruption enioyed your liberty, against the most ambitious Popes. And some haue of very late had an evident proofe of the Popes ambitious aspiring ouer your temporall power; wherein yee haue constantly maintained and defended your lawfull freedome, to your immortall honour. And therefore I hartily wish you all, to doe in this case the office of godly and iust Kings and earthly Iudges: which consisteth not onely in not wronging or invading the liberties of any other person (for to that wil I neuer presse to perswade you) but also in defending & mantaining these lawfull liberties where with GOD

hath indued you. For ye, whom GOD hath ordained to protect your people from iniuries, should bee ashamed to suffer your selues to be wronged by any. And thus, assuring myselfe, that yee will with a setled iudgement free of preiudice, weigh the reasons of this my Discourse, and accept my plainenesse in good part, gracing this my Apologie with your fauours, and yet no longer then till it shall bee iustly & worthily refuted▪ I end, with my earnest prayers to the Almightie for your prosperities, and that after your happy temporall Raignes in earth, yee may liue & raigne in Heaven with him for ever.
            
         
      
   