
      
         
            
            A CONFERENCE HELD AT PARIS betweene Father Gontier a Ieſuite, and DOCTOR Du Moulin: SECONDED BY THE LADY OF SALIGNAC. Together with Doctor Du Moulin his anſwere to GONTIER his letter to the KING concerning the ſubiect of this CONFERENCE. By Peter Du Moulin Doctor of Diuinitie, and Minister of the Word of GOD in the Church of PARIS.
            Tranſlated according to the French Copie printed in PARIS.
            LONDON Printed for IOHN BARNES and are to be ſold at the ſigne of the Pyde-Bull neere Saint Auſtines gate. 1615.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE VERY GODLY AND RIGHT NOBLE Lady, my Lady ELIZABETH WINVVOOD: Wife to the Right honourable Sir RALPH WINVVOOD Knight, one of his Maieſties Priuy Counſell, and Principall Secretary to the State.
            
            
               MAdam, it may bee thought a double recompence in you, amongst many workes and many writers, if you would onely ſpare employments to peruſe and giue (in charity) a milde opinion of this. But I (intending to your ſelfe a recompence, for late and earely loues vouchſafed by your honourable Husband) dare honeſtly prefixe your name to this, and thinke it woorth

your patronage. When as indeede omnipotence it ſelfe cannot be well entituled to any thing but truth: then certainely it ſhould be triumph, to defend a truth conuincing. And ſuch a truth is now commended to your fauor: which if it may acquit my zeale vnto your Knight and You, of thanks though not of ſatisfaction. For hauing thought your ſelfe moſt worthy to defend this truth, oppoſed by one of your own ſexe, & almoſt of the ſame rank, I ſhall according to my wiſh esteeme it ſutable to your perſon, whom with your honourable Husband, I doe now leaue to Heauens diſpoſall; which may enable me to diſcharge a further duty.
            
               Your Ladyſhips moſt deepely bound, IOHN BARNES.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               A TRVE NARRATION of the conference betweene Du Moulin and Gontier, ſeconded by my Lady BARONESSE of Salignac.
            
            
               PETER Du Moulin hapning about three of the clocke in the after-noone to meete with Monſieur de Liembrune before his gate in Marſh ſtreete, was requeſted by him to ſteppe vp along with him vnto his chamber, where hee was no ſooner come, but he ſaw the roome full of Ladies; among which, one of them, at the firſt on ſet, entreated him to explaine the 31. article, in the confeſſion of the faith of the reformed Churches. Du Moulin anſwered, that if it pleaſed her to take the paines to come home to his houſe, he would do the beſt he could to ſatisfie her. Preſently vpon that another Lady replied and ſaid, that we ought at all times be readie to giue an account of our faith: that Du Moulin ought not deny to inſtruct them herein which did demand it of him: whereunto Du Moulin anſwered, that hee knew well enough, they did not aske this for any deſire they had to

be inſtructed; and to diſpute about religion with women, which tattle altogether; and after they are gone publiſh what they pleaſe, were to wrong the truth of religion. One among them replied, that ſhe could not ſatisfie her ſelfe as concerning this Article, and that it was often obiected to her, how that our Miniſters were not able to giue an account of their Miſſion and Vocation. Du Moulin anſwered, that he wondred much how ſhe forgat to aske a reaſon of them for the iuſtifying of theirs: and that had ſhe ſo done, ſhe ſhould haue found them leſſe able to ſatisfie her: that euery one which preſumes to aske a reaſon of another for the maintaining of his vocation, ought to be ſure that he is able to iuſtifie his owne, and be readie at any time to yeeld a reaſon. He had no ſooner ſpoken theſe wordes, but in comes Gontier, with two others, which brought many bookes along with them; Gontier at his firſt entrance asked what was the matter? what it was that was ſaid there? Why my Lady heere (ſaid Du Moulin) requires a reaſon of me to iuſtifie my Miſſion: and I told her, that ſhe ſhould haue demanded the like of you, for the iuſtifying of yours.
            
               Gontier.
               This is onely a ſhift to rid your necke out of the coller.
            
            
               Du Moulin.
               It is no ſhift at all: for whoſoeuer is ſo bold, as to demaund a reaſon of another for his vocation, bindes himſelfe thereby to giue an account of his owne. But if you will confeſſe that you are not able to defende yours, I will preſently heere take vpon mee to defende mine.
            
            
               Gont.
               Pray ſir, be not cholericke; you doe not heare me acknowledge any ſuch matter.
            
            
               Du Moul.
               I ſpeake nothing, but what is apparantly true; and do here vndertake to proue that you haue no vocation.
            
            
               
               Gont.
               Who hath giuen you authoritie to ſpeake ſo ſaucily to your ſuperiours.
            
            
               Du Moul.
               As for your dignitie I denie that you haue any ſuch ſuperioritie ouer me. But to the point, I heere maintaine that you haue no commiſſion; for you call your ſelues Prieſts, and haue receiued this order of prieſthood in this manner: which is, that the Biſhop, hauing anointed your fingers, and impoſed his hands, ſaith vnto you; Receiue power to offer vp ſacrifice to God, and to celebrate the Maſſe, as well for the liuing as the dead: By this meanes he hath made you Sacrificers to ſacrifice Ieſus Chriſt. I demaund of you therefore in what place of Scripture Biſhops are authorized to eſtabliſh ſuch ſacrificing Prieſts in the Church.
            
             
               Gont. That is eaſily prooued, out of the ſecond and fifth Chapters of the firſt Epiſtle to Timothie; bring mee a new Teſtament hither: hereupon a Teſtament was brought him, wherein he read theſe two Chapters, which was not a little tedious to the ſtanders by; and finding nothing there that he deſired, ſaid to one of his company (which was his aſſiſtant) go and fetch me my He did the like at Amiens againſt Monſieur Hucher being troubled to anſwer, he ſent to fetch his concordance. Concordaunce, which being brought, he ſtood turning the leaues along time without ſaying a word: Du Moulin being weary of ſtaying for his anſwere, ſaid vnto him, if this diſgrace had lighted vpon me to haue beene put to ſilence, and to ſend for my Concordaunce, I ſhould be aſhamed euer to ſhew my face more in any honeſt company: wherupon Monſieur de Liembrune tould Gontier, Sir I am aſhamed to ſee, that which I do: for you haue often told me that the Miniſters durſt not ſpeak a word before you, and now I ſee you driuen to ſuch ſtraites, that you haue not a word to ſay: After halfe an houres ſilence, I ſought (ſaid Gontier) a place of Scripture, wherein there is mention made of impoſition of handes: I will eaſe you, ſaid Du Moulin, of the paines and preſently turned to the

place, which is in the 4. Chapter of the firſt Epiſtle to Timothy. Gontier red the words which were theſe, Deſpiſe not the gift that is in thee, which was giuen thee by propheſie, with the laying on of the hands of the company of the elders: Note withall that theſe elders were Prieſts, and that Greeke word imports as much.
            
               Du Moul.
               This doth not proue at all that Biſhops haue authoritie from God to eſtabliſh ſacrificers in the Church.
            
            
               Gontier in ſteede of anſwering, tooke a Bible, and turning himſelfe towards Monſieur de Liembrune, ſaid that he would ſhew, that vnder the old law, the Church was neuer without Sacrificers.
            
               Du Moul.
               That is nothing to the purpoſe, we ſpeake of the authoritie which Biſhops haue to make Sacrificers vnder the new Teſtament.
            
            
               Gont. Whereupon Gontier being at a ſtand, asked for pen and inke, which being brought, hee falls a writing without ſpeaking a word, and then blotted out that which he had written, which made the company wonder at him.
            
               Du Moul ſ.aid vnto him, you gaine time, and vnder the colour of writing take leiſure to thinke vpon ſome thing to ſaue your ſelfe.
            
               Gont. Laying aſide his writing entreated Du Moulin to ſet downe his propoſition in writing.
            
               Du Moul. Then at his entreatie writ theſe words. Let any man ſhew me out of the word of God, that the Biſhops of the Romiſh Church haue authoritie to eſtabliſh Sacrificers in the Church.
            
               Gont.
               I will proue vnto you that the Apoſtles were Sacrificers.
            
            
               Du Moul.
               This is not the thing in queſtion, neither doth it proue that which I demaund.
            
            
               Gont.
               It is ſufficient if I proue that the Apoſtles were

Prieſts and did offer vp ſacrifices.
            
            
               Du Moul.
               Since you are at a ſtay, and that I cannot draw any proofe from you of the power that Biſhops haue, to eſtabliſh ſacrificing Prieſts in the Church, let vs ſee how you proue that the Apoſtles were ſacrificers. Hereupon Gontier tooke his pen and wrote that which followes.
            
            
               Gont.
               This word, to Sacrifice, in his primary ſignification imports as much as to do an holy thing; but the Apoſtles were ordained to do an holy thing, therefore the Apoſtles were ordained to ſacrifice.
            
            
               Du Moul.
               We haue nothing to doe here with Etymologies, but with the ſence of this word, to ſacrifice, as it is taken in the Church of Rome, to wit, to offer vp really vnto God the body of Ieſus Chriſt in a propitiatorie ſacrifice for the liuing and the dead. To pray vnto God is to do an holy thing, yet neuertheleſſe euery one that praieth is not therefore a ſacrificer in this ſence: whereupon it followes that the concluſion is nothing to the purpoſe, ſince the word, to ſacrifice, is taken therein in another ſence then we take it.
            
            
               Gont.
               I haue proued that which I was to proue.
            
            
               Du Moul.
               I denie it, this is nothing to the purpoſe, you tie your ſelues to the word, ſo to auoide the thing.
            
            
               Gont.
               I haue done enough, and you haue granted what I demanded.
            
            
               Du Moul.
               I do not agree with you in that, and doe call the company to witneſſe, if there be any one here which hath hitherto heard Maſter Doctour ſpeake one word to proue that Biſhops haue authoritie from God to eſtabliſh Sacrificers in the Church: or that the Apoſtles were Sacrificers, to ſacrifice Ieſus Chriſt.
            
            
               Gont. Whereat all holding their tongues, Gontier anſwered and ſaid that Ieſus Chriſt had ſaid vnto his Apoſtles:

               Do this, and thereby commanded them to ſacrifice.
            
               Du Moul.
               I denie that, to do this, ſignifies to ſacrifice.
            
            
               Gont.
               This word, Do, is referred to his body.
            
            
               Du Moul.
               Suppoſe it were ſo; yet to do his body is not to ſacrifice it.
            
            
               Gont.
               In the 26. of Saint Mathew it is ſaid that the bloud of Chriſt is ſhed for the remiſſion of ſinnes, now where the bloud of Chriſt is ſhed there is a ſacrifice; and all that is auaileable to the remiſſion of ſinnes is a ſacrifice.
            
            
               Du Moul.
               That I denie: if it were ſo, Baptiſme ſhould be a ſacrifice ſeeing that that alſo is auailable for the remiſſion of ſinnes: nor is it true, that whereſoeuer any bloud is ſhed for the remiſſion of ſin, there ſhould of neceſſitie be a ſacrifice, except this bloud be offered to God, for without this it is no ſacrifice: Alſo it is requiſite that this ſhedding of bloud be made by death, but in the Euchariſt you cannot ſhew me, either that this bloud is offered vnto God, or that this ſhedding of bloud is made by death.
            
            
               Gont.
               In the 26. of Mathew it is expreſſely ſaid that the bloud of Chriſt is: and withall hee went to write this argument the bloud ſhed which is ioined with death, is a ſacrifice, but the bloud ſhed in the ſacrament is ioined with death, therefore it is a ſacrifice.
            
            
               Du Moul.
               You take that for granted which you are to proue, to wit, that the bloud which you ſay to haue been ſhed in the Sacrament hath beene offered vnto God; Secondly I anſwere, that you doe fallaciouſly adde this ſame word, Ioine, to that which I haue ſaid: that in the 26. of Mathew it is truly ſaid of the ſhedding of bloud which by nature is ioined with death, But I ſay that when the very bloud of Chriſt is really

ſhed in the Sacrament, yet it is neuertheleſſe not ſhed by death.
            
            
               Gont.
               By this anſwere you ſeeme to allow of my Maior.
            
            
               Du Moul.
               You ſpeake nothing, neither haue you produced any thing yet, to proue that Ieſus Chriſt hath offered his bloud to God in the Euchariſt.
            
            
               Gont.
               I haue proued it ſufficiently, I need not proue it againe.
            
            
               Du Moul.
               Proue this, or confeſſe that you cannot.
            
            
               Gont. Gontier hereupon tooke his pen and writ as followes: The bloud ſhed for the remiſſion of ſinnes is contained in the inſtitution of the Euchariſt: in the 26. Chap. 28. verſe of Saint Mathew.
            
            
               Du Moul.
               This doth not enforce at all, that Ieſus Chriſt did offer his bloud vnto God in the Euchariſt.
            
            
               Gont. Hereupon after ſome ſilence, and complainte of the Ladies, deſiring vs to conferre about ſome other matter, at laſt Gontier ſtood vp vpon his legges, and framed an argument; which he would not write, but Du Moulin writ it as he told it him: the argument was this, The bloud of Ieſus Chriſt which is ſhed for the remiſſion of ſinnes, muſt of neceſſitie be offered vnto God, but in the inſtitution of the Euchariſt contained in 26 Chapt. 28. verſe of Saint Mathew the bloud is ſhed for the remiſſion of ſinnes, therefore it muſt needes be offered vnto God.
            
               Du Moul.
               I denie that the maior propoſition is alwaies true, for ſhould the very bloud of Chriſt Ieſus be ſhed in that ſame action of the Euchariſt, it would not follow, that it were offered vnto God for a ſacrifice: for it might be offered or preſented to the Communicants, and not vnto God: It is ſufficient that he hath beene offered on the croſſe: As for the ſecond propoſition, I acknowledge that the bloud of Ieſus Chriſt was ſhed,

but vpon the croſſe: Saint Mathew ſaith truly that the bloud of the Lord is ſhed, but hee meanes vpon the croſſe; as the Romiſh Bible witneſſeth; and the very Maſſe, which turne it in the future, effundetz, that the bloud of the Lord ſhall be ſhed, I aske of Mr. Doctour whether he will renounce his Bible, and his Maſſe.
            
            
               Gont. Gontier taking pen and inke to anſwere blotted out part of that which Du Moulin had writ; Du Moulin complained thereof, and ſhewed it to the companie, Gontier exeuſed himſelfe, and ſaid he did it vnwittingly, afterward he began to write theſe words this offring cannot be made vnto the people. Afterward he pauſed vpon it, and blotted out that which he had written; then paſſing that ouer, he poſts to the ſecond article of Du Moulins anſwere; who required him to anſwere to the firſt article: Gontier anſwered that he would not anſwere to it at all: and that in his anſwering he would haue to do with thoſe parts which hee thought moſt feebleſt: Du Moulin preſt him againe, ſaying that his concluſion was weake, whileſt that one of his propoſitions remained ſtill denied: Gontier refuſed againe: Some that ſate there comming vnto him, whilſt he did thus delay, vrged him vnto it, yet he perſiſted in his refuſall; but vppon the ſecond article he ſaid, that Du Monlin denied his owne Bible; which ſaith, is ſhed, and not ſhall be ſhedde.
            
            
               Du Moul. Anſwered that our tranſlation was turned faithfully according to the Greeke, and that this did proue nothing, but that the expoſition of the Romiſh Church which the bibles approued by the counſell of Trent and the Maſſe it ſelfe doth carry, is falſe.
            
               Gont. Gontier then made one of Robert Stephens Greeke Teſtaments be brought vnto him, and for to weaken the authoritie of the Greeke text ſaid that many things there had beene changed, and that at the end

of the booke there was a table of more then fiue hundred ſeuerall readings.
            
               Du Moul. Anſwered that theſe diuers readings did not alter the ſenſe at all; that all this inueighing againſt the originall of the new-teſtament did not help him a iot to proue that which as yet he could not proue: to wit, that Ieſus Chriſt offered vp his bloud to God in the Euchariſt, and he called vpon Gontier to proue it, Gontier continuing in denying to proue it to him, and the diſputation being there at a ſtay, all the Ladies to gratifie him entreated them to talke of ſome other ſubiect, and ſaid that this matter was to deepe for their capacities.
            
               A new matter propoſed.
               ONe of the Ladies therefore requeſted that theſe words might be expounded, This is my body. Du Moulin. Anſwered and ſaid: That no man doubted of the truth of theſe words, and that wee ſhould beleeue the Scripture according to the expoſition that it carries of it ſelfe: that theſe words, This is my body, were thus expounded by the Apoſtle Saint Paul 1. Cor. 10. chap. 16. verſ. The bread which wee breake is the communion of the body of Chriſt; An expoſition which the Church of Rome doth reiect, not beleeuing at all that it is bread, nor that we breake bread; nor that this bread ſo broken is the communion of the body of Chriſt, ſeeing that it is his very body: Hereunto adde, that the Euangeliſts do with a ioint conſent witneſſe, that Ieſus Chriſt broke bread and gaue it: He tooke bread broke it, and gaue it: Therewith the Church of Rome,

denies, not beleeuing that hee gaue bread: Nay which is more, it denies theſe words; This is my body: For ſeeing the word, This, ſignifies that which he gaue, and ſeeing that he gaue bread, the ſenſe of theſe words, This is my body, is, This bread is my body, the which the Church of Rome denies.
               
                  Gontier on the contrarie oppoſed againſt this, that Saint Paul had ſaid in the Euchariſt, that the body of our Lord is broken for vs: that the bread whereof hee ſpeakes, ſaying The bread which we breake is his fleſh, as it is ſaid in the ſixt of Saint Iohn, The bread which I will giue is my fleſh.
               
               
                  Du Moul. Replied and ſaid that herein Gontier contradicted the Church of Rome, which doth not beleeue at all, that the Lords body is broken in the Euchariſt, and asked of Gontier whether he would ſubſcribe to this: That the Church of Rome doth beleeue that the body of the Lord is broken in the Euchariſt: that Gontier by this word, Bread, meaning the body of Chriſt makes the words of Saint Paul ridiculous, making him to ſay, that, the body of Chriſt, which wee breake, is the communion of the body of Chriſt. That in that place of Saint Iohn he ſpeakes not at all of the Euchariſt, but promiſeth to yeeld himſelfe vnto death, as he makes manifeſt by the words following: The bread which I will giue, is my fleſh which I will giue for the life of the world, now he did not giue himſelfe for the life of the world, but in his death.
               
                  Gont. Hereunto Gontier anſwered nothing, but only this, that theſe words, I will giue, being twiſe repeated were taken in two ſeuerall ſignifications. Afterward being required to ſubſcribe, that the Church of Rome doth beleeue that the body of Chriſt is broken in the Sacrament; He tooke paper and writ: Chriſt hath broken his body in the Euchariſt: Saint Paul: 1. Cor. 11.

                  verſ. 14. which was not that which was demanded of him: Hereupon being required to ſpeake his minde freely, and tell in his conſcience, whether he thought the Apoſtle Saint Paul did ſpeake truth, ſaying, that we breake bread: He anſwered flatly that he would anſwere no more then he had done alreadie; which moued one of the Gentlemen that ſate by (Maſter Paupart by name) who came in at the latter end of the conference, to ſay vnto him, wee haue brought our eares but it ſeemes you want a mouth.
               This done Gontier being preſt a new, to proue, that Ieſus Chriſt hath offered his bloud to God in the Euchariſt, forſooke the battaile, and being aſhamed of himſelfe, and cleane out of heart retired into one of the corners of the chamber, where being all alone he falls a writing what he thought beſt in a paper apart, which when he had ſhewed vpon the table, a little after hee toare in peeces ſnatching it out of the handes of my Lady of Liembrune who was willing to haue kept it.
               He therefore giuing roome my Lady Baroneſſe of Salignac ſucceeded in his place.
            
            
               The vpſhot of the conference.
               MY Ladies diſcourſe tended to this end: I haue (ſaid ſhe) withdrawne my ſelfe from the religion wherein I was bred, after I came once to the through diſcuſſing of the cauſe; I haue ſpent foure whole yeares in ſounding of this; I haue looked vpon all the Fathers Latine and Greeke, I kept a man of purpoſe to tranſlate them; I haue found that the Fathers of the foure firſt ages are conformable in all things to the faith of the Church of Rome, hereupon I was confirmed in mine

opinion, and my conuerſation hath turned diuerſe others.
               
                  Du Moul. Said, Madame ſince you vnderſtand that which you do ſo well, giue me leaue to aske you, if you do not call vpon the 
                     Ʋirgine Mary, and if the forme of your praier, wherein you call vpon her, be not Aue Maria &c. yes ſaid ſhe: Then Du Moulin ſaid vnto her, you do not therefore vnderſtand what you do, for by ſpeaking thus you thinke you pray to the Virgine Mary, but indeed you pray vnto God for her, ſaying vnto her, Mary the Lord protect thee, the Lord bee with thee &c. Alſo Madam, I thinke you haue not forgot the cauſes, which moued you to this change. For example can you ſhew vs any places of the Scripture, wherein wee are commaunded to paint God, and to make carued images of the trinitie in ſtone: The Lady anſwered that ſhe would not take vpon her to prooue that in the preſence of a Doctour: Du Moulin then ſhewed her the 4. Chapter of Deuteron. at the 15. verſ. and following, where God forbids any image to bee made like vnto him; She on the contrary alleaged the images of the Cherubins; But Du Moulin told her that ſhe ſpake of the images of God, and that a Cherubin was no God.
               As for the images of Creatures, he asked her, if ſince her change of religion, ſhe had ſeene any commaundement of God for the worſhipping of creatures images: Gontier did releeue her a farre of, crying out of his corner where he was retired; Madame, inſtance in the braſen Serpent, being the image of Chriſt, who was both God and man, tell him withall, that there was ſacrifice and incenſe offered before the Cherubins.
               
                  Du Moul. Anſwered that the braſen Serpent, was no image of Ieſus Chriſt, but a figure of his office, and ſauing vertue; that ſuppoſe it were his image, yet it was

not an image of his diuinitie: that he could neuer find that the Iſraelites did worſhip it, but that they were taxed for idolatrie: and laſtly that there was neuer any ſacrifice or incenſe offered vp before the Cherubins, there being alwaies a vaile interpoſed. Shee heereupon had recourſe againe to the Fathers; affirming that ſhee had read them all. Du Moulin tolde her that it was impoſſible, firſt in reſpect of the multitude of bookes, and then becauſe of the difficultie therof to her, which vnderſtood neither Greeke nor Latine. That twenty yeares were too little for him to doe it: and that ſhee muſt needes aske twice as long: Hee entreated her to name ſome Father among others, which ſhee had read: ſhee named Chryſoſtome for an example. Du Moulin ſaid, praie Madam ſhew me but one place in him which you doe beſt vnderſtand: then ſhe ſtrained courteſie, ſaying that being as ſhe was a mother of a family, ſhe could not be wholly at leiſure: Afterwards ſhe brought foorth a whole bedroll of the Fathers, wherein ſhee tooke the Greeke for the Latine, ſaying that Tertullian was the diſciple of the Apoſtles; that Cyprian was his diſciple in the 150. yeare of our Lord, for which ſhee was taken vp by Gontier which heard it a farre off. Who raiſing himſelfe vp, gently tooke his leaue of the company: Du Moulin told him as he was going foorth, that if we were caſtawayes and damned creatures, as they reported, they ſhould then by the lawes of Ch
                     •
                  iſtian charity haue compaſſion vpon vs: and I am amazed that you which heere ſhew your ſelfe to bee of ſo yeelding a nature, ſhould yet neuertheleſſe preach bloud and ſedition (as all thoſe tell me which goe to heare you) Gontier anſwered, you are miſinformed: I haue giuen an accoun
                     •
                   to the King for that which I did, I would hazard my life for your good; After ſome complement the company departed. Two

dayes after, my Lord of Liembrune meeting with the ſame Ladies in Saint Nicholas des Chamans, hee enquired of them what the reaſon was that father Gontier was ſo aſtoniſhed, and did ſtay at a ſt
                     •
                  nd in his anſwering, who ſayd that (as he himſelfe told them) he did this to cheere vp my Lady of Liembrune who wept for feare he ſhould elſe haue afflicted her a new.
            
         
         
            PETER DV MOVLINS ANSWER TO THE Letters of M. Gontier written to the King, concerning the Subiect of this Conference.
            
               SInce the religion of Rome is become a marchandize, they which teach it ſtudy how to put trickes vpon men, but they doe them ſo ſlouenly, and performe them with ſo little ſlight, that (as it ſeems) they are willing to do vs a pleaſure in diſgracing themſelues; The letters of Monſieur Gontier vpon this ſubiect ſhew this which I ſay to be true; wherin he bragges of the conuerſion of my Lady of Mazancourt, as the prize of his victorie; though ſhe in the yeare 1596. in the moneth of Iune,
               
in the Church of Sechelles publikely forſwore our religion on her marriage day, and proteſted that ſhe would liue in the Church of Rome: and neuer ſince hath ſhe turned to vs, or made any ſhew of profeſſing our religion. See then what a new conqueſt here is, he hath ſpoiled vs of that which wee neuer had, hee hath killed a perſon already dead, hee hath made a Lady forſweare our religion, which had done it a douzen yeres before; and gained ſo excellent a victory, to the end the people ſhould ſay, This was done by the dexterity of venerable Father Gontier: Not vnlike him, who hauing bought an hare, tied it with a chaine vnto his ſaddle bow, that ſo the people might ſay, this is the hare which hee hath taken; which opinion makes the diſh to relliſh the better: Theſe Doctors could neuer yet catch any, but ſuch like preyes as theſe: Shee ſurely is a Lady of honor, whoſe perſon & family I reuerence, yet ſhe neuertheleſſe, either to gratifie her husband, or els through ſimplicity, had willingly forſaken the truth before our conference: In which ſhe was ſo farre from profiting any thing, that whilſt it was a doing, ſhe often profeſſed that ſhe did not liſten to that which was ſaid, nay more then this; ſince that hath ſhe written letters to my Lady of Liembrune her ſiſter, where ſhe ſpeaks thus; I was not in any manner in the world inſtructed, becauſe the points, which Du Moulin propoſed to bee diſcuſſed, were aboue the reach of my vnderſtanding: A little after ſhe ſaith, that when the conference was done, ſhee went to conſult with Father Gontier, who ſhewed her all the Fathers of the firſt 600. yeares to bee on his ſide; where as (ſhee reports) ſhee hath found true ſaluation, that heereupon ſhe hath fixt her reſolution.
            But if Maſter Gontier behaued himſelfe ſo manfully as hee ſayes, without ſhewing how; how comes it then to paſſe, that the Ladies there preſent were faine to excuſe

him to Monſieur de Liembrune, for bearing himſelfe ſo daſtardly in the fight, ſaying that he did this to comfort my Lady of Liembrune which wept? why was I conſtrained to turne for him to a paſſage of Scripture which hee could not finde? why did he ſtand ſo many times ſo long, together without ſpeaking a word? why (he being at a non-plus, and not able to iuſtifie the authority of Biſhops for the ordaining of ſacrificing Prieſts) was I forced to change my queſtion, for to gratifie him? why did hee withdraw himſelfe out of my preſence to hide himſelfe in a corner? why did hee blot out that which I had written? why did he teare the papers which himſelfe had written? whereof I can yet for aneede produce ſome peeces: And note that he tooke mee vnawares then, when I thought of nothing leſſe then conferring with him; but hee came prepared and furniſhed with bookes hauing agreed on this conference before hand with the Ladies; I am alſo giuen to vnderſtand by the report of men worthy of credit, that a few daies after the conference, Gontier dining with my Lord the Prince of Conde, and my Lord the Duke of Eſpernon, that the Prince askt Gontier as concerning this matter, telling him there went a ſpeech abroad thereof which tended little to his praiſe; and that the ſayd Ieſuite imputed his little reſiſtance to the great noiſe there was made: but eſpecially to the earneſt entreatie of an aduocate; yet there was no aduocate nor anie ſtirre, but onelie towards the latter end, the three firſt houres being paſt ouer with a great ſilence, euerie one looking that Maſter Gontier ſhould ſpeake, whilſt hee did nothing but turne the leaues of his Concordance, and made as though he did write.
            Now to iuſtifie this which I ſpeake to bee true, I call the aſſiſtants for witneſſes which ſate there from the beginning to the end, and God knowes that in the diſcourſe

which I haue publiſhed, I haue dealt as faithfully as I cold poſſible, hauing ſhew'd it ready writen to thoſe which were preſent at it; to the end that if I had forgotten my ſelfe in any thing, they ſhould correct what was amiſſe; yea I haue yet ſome part of Mr. Gontiers arguments written with his owne hand, of the which hee doth not ſo much as repeat one word in his letter; wherein he reduces our conference to a douzen lines, not for breuities ſake, for he breakes out into other vnprofitable diſcourſes, but by an apparant ſhift: for in our conference there were two points aboue others that we chiefely handled: one, whether Biſhops were authorized from God to eſtabliſh Sacrificers for to ſacrifice Ieſus Chriſt: the other, whether it could poſſibly be prooued that Ieſus Chriſt did offer vp his bloud to God in the Euchariſt: becauſe, that although his bloud were really ſhedde, yet it is not a ſacrifice if the bloud be not offered vnto God.
            Theſe two points beeing of ſuch importance, how comes it to paſſe that Mr. Gontier writing to the King, doth not ſatisfie them, nor ſo much as mention a word of them at all? did he thinke his Maieſty vnworthy to be throughly informed in the truth of the matter? or why doth he fruſtrate the people of this their expectation. And if in the conference hee had not a word to ſpeake heereupon, why doth he not yet repaire his credit heerein by his writings vpon farther ſtudie? why is he ſo loth to ſpeake anie more of the paſſage in Saint Cyprian, which is in the 9. Epiſt. of the firſt booke alleadged by my Ladie Baronneſſe of Salignac, doth hee not perceiue by this that he hath ſpoken nothing worth the conſidering, but that a ladie hath ſpoken that which deſerues to be weighed? Nay, he ſhewes that he neuer read the place, ſeeing that he produceth it ſo diſguiſed, and which is more, ſaies in the margent of his booke

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
that this is the 66. chapter; when Saint Cyprians Epiſtles are not diſtinguiſhed by chapters; doubtleſſe my Ladie of Salignac, who hath ten times more learning for a Ladie, then he for a Doctor, could haue taken him vp for this: Saint Cyprian indeed ſpeaks in the place alleadged, of alters and ſacrifices, but by ſacrifices he vnderſtands the preſents which the people offered on the table, of which one part was laid aſide for the celebration of the Euchariſt; wherefore in his Sermon of almes he takes vp the rich men which men which came to receiue without offering anie ſacrifice: Doeſt thou come (ſaith he) to the Lords Table without a ſacrifice, doeſt thou take part of the ſacrifice which the poore hath offered? and in the ſame ninth Epiſtle, in the honour of the brethren which offer vp offrings, as if they did receiue the tithes of fruits, Let them not depart from the Altar, and ſacrifices.
            
            As concerning prayer for the dead, which began to be in vſe in the time of Tertullian, and of which Saint Cypryan ſpeakes in this Epiſtle, this is a praier which at this daie the Church of Rome doth allowe of no more then wee; ſeeing that then they praied for the Saints and Martyrs, and that it ſhall neuer bee found that any one praied for the deliuerie of ſoules out of purgatorie, but onely for the enfranchiſement of ſoules kept in priſon, and ſleeping in the boſome of peace, of which you haue a feeling in your maſſe, where the Prieſt praies in this manner for the dead: Lord thinke on thy ſeruants which ſleepe in the boſome of peace; Amongſt the number of which the ancient Church doth reckon the Saints: who alſo as they thought in the next age to St. Cyprian, ſhould bee purged by fire in the laſt day of iudgement, not exempting ſo much as the virgin Mary herſelfe, as wee haue ſhewed by a great number of proofes in the laſt chapter of a booke entituled, The

waters of Silo. Neuertheleſſe Maſter Goutier leaſt hee ſhould haue nothing at all to ſay, doth accuſe mee for denying our owne Bible; How ſo? becauſe ſaith hee, that when he did alleadge theſe words vnto me, which is ſhed for vs, I ſaid this was to be vnderſtood in the future: A ridiculous calumnie: Rather on the contrary I ſay that our Bible doth turne the words more faithfully then that of the Church of Rome, ſeeing that it is in the Greeke 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , which is ſhed, and not ſhall bee ſhed, as the Bible of the Church of Rome and the maſſe haue it: But it is one thing to aske what is the beſt tranſlation of the words of Ieſus Chriſt, another thing to aske what is the meaning of the words; for our tranſlation onely is true: but the Romiſh Bible doth expound the meaning and intention of Ieſus Chriſt, which is to promiſe that his bloud ſhall be ſhed for vs on the croſſe, failing in the turning, but not in the drift of his words: as if when Ieſus Chriſt ſaith, Ioh. 10. ver. 15. I lay downe my life for my ſheepe, one ſhould tranſlate it thus, I will lay downe or leaue my life: hee indeed ſhould lay downe the true meaning of his words, which although it were true, yet ought it not to be inſerted in the text: Let this ſuffice for an anſwer to Maſter Gontiers letters, letters without ſinewes, without ioynts, puft vp with a childiſhly affected kinde of ſwelling, which we do therfore here pricke to the end we might bring it downe. Had he no bodie to preſent them to, but his Maieſtie. The Pagans in their ſacrifices did neuer offer an Ape vnto their gods, but theſe men preſume to offer apiſh to yes to ſo great a Prince, which holds the place of God among vs: who being wonderfull in his patience ſince he ſuffereth himſelfe to be thus ſerued, is no leſſe wonderfull in the cleareneſſe of his iudgement. For hee knowes well that, if his royall vertues were not aboue al enuie, and out of the danger of forgetfulneſſe, they

muſt needs loſe ſome of their luſtre by being mixt with the impureneſſe of their pamphlets, as pearles that are wrapt in ſmoake: neither doth he like of theſe ſeditious preachers, which now preach in their Sermons before his Maieſtie, that we hate dominion, & ſet al kind of gouernment at nought: for his Maieſtie is not ignorant that this is ſo farre from being true, that on the contrary, this is the principall cauſe for which we are hated, to wit, becauſe wee haue not taken on oath of allegeance to anie other then to the King, becauſe we hold that the Pope cannot giue or take away realmes, nor diſpenſe with ſubiects for the oath of fealty; becauſe wee teach that he ſhould not haue heere anie other lawes, any other iudges, any other priſons, then thoſe of the King, becauſe that we ſhew that his realme is ſpoiled of ſiluer, which paſſeth ouer into Italy for the paiment of firſt fruits diſpenſations, abſolutions, matrimoniall contracts &c. And that couſenage and tyrannie are eſtabliſhed vnder the ſhew of religion. Finallie, becauſe we complaine that the Pope makes Kings kiſſe his feete, and tramples on their Crownes: would wee but ſticke to the Pope in theſe things, hee would eaſilie diſpenſe with vs for our beleefe in the Goſpell: or by a ſpeciall priuiledge would permit vs to beleeue thereon, in the things which were not preiudiciall to his profit. Is there any one that can accuſe the reformed Churches of rebellion or attempting ought againſt our Kings, or of conſpiring to blow them vp with gun-powder, and yet to dare to preach this in the preſence of his Maieſty: which reproach, the onely conſideration, and manie proofes that he hath had of our fidelitie doe ſufficiently confute: For that the Ieſuites goe about to perſwade him that we are rebellious, or ill-minded towards him, is all one as if Caiphas ſhould defend Ieſus Chriſt againſt his Apoſtles, or as if Catiline ſhould accuſe Cicero of ſedition.
            
               
At the end of Maſter Gontiers Epiſtle there is a diſcourſe annexed, ſubſcribed with the name of Corbozon Mount-gommeri, which was not preſent at the conference, but ſaies that he heard of it at the 
                  Ʋicaridge of Saint Nicholas: This ſo honorable a name of Mount-gommeri doth vnhappily come to be written vnder ſo baſe a pamphlet, and I cannot beleeue, that ſo falſe and ridiculous peece of ſtuffe, ſhould come from vnder the handes of a Gentleman of that honor as he is; without doubt ſome paltry Ieſuite compoſed this writing at his pleaſure, which comes no more neere the truth of that which paſt betweene vs, then Ouid his Metamorphoſis doth to that of the Goſpell. And indeed, the recitall that Maſter Gontier hath made of our conference in his letter to the King, hath nothing like vnto this; but Monſieur de Corbozon is willing to honor it, in couering it vnder his name, as with a cloake, which will ſcarce euer be brought him backe againe cleane: It would bee time loſt to go about to confute this writing; for if I ſhould conuince the Author of abſurditie, Maſter Gontier would renounce him as one that had written vpon falſe information, and ſo I ſhould haue done as good as nothing. As for the defiance and threatnings of Maſter Gontier, we neuer yet refuſed vpon any occaſion that was offered, to enter the liſts vpon iuſt and equall termes; But this people loues to ſet on men in corners, that they may a little after publiſh the contrary the more freely; eſpecially when they haue one in hand to deale withall which is alreadie conuerted; and which hath promiſed to yeeld himſelfe before the combat, only they make it deferre it a little, till the time they haue plotted a conference.
            Now for to iuſtifie this which I ſay to be true, Maſter Gontier a few daies after all this adoe, ill befitting the grauitie of a Doctour, will not yet let mee ſcapeſo,

ſaying that he will enter in conference with me concerning the antiquitie of our Church; and I meaning to enter the liſts with him, haue at this time ſent him a writing, of which this is the ſubſtance.
            
               
                  
                     I maintaine that M. Gontier can not ſhew me in the foure firſt ages after Chriſt, any Church, or any man which held the ſame religion as the Church of Rome doth at this day: and for this purpoſe.
                  1 He ſhould ſhew me any ancient Church that celebrated the Communion without Communicants, as they do ordinarily in the Church of Rome.
                  2 That he ſhould ſhew me that any ancient Church did barre the people of the Communion of the cup.
                  3 Or that in any ancient Church, the common ſeruice was read in a tongue which the people vnderſtood not.
                  4 Or that any ancient Church did forbid the people to read the holy Scriptures, as it is by no meanes permitted without a ſpeciall priuiledge in the countries, where the Pope is abſolute Commander.
                  5 Or that in any ancient Church there were euer made any images of God, and repreſentation of the Trinitie in ſtone, or in painting.
                  6 Or that in any auncient Church the people were

taught to pray without vnderſtanding that which they ſaid.
                  7 Or that any ancient Church did do ſeruice to the images of Creatures, in kiſſing them, in clothing them, by bowing themſelues downe before them, and offring vp ſacrifices vnto them.
                  8 Or that any ancient Church euer beleeued that the Virgine Mary is crowned Queene of heauen, and Empreſſe of the world, as it is painted throughout all their Churches.
                  9 Or that any ancient Church did aſſigne diuers offices to Saints; to one ouer this Country, to another ouer that, to one ouer this ſickneſſe, to another ouer that, to one ouer this trade &c.
                  10 Or that any ancient Church did euer beleeue that the Pope could giue and take away realmes, and free ſubiects from their oath of allegeance, canonize Saints, diſpenſe with vowes and promiſes made vnto God.
                  11 Or that in the ancient Church, the Pope by his pardons did diſtribute the ſuperabundant ſatisfactions of the Saints, for the remiſſion of the puniſhment of the ſinnes of others.
                  12 Or that the Pope did then lay his pardons on one Church and not on another, on one village and not on another, and this ſometimes for one hundred and two hundred yeares of true pardon.
                  13 Or that the ancient Church did beleeue a Lymbus of little infants.
                  14 Or that the ancient Church did euer adore the hoſt, which the Prieſt holds, with diuine worſhip, and that this is the cauſe, why the Prieſt doth vſe to hold vp the hoſt in the Maſſe.
                  15 Or that the bookes of the Machabees were held for Canonicall in the ancient Church.
                  
                     
16 Or that the ancient Church did beleeue that the Biſhop of Rome could not erre in the faith.
                  17 Or that the ancient Church did beleeue that Ieſus Chriſt by his death and ſuffering did indeed diſcharge vs from the puniſhment of ſinne before baptiſme, but as for the puniſhment of ſinne committed after baptiſme, he hath changed it from eternall, vnto temporall, and that it lies vs vpon to ſatisfie the iuſtice of God for this.
               
               That Maſter Gontier ſhould tell vs, if in theſe points he will admit of the Fathers for iudges, we will aske but halfe a douzen cleare paſſages vpon euery point.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   