
      
         
            
            
            HERACLITVS:
OR,
MEDITATIONS
vpon the Miſery of Mankinde,
and the vanitie of
Humane life:
With
The inconstancie of worldly Things;
as alſo the wickedneſſe of this deceitfull
age deſcribed.
            Faithfully tranſlated out of the laſt Edition
written in French by that learned
Diuine, Monſieur Du Moulin,
               By ABRAHAM DARCIE.
            
               LONDON
Printed by G. P. for Thomas Pauier: and
are to be ſold at his ſhop in Iuie
Lane. M.DC.XXIV.
         
         
            
            TO THE
ILLVSTRIOVS
IOHN, Earle of Bridgewater, &c.
And to the Princely Lady
FRANCESThis Princely Dame, is a bleſt branch of theſe famous Trees of Honour, the moſt ancient Houſe of Derby, and the Noble family of the Spencers. his Noble
Counteſſe;
As alſo to the Honorable Ladies, the Lady
Honorable branches of Honour ſprung from the Noble Houſe of Bridgewater. FRANCES HOBART, and the
Lady ARABELLA St IOHN
their worthy Daughters: 
            And to the Honor of the Right Honorable,

                  The Lord St IOHN,
Baron of Bletſo, &
the Illuſtrious Lady
ELIZABETH
Noble Twigs of vertue, iſſued from the Illustrious family of the Paulets, & Marquiſes of Wincheſter. His Noble and
Vertuous Wife,
with their Honorable
Sonne, Mr▪
St IOHN.
                  The Lord HOBART
L. Chiefe Iuſtice
of the Common-Pleas,
and to the
Religious Lady his
worthy Wife, to
their Generous &
vertuous Son, Sir
IOHN HOBART.
               
True Patternes of Vertue and Pietie,
Noble Patrons and Patroneſſes of
Honor and Learning,
ABRAHAM DARCIE wiſheth to
theſe Noble Families, all internall, externall,
and eternall Happineſſe and proſperity
in Chriſt Ieſus.
         
         
            
            
               Right Honorable,
Moſt Worthy:
            
            
               THat great and wiſe
Monarch, King
SALOMON, ſaid
long ſince, that
there is no end of
making Bookes,
               Eccleſ. 12. 12. 
               and much ſtudie
is a wearineſse of the fleſh.
            
            Which Paradoxe was neuer
more verefied, then in theſe degenerate
dayes of Vanity, when
ignorant as well as wiſe men
will bee ſtill writing of themſelues,
whereby the Preſse is
euen oppreſſed with multiplicitie

of ſuch idle Treatiſes, more
light then vanity it ſelfe. But
for ſuch Bookes as doe either
affoord direction to the Church,
or a way to reforme and better
our Life, thoſe are moſt worthy
to bee read, and carefully
obſerued.
            This excellent Worke, (firſt
penned in French by one of
the moſt learned Diuines in
France) clearely ſhewing vs the

                  Ʋanity, Miſery, and Inconſtancie
of this World, doth warne
and admoniſh vs to take heede
how we truſt to it, and that we
muſt not build our happineſſe
vpon ſo deceitfull grounds as
Riches and Earthly poſſeſsions,
but to direct our Hearts, leuell
and lift our mindes and thoughts
               
to HEAVEN, to that Eternal
and bleſſed Habitation of
CHRIST IESVS.
            Conſidering theſe things,
what greater abomination can
there be, then to ſee the people
of this miſerable age delight to
vndoe one another,
                  Pyrrus King of Epirots, that valiant and victorious warriour, is killed by a ſilly woman with a tile ſtone. enuie, deſpiſe,
curſe, warre, and finally
kill one another? For a thing
ſo vaine as this World, deceitful,
miſerable, inconſtant, and damnable,He who had filled the earth with the Trophees of his deedes, and triumphs of his victories, Alexander of Macedonia, that moſt famous Monarch, died impoyſoned by his owne ſeruants.
which ſometimes honors
vs, and preſently contemnes
vs, cals vs to high Callings, and
ſodainly debaſes and degrades
vs; lifts vs to high proſperity,
and immediatly flings vs headlong
into lowe aduerſity. Therfore
PHILIP King of Macedonia,
               The chiefe of the Greekes, hauing eſcaped ſo many perils in the Troyans warres, is cruelly murdered before his Caſtle.
acknowledging the worlds

great inconſtancie, hauing receiued
many good newes in
one day, prayeth the immortall
Gods to ſtop the courſe of ſo
greatioyes,Great Pompey hauing ſhunned the bloudy hand of his enemies, is killed by his deare & obliged friend. fearing leſt ſome ſiniſter
actions, and mournefull
euents ſhould enſue them.
            Right Honourable, this
Booke hauing paſt many Impreſſions
in FRANCE,That victorious French Monarch, Henry of Bourbon, the 4. of that name, whoſe inuincible valour made Spaine quake, & Rome trēble, is in time of peace lamentably murdred in his Coach, in the midſt of his Royall citie of Paris.
                is
now arriued, newly reuiued
and augmented here in England;
and though it bee little in
ſhew, yet it containes many
good things, yea, matters of
weight and conſequence, worthy
to bee read, knowne, and
obſerued: As alſo very fit and
needfull for a Chriſtian to meditate.Theſe examples do euidently ſhew the worlds mutability and inconſtancie.
The exquiſite worth
thereof hath mooued mee to

tranſlate it; but the fame of
your rare vertues hath the more
imboldened mee to publiſh it
vnder the banner of your Noble
protections. Accept it (moſt
Honorable) as courteouſly, as
officiouſly it is Dedicated and
Conſecrated to the perpetuall
Honour, and Honourable vſe
of your Illuſtrious Houſes and
Noble Families, by
            
               Your Honours
and Worthineſſe
humble and
deuoted obſeruant,
ABRAHAM DARCIE.
            
         
         
            
            
               A Table of the Contents
of this Booke.
               CHAP. 1.
               THe vanity and miſery
of the Nature of
man. fol. 6
               CHAP. 2.
               The vanity and inconſtancy
of man in his action. 10
               CHAP. 3.
               Of mans Ripe Age. 16
               CHAP. 4.
               The life of Courtiers. 27
               CHAP. 5.
               The life of Magiſtrates,
and wicked Iudges. 31
               CHAP. 6.
               Of mans eſtate being in
Wedlocke. 36
               CHAP. 7.
               The vanity and inconſtancie
of Women. 42
               CHAP. 8.
               Of Couetouſneſſe, Enuie,
and Ambition. 45
               CHAP. 9.
               Of Petty-fogging ſtrifes,
and law-contention. 53
               CHAP. 10.
               Of Philoſophy, and the
knowledge of diuers
tongues. 55
               CHAP. 11.
               Of Pilgrims, and Ciuill
vertues. 59
               CHAP. 12.
               Of old and decrepit Age.
77
               CHAP. 13.
               Of Death. 69
               CHAP. 14.
               Of the terrible Iudgement
ſeat of God. 74
               CHAP. 15.
               Of Heauen. 79
               CHAP. 16.
               Of Hell. 81
               CHAP. 17.
               The miſery and vanity of
our Life, and the wickedneſſe
that now raigneth.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            HERACLITVS
TEARES:
OR,
THE MISERY OF
HVMANE LIFE.
WITH
The vanity and inconſtancie
of worldly things.
            
               IF we doe but ſeriouſly conſider
this beſotted World,
how like a turbulent torrent
it is ouerflowne with all ſorts of
impertinent and importunate affaires,

which cut our time into a thouſand
pieces, wee ſhall finde, that each
of them takes from vs one part of
our life, leauing vs no time but
that which wee gaine by theft; ſubtracting
ſome houres for to examine
our ſelues in ſecret, and to entertain
our mind with religious thoughts.
Theſe ſolitary meditations haue ſufficient
in them to employ our wits.
For the firſt Subiect which doth preſent
it ſelfe to our peruſall, is a conſideration
of the vanity and miſery of
humane life, not for to molest vs any
way, while we are in it, but to prepare
our ſelues to depart well out of it. No
man can aſpire as hee ought to the future
life, which doth not contemne this
preſent, neither can any man contemne
this preſent, which doth not well know
it: and the way truely to know it, is to

remoue it farre from vs, to withdraw
it from our heart, and to baniſh it
from our affection; For worldly
goods beeing neere at hand, doe both
dazell the Minde, and distract the
Iudgement.
            But let vs firſt enquire, before we
proceede, of ſome one that hath paſſed
this way. King Salomon in the beginning
of Eccleſiaſtes, entring into
that meditation doth write, that vanity
is moſt vaine, all is vanity.
That great and mighty King, who
had riches without example; peace,
without trouble; glory, without enuy:
who was obeyed of his Subiects, reſpected
of his Neighbors, and raigned
forty yeeres, which was a ſufficient
time to content his minde, in ſumptuous
buildings, in multitude of Horſes,
in all variety of ſtudies and Sciences,

who had trauerſed his ſpirits through
all the ſecrets of Nature, euen from the
Cedar vnto the Hyſop. Neuertheleſſe,
in the concluſion of all, conſidering how
theſe ſweets are confected with bitterneſſe,
how there is little conſtancie
in theſe things, how there is ſmall content
in all this trauell, hee makes this
the cloze of all his actions, That all is
vanity and affliction of ſpirit But before
that Solomon had proued theſe
things,Eccl. 1. 14. hee learned that leſſon of Dauid
his father, which is written in the
39. Pſalme, Truely euery man is
nothing but vanity, he walketh in
a vaine ſhadow, and diſquieteth
himſelfe in vaine: hee heapeth vp
riches, and knoweth not who
ſhall gather them. Let vs therefore,
according to the rules of ſuch excellent
men, enter into that meditation,

and taking that Inſtrument out of
their hands, make an Anatomie of
our ſelues. There is no diſcourſe more
ſerious, then that which treateth of
vanity: Nor contemplation more
high, then to reaſon of our owne infirmities:
ſeeing by that meanes man
mainteining himſelfe, is eleuated aboue
himſelfe.
            This vanity linked with miſery, is
to be conſidered:
            Firſt, in the Nature of man.
            Secondly, in his actions.
            And thirdly, in his thoughts and
deſires.
            
               
               CHAP. I.
               The vanitie and miſerie of the Nature
of Man.
               
                  MAN being the image of God,
and the chiefe worke of Nature,
is miſerable euen in his
originall: For the moſt noble
of them, yea, if he be the ſonne of
an Emperor, doth receiue his forme betweene
the two excrements of nature,
and there hee is nouriſhed for a time
with the moſt impure bloud of all: hee
is there ſubiect to be bruiſed by the leaſt
fall of his Mother. His birth is ſhamefull,
inſomuch that women bluſh to bee
publiquely ſeene in child-bed.
               The beaſts and birds are brought into
the world, either couered with haire,
feathers, or wooll; not ſo much as the
ſeedes and corne of the ground, but nature
hath cloathed them with eares and
huskes, man onely excepted: for hee

being once come from his mothers
wombe, ſeemeth no other thing then
the ſimilitude of a poore worme, that
commeth creeping out of the earth, his
cloathing is bloud onely, wherein he is
bathed and couered, which ſignifieth
no other thing but the image and figure
of ſinne.
               The beginning of his life is with
ſorrow: for at comming into the world,
weepings and wailings doe accompany
him, which are as meſſengers and
fore-ſhewers of his calamities to come;
the which becauſe hee cannot expreſſe
in words, he witneſſeth by teares.
               Hee is borne immoueable, and tumbleth
into his owne filth. Other liuing
creatures are no ſooner out of the
wombe, but they fall on their feete and
are ready to goe; nor out of the ſhell,
but they runne for meate. The worme
(be hee neuer ſo little) as ſoone as nature
hath brought him out of the earth,
beginneth to crawle and creepe, and to
ſeeke for foode: The little Chicken, as
ſoone as hee is out of the ſhell, is found

cleane, & runneth after the Hen, knowing
when he is called: hee picketh and
eateth▪ hee feareth the Kite, and flyeth
danger, being guided onely by nature.
But behold, Man, ſo ſoone as hee is
come into the world, is like vnto a little
Monſter, and a lumpe of fleſh, which
will let himſelfe bee eaten of other
beaſts, if he be not ſeene into; and dye
for hunger, before he can finde his mothers
breſt, and will as ſoone eate poiſon
as good meat, and handle hot iron,
before hee can diſcerne the good from
the euill.
               Thus Man beeing brought into this
miſerable world, and plunged in the
gulph of miſeries, he then requireth to
haue nouriſhment, and cloathing, to
comfort the infirmity of his nature; but
behold, he is ſubiect vnto ſuch neceſſitie,
that hee is glad to gaine it with the
ſweate of his browes: Whereas other
liuing creatures do finde all things readie
prepared for them, Man onely hath
need of habiliments; for he that is the
moſt noble in the world, is aſhamed to

ſhew his nakedneſſe, and therefore hideth
himſelf vnder the ſpoiles of other
creatures. Hee is ſubiect to more maladies
then all the beaſts together; to
which the obſcureſt fogges or euening
dewe doe no hurt. They neuer bleed at
the noſe, although they goe alwayes
declining towards the earth. They are
ignorant what the Catarre, Calcull, and
diuers ſorts of Agues meane.
               Man onely is capable to diſcerne
theſe differences, and to feele their effects;
for if there be any beaſts which
are more afflicted with diſeaſes, they
are ſuch as liue limited within the
precinct of ſome houſe, and ſo receiue
it by contagion. But ſome will obiect
that Man hath reaſon aboue the beaſts:
which is indeed the reaſon of his torment,
in winning him to practiſe dangerous
and pernitious deſignes; to bee
ſubtle in contentions, to ioyne himſelfe
into other mens affaires, and being once
ſatisfied, to ſtirre vp an artificiall appetite,
and a deſire to drinke without
thirſt. I am ignorant what the reaſon

is, but we are much more ſenſible of ill
then good; and that griefes doe more
diſturbe vs, then pleaſures can content
vs. Scarce can we thinke of an abſolute
health, but ſome torment or other doth
preſently poſſeſſe vs, as the Tooth-ach,
or paine in the fingers end. One drop of
gall, will diſtaſte a whole veſſell of
ſweets. How much then of happy fortunes
is required to digeſt one affliction?
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               The vanity and inconſtancy of Man in
his actions.
               MAn being borne ſo poore and baſe
into this world, how many yeeres
ſteale from him,Of Infancy. before he receiue abilitie
to conduct himſelfe? How long
and laborious is his inſtruction? What
time is conſumed while hee trembleth
vnder Maſters, for to gaine vnprofitable
words, & ſome little ſuperficiall knowledge?
Alſo who doth not diſcerne in
this part of his age, an vntoward peruerſitie,

a contradicting humour, and in
one infant ſpirit, all the vices of Man, as
buds and graines of ſome future infelicitie?
The onely meane to appeaſe
children, is to correct ſome one before
them: If any do but touch one of their
toyes, they ouerturne all the reſt for
deſpite, The loue & reſpect which they
giue to their puppets, are eminent ſeeds
of Idolatry. Such are the infants that
are begotten of the beſt of men: A
graine of corne winnowed from the
chaffe, produceth corne with chaffe; a
man circumciſed, begetteth an infant
vncircumciſed.
               Therefore you may ſee by the peruerſitie
of your children, the image of
your corruption.
               Wee haue already diſcourſed vvhat
perils and dangers man hath at his firſt
comming into the world, and in his infancie.
Now therefore let vs conſider
vvhat he is when he is ſprung vp,Of Youth. and
vvhether that there be an end of his miſeries
or no. Of which, if we be equall
Iudges, we ſhall finde, that he doth rather

increaſe then decreaſe in miſeries:
for this is the time of mans life, wherein
Nature doth raiſe againſt him a more
furious combate; for now his bloud
beginneth to riſe, the fleſh prouoketh
him to his owne pleaſure, the vvicked
world eſpieth him, the Diuel tempteth
him, & his ſelfe-will'd youthfulnes leadeth
him into all dangers, and induceth
him to reiect all inſtructions, inſomuch
as it is impoſſible but that which is aſſailed
with ſo many vices, and ſuccoured
of none, in the end is diſcomforted
and ouercome. For in the body of
youth, ryot, libertie, and deliciouſneſſe
aboundeth: for all the vices in the
world (ſaith Marcus Aurelius) doe
there plant their ſiege. O how many
perſons in this age are corrupted vvith
too much pleaſure, lulling themſelues
aſleepe, in the lap of ſuch as ſeeke to
ſtrangle them! O traitrous Dalilah,
which ſeekeſt by thy inticing flatteries,
to deliuer vs to an enemie, farre vvorſe
then the Philiſtims, which is the Diuell
himſelfe! Such pleaſures are like vnto

guilded pils, which vnder their externall
beauty include bitterneſſe. They
are alſo like vnto freſh Riuers, that end
their courſe in the Sea, loſing their
ſweet relliſh in an ocean of ſaltnes. True
zeale cannot flouriſh vnder ſo nice and
delicate a gouernment; nor can the perfect
knowledge of God (which is a celeſtiall
gift) be ſubiected to the belly, it
cannot remaine amongſt ſwine; that
habitation is onely agreeable to the diuell,
who, by the permiſſion of Ieſus
Chriſt, hauing entred into a Herd of
ſwine, compelled them to runne headlong
to their owne ruine: and who (as
it is recorded in the holy Writ) nouriſheth
prodigall children vvith the
husks of pleaſures, in ſtead of their parents
bread.
               It behooueth the Husbandman, when
the trees are yong,Youth compared to yong trees. to vphold them, and
to lop the o're-weighty branches, if afterwards
he intends to gather any fruit.
Likewiſe, it is neceſſary for Parents, to
reforme & correct the vices that raigne
in Youth, leſt afterwards it returne to

their ſhame and reproach. But there are
at this day many fathers and mothers,
who for not hauing well inſtructed
their children in their youth, doe receiue
much ſorrow and griefe in their
age: a iuſt reward for ſuch Parents, who
(although they be ſaid to be nouriſhers
of the bodies) are the deſtroyers of the
ſoules of their children.
               If Ely was grieuouſly puniſhed vvith
his children, for that hee did not ſo
ſharpely chaſtice them, as their offences
did require, what ſhall become of thoſe
fathers and mothers, which in ſtead of
correcters, are the childrens corrupters?
Such Parents may well bee compared
to Apes, which kill their yong ones by
too much claſping them between their
armes, and keeping them ſo deare; and
this is the cauſe that ſo many fall into
the hands of the Hangman, which is to
them reformer and correcter.
               Many there bee, that in ſtead of giuing
good exhortations to their Family,
doe ſhew them firſt themſelues
naughty and wicked examples. For the

firſt commandement that they giue
them how to liue well, is to blaſpheme,
ſweare, exerciſe gluttony and drunkenneſſe,
to ſpoile the ſubſtance of their
youth; to bee fornicators, and to kiſſe
women and maidens in their preſence.
               There bee alſo many mothers heere
that learne their Daughters to Dance,
to vſe Rhetorick termes, to haunt companies,
to ſcoffe and flout, to paint and
colour their faces, to decke their fingers
with Rings, and their necks with Iewels,
as though they were Iewel-ſellers,
pretending to keepe a ſhop: but in
the end it will happen to them, as it did
to the Prophet Dauid, 2. King. 13. & 15.
whoſe ſinne was puniſhed in his children,
which were moſt of them ſo wicked, that
the one of them defloured his owne Siſter,
and the other killed his Brother, and afterwards
ſought the death of his owne Father,
and chaſed him out of his Kingdome.
               
               The ancient Philoſophers maintained
this argument, that all ſinnes committed
in this world, vvere puniſhed in the

World to come, except the ſinne that
Man committed in the bringing vp of
his children, and for that hee ſuffereth
puniſhment in this world: for the father
can giue nothing to his child, but
fraile and mortall fleſh, by the corruption
whereof, the life taketh end; but
by good learning and knowledge, eternall
praiſe & memory is gotten. Therefore
to conclude, if children haue been
in great miſery, being nouriſhed with
ſpotted milke, yet the miſery doubleth
in thoſe that ſhould cauſe them to bee
inſtructed: for the food of the body
is more vile then the food of the ſoule.
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               Of Mans ripe Age.
               HAuing finiſhed this our ſecond diſcourſe,
Man is growne to his full
perfection both of ſtrength and diſcretion,
and his heat being allayed by age,
behold other vanities which attend on
him, although not altogether ſo violently

ſcorching, yet more opinionated
and troubleſome, for hee entreth into
deeper cogitations and trauell in the
ſpirit. It is requiſit therefore that hee
frequent publike places, that he haunt
the company of thoſe that are touchſtones,
for to know the good from
euill. If he be come of a great and Noble
ſtocke, hee muſt make many enterpriſes
of Warre, put himſelfe in perils,
hazzard his life, and ſhead his bloud, to
die in the way of Honour, or elſe hee
ſhall bee reputed a daſtardly Coward,
and vtterly deſpiſed of all men. If hee
be of baſe eſtate, and that hee be called
to the knowledge of Arts, Sciences,
and needfull trades; yet for all that, he
runneth into a thouſand dangers, trauailes,
paines and troubles, as well of
the body as of the ſoule, hee toileth
day and night, and ſweateth water and
bloud, to get a maintenance during his
life, and oftentimes it is ſeene, that
what paines ſoeuer man taketh for his
liuing, yet it is ſcant ſufficient to ſerue
his neceſſitie. Let him be of any Vocation

or Calling whatſoeuer, there come
vnto him irremoueable cares, domeſticke
troubles, or the knowledge of
husbandry, or contentions in Law, or
the labour of painfull Mechanick Arts;
all to the end that he may get ſomwhat
for his children, who ſucking from him
(it may be) all that he hath, is onely requited
with ingratitude and reproch.
               Theſe infelicities are the occaſion
that man is alwayes wearied with the
things preſent, deſiring onely things
to come, and continually endeuouring
to catch at ſomewhat that is already
eſcaped; whereas if by chance they
obtaine it, it diſſolueth to nothing,
as it is in their hands, or if they enioy
it, yeelds no contentment, nor doth any
wiſe appeaſe their feare, or ſatisfie
their deſire.
               It is not therefore without cauſe
that M. Aurelius was wont to ſay
(when hee conſidered the miſery of
mankinde) I muſed in my mind, ſaid he,
whether there might bee found in any
age, a man that could vaunt, that in all

his life-time he neuer taſted aduerſitie:
and aſſuredly if there might bee ſuch a
one found, he would be ſuch a fearfull
monſter vpon earth, that all liuing
things would bee amazed to behold
him. Then he concluded after this ſort,
ſaying; And in the end I found my
owne thoughts true; for hee that vvas
yeſterday rich, was to day poore; hee
that was yeſterday in health, was to day
ſicke; he that laughed yeſterday, did to
day weepe: he that was yeſterday in
proſperitie, was to day in aduerſitie;
and he that was yeſterday aliue, was to
day dead.
               But let vs now returne to our former
matter, and ſet downe our diſcourſes
in order.
               What liuing man is he in al the world,
that hath giuen himſelfe to any Science,
or otherwiſe to liue, but that at
one time or other hee diſliked of his
owne profeſſion, and is weary thereof?
               And for the better vnderſtanding of
the ſame, we will particularly diſcourſe
the miſeries and troubleſome liues of

all the principall eſtates, liuing vpon the
boſome of the ſinfull earth.
               Searching into all eſtates of men, we
ſhall finde that aboue all other mortall
creatures, Kings are moſt liberally prouided
for: for what maketh man appeare
more happy in this world, then
Goods, Honors, Dignities and Rule;
licence to doe good or euill, without
controulement, power to exerciſe liberalitie,
and all kinde of pleaſure, as well
of the body, as of the minde: all that
may be wiſhed for, to the contentation
of Man, either in varietie of meates,
magnificence in ſeruice, or in veſtures,
to raiſe at their pleaſure the meaneſt
man to high place, and with a frowne
diſgrace the mightieſt? All which is
continually at a Princes command:
there is nothing that may pleaſe the
memory, or flatter the deſires of the
fleſh, but is prepared for them euen
from their cradles, onely to make their
liues more happy and full of felicitie.
               But now if wee iudge of their liues
vprightly, and weigh them in a true

ballance, wee ſhall finde, that the ſelfeſame
things that make them happy in
this world, are the very inſtruments of
vice, and the cauſe of greater ſorrowes:
for what auaile their coſtly ornaments,
honorable ſeruices, and delicate
meates, when that they are in continuall
feare to bee poiſoned, wrong ſeduced,
and often beguiled by their ſeruitors?
Haue wee not had experience thereof
many times? Doe not Hiſtories report
that ſome men haue beene poiſoned
with Pages, and with the ſmoake of
Torches? Wee may reade likewiſe of
certaine Emperours that durſt not lye
downe to reſt in the night, before they
had cauſed their beds to be lyen in, and
all the corners of their chambers to bee
ſearched, leſt they ſhould bee ſtrangled
or murthered in their ſleepes. Others
that would not permit any Barbers to
touch their faces, for feare that in trimming
of their heads or beards, they
would cut their throats: and yet to this
day they are in ſuch feare, that they
dare not put meat into their mouthes,

before their taſter haue taſted thereof.
               What felicity can a Prince or King
haue,That Kings and Soueraignes are not more free from miſery then other inferiour perſons. that hath many thouſands of men
vnder their gouernment, when he muſt
watch for all; heare the complaints and
cryes of euery one; procure euery mans
ſaufeguard; prouoke ſome 
                     •
                  o doe well
by liberall gifts; and others, by terrour
& feare? He muſt nouriſh peace amongſt
his Subiects, and defend his Realme againſt
the inuaſion of forraine enemies,
beſides many other calamities that are
depending vpon a Regall Crowne.
               But now touching the vnhappy ſtates
of wicked Princes, vnto whom three
kindes of people are moſt agreeable and
familiar. The firſt are flatterers, which
be the chiefe enemies to all vertue, and
they that impoiſon their ſoules with a
poiſon ſo peſtiferous, that it is contagious
to all the world: their Princes folly,
they call Prudence; their crueltie,
Iuſtice; their wantonneſſe, Loue; their
fornications, Pleaſures and paſtimes: if
they be couetous, they call it good huſbandry;
if they be prodigall, they call it

liberalitie. So that there is no vice in a
Prince, but they cloake it vnder the ſhadow
of ſome vertue.
               The ſecond ſort are ſuch, who neuer
reſt night,The inuenters if new Patents. but in the morning they
bring in ſome new inuention or other,
how to taxe and draw money from the
poore people; and generally all their
ſtudy is imployed to bee waſtefull, and
prodigall in the exactions and miſery of
the poore Commons.Enuious, & inſatiable Courtiers.
               
               The third and laſt ſort are ſuch, that
vnder the cloake of kindneſſe and honeſtie
(counterfetting good men) haue
alwaies their eyes fixed vpon other
mens liuings, and make themſelues reformers
of Vices.
               They inuent wicked & falſe deuices,
not only how to get other mens goods,
but oftentimes their liues, who before
God are moſt innocent.
               Behold, heere you may well ſee the
manifold miſeries that compaſſe Scepters,
and States of Princes: Heere are
the thornes that they receiue, in recompence
of their brightneſſe and royall

dignity, which ought like a Lampe to
giue light to all the world: but when it
is eclipſed or darkened with any vice,
it is more reproachfull in them then in
any other priuate perſon whatſoeuer:
for they ſinne not onely in the fault
which they commit, but alſo by the
example which they giue.
               The aboundance of honours & pleaſures
that Princes enioy, ſerueth as a
bait to induce them to euill, and are the
very matches to giue fire to vice.Wealth inticeth men to ſinne. What
was Saul before hee was made King,
whoſe life is ſhewed in the holy Scriptures,
whom God did elect? Yet hee
made a ſudden eclipſe or changing.
How wonderfull was the beginning of
the raigne of King Salomon; the which
being ouercome with royall pleaſures,
gaue himſelfe as a prey to women! Of
two and twenty Kings of Iudah, there
is found but fiue or ſixe that haue continued
in their vertue.
               If we conſider the eſtate of the Aſſyrians,
Perſians, Grecians & Egyptians, we
ſhall finde more of them wicked then

good. If we conſider what the Romane
Emperours were, (which hath been the
moſt flouriſhing Cōmon-wealth in the
vvorld) vvee ſhall finde them ſo ouercome
with vices, and all kinde of cruelties,
that I doe almoſt abhortre to ſpeake
of their corrupt and defiled liues. What
was the eſtate of their Common-wealth,
before that Scilla and Marius
did murmure againſt it; before that
Cataline and Catulla did perturbe it; before
that Caeſar and Pompey did ſlander
it; before that Auguſtus and Marcus
Antonius did deſtroy it; before that
Tiberius and Caligula did defame it; before
that Domitian and Nero did depraue
it? For although they made it rich
vvith many Kingdomes, yet were the
vices they brought with them, greater
then the Kingdomes they gained. For
their goods and riches are conſumed,
yet their vices remaine vnto this day.
What memory remaineth of Romulus
that founded the Citie of Rome? Of
Numa Pompilius that erected the Capitoll?
Of Aurus Marius, that compaſſed

it with walles? Did not they
ſhew what felicity remaineth in high
eſtates, who are more ſubiect to the aſſaults
of Fortune, then any other earthly
creature? For many times the thred
of life breaketh, when they thinke leaſt
of death, and then the infamy of thoſe
that bee wicked, remaineth written in
Hiſtories, for a perpetuall memorie
thereof. The which thing all eſtates
ought more to regard a thouſand times,
then the tongue that ſpeaketh euill,
which can but ſhame the liuing: but
booke record a perpetuall infamie for
euer: which thing beeing duely conſidered
of by many Emperours & Kings
in times paſt, forſooke their Scepters,
and Royall Empires, and betooke
them to an obſcure life, reſting better
contented with a little in quiet, then to
enioy with full ſaile the crooked honors
of the world.
            
            
               
               CHAP. IIII.
               The life of Courtiers.
               BVt aboue other vanities and miſeries
which corruption doth continually
attend, there doth appeare in
Princes Courts a certaine Noble captiuitie,
where, vnder the colour of
Greatneſſe, is the higheſt Seruitude,
and thoſe gilded chaines that fetter
mens minds. He which will liue heere,
muſt alwayes be masked, and prepared
in one houre to conuert himſelfe into
twenty ſeuerall ſhapes, to entertaine
many ſeruants, but no friends. Their
innocency is accounted meere ſimplicitie;
and to affirme any thing, is to diſproue
the ſame. There are two ſorts of
people in the Court which hate one
the other, each knowing of it: notwithſtanding,
there is alwayes an emulation
betwixt them, which ſhould
firſt attempt any point of Honour, to
doe the other ſeruice, and bee the laſt
that ſhould end it. But ſuch ridiculous

complements are like vnto Anticke
actions. Enuy, which doth ſupplant and
deceiue his neighbour, or that doth
ſnarle in ſecret, is there perpetually, and
to appeaſe it, there is no way but by miſerie.
Vices and degenerate actions, are
eſteemed among Courtiers, as precepts
and part of their compoſition. Not to
bee corrupted by them, there requireth
more faith then a graine of Muſtardſeed.
As Crowes build their neſt among
the higheſt boughes, ſo doth the
diuell among the higheſt of men, where
ſpreading his wings, he clocketh for his
little ones,New Duels doe adde to one much reputation: for as it is a ſhame for a man to come into the world; ſo they hold it an honour to ſend him out of it. which are his Vices, becauſe
there they remaine more expoſed to
the ſight, and neuer appeare but vvith
authoritie. There alſo ſhall you ſee Caualiers,
who out of their gallant diſpoſition
will kill one the other, vpon the interpretation
of a word: a manifeſt confeſſion
that their life is not much worth,
ſith they will ſell it ſo good cheape.
Notwithſtanding theſe kinde of men,
that are in theſe occaſions ſo valiant,
do fly away, when they ſhould ſuffer the

leaſt thing for Gods cauſe. Surely many
ſuch are required to make one good
Martyr for the holy Goſpell.
               There be ſome kinde of Courtiers ſo
ſubtill and crafty, that they doe play as
the Fiſherman, who as ſoone as he hath
gotten any thing in his Net, giueth ouer
the Court, and goeth his way. Other
ſome there be that play all out: and
other that remaine vntill they become
wondrous rich, and in the end they are
made to reſtore all backe againe.
               There are alſo others that doe nothing
but inuent meanes to inlarge their
owne treaſures, and become vvealthy
with ſpoiling poore people. Princes
doe by them many times as wee doe by
our hogges; wee let them fatten, to the
end we may eate them afterwards: ſo
likewiſe are they ſuffered many times
to enrich themſelues, to be diſpoſed afterwards
when they are fat: and one
that is new come, oftentimes is preferred
in their places.
               By this you may ſee, that Courtiers
oftentimes doe ſell their liberty, to become

rich, for they muſt obey all commandements;
they muſt frame themſelues
to laugh when the Prince laugheth,
to weepe when hee weepeth, approue
that which hee approueth, and
condemne that which he condemneth.
They muſt alter and change their natures
to bee ſeuere, with thoſe that are
ſeuere; ſorrowfull, with thoſe that are
ſorrowfull, and in a manner transforme
themſelues, according to the nature of
him whom they will pleaſe, or elſe they
ſhall get nothing. To bee briefe, they
muſt frame themſelues according to his
manners & nature, and yet many times
one little offence ſtayneth all the ſeruice
they haue done in the life before.
               Many in Princes Courts put off their
caps to them, whom they would gladly
ſee cut ſhorter by the head, and often
bow their knees to do them reuerence,
whom they wiſh had broken their
neckes.
               Here you may ſee the life of a great
number of vicious Courtiers, which is
no life, but rather a lingring death:

heere you may ſee wherein their Youth
is imployed,Mens reward for thoſe follies and deboiſtneſſe, committed in their Youth. which is no youth, but a
tranſitory death: for when they come
to age, they bring nothing from thence
but gray heads, their feet full of Gouts,
their backes full of paine, their hearts
full of ſorrow, and their ſoules filled
with ſinne.
            
            
               CHAP. V.
               The life of Magistrates and wicked
Iudges.
               NOw our diſcourſe of Courtiers being
paſt,Magiſtrates and wicked Iudges. it is requiſite we ſpeake of
things done in the ciuill life, and to
how many miſeries it is ſubiect. For although
it be at this day a degree moſt
noble, & neceſſary for the peace of mans
life; yet ſhall we finde, that it deſerues
to haue his part in this Pilgrimage, as
well as others: and if there be any delectation,
pleaſure, or Honour, depending
thereon, yet it is tranſitory and inconſtant.
               
                  
Firſt, knowing that all the actions of
Magiſtrates paſſe before the eyes of the
common people, whoſe iudgements in
matters of State be but ſimple, yet haue
they a certaine ſmell or ſauour to know
the good from euill. Wherefore thoſe
that be Iudges and Magiſtrates, be ſubiect
(as in a Play) to bee hiſſed at, and
chaſed away with ſhame and confuſion.
               For the haire-brain'd people vvhich
is compared to a Monſter with many
heads, are mutable, vncertaine, fraudulent,
apt to wrath and mutinie, ready to
praiſe or diſpraiſe, without wiſedome
or diſcretion, variable in their talke, vnlearned
and obſtinate.
               Therefore it behooueth that the life
of a Iudge or Magiſtrate bee ſincere
and vertuous. For as he iudgeth openly,
ſo ſhall hee be iudged of the people ſeuerally,A Notable ad
                        •
                     ertiſement for Judges and Magiſtrates.
not onely in matters of waight,
and importance, but in thoſe of ſmall
conſequence. For alwayes the rude
people will find ſomewhat to reforme,
as the 
                     〈◊◊◊…〉
                   at their

Law-maker Licurgus, for that he went
alwayes holding downe his head. The
Venecians defamed wiſe Cato, in his eating,
and accounted Pompeius vnciuill:
for that he would ſcratch with one finger
onely: yet theſe are but few in compariſon
of other good men, that the
common ſort haue perſecuted, baniſhed,
and in the end put to death.
               If that great Oratour Demoſthenes
were aliue, hee could ſay ſome-what,
who after he had a long time been a iuſt
and faithfull Gouernour of the Common-wealth
of Athens, was in the end
without cauſe vniuſtly baniſhed. Moſes
and many other holy men haue ſo
many times taſted the fury of the common
people, that if they were this day
liuing, they would powre out moſt
grieuous complaints againſt them.
               Now wee haue ſhewed and ſet forth
the miſeries that proceede from common
people; ſo, muſt wee in like ſort
put into the ballance the errours and
corruptions that are found in wicked
Iudges; of the which ſort, ſome are

corrupted with feare: for ſuch feare they
haue, that rather then they will diſpleaſe
a Prince or a great Lord, will
violate Iuſtice, like Pilate that condemned
Chriſt, for feare that hee had to
diſpleaſe the Emperour Tiberius.
               
               Other Magiſtrates are corrupted by
loue, as was Herod, who for to pleaſe
the fooliſh loue of a Damſell that danced,
condemned Saint Iohn Baptiſt, although
that hee knew that hee was iuſt
and innocent.
               Some are many times corrupted by
hatred, as was the chiefe Prieſt that condemned
Saint Paul to bee ſtoned to
death, though he deſerued it not.
               Some Magiſtrates are corrupted by
ſiluer and gold, and other gifts & preſents,
as were the children of the Prophet
Samuel: and this diſeaſe is ſo contagious,
that I feare (at this day) many
are infected with it.
               They all loue rewards (ſaith the Prophet)
they all looke for gifts: they doe
not right to the Orphane, and the Widdowes
complaint commeth not before

them. And in another place, Woe be to
you that are corrupted by money, by
hatred or loue; and which iudge the
good to be euill, and the euill good; making
the light darkneſſe, and the darkneſſe
light. Woe bee to you that haue
not reſpects to the ſecrets of things, but
to the deſerts of men: that regard not
equity, but gifts that are giuen; that regard
not Iuſtice▪ but money. You are
diligent in rich mens cauſes, but you
deferre the cauſe of the poore: you are
to them moſt cruell & rigorous Iudges,
but vnto the rich, kinde and tractable.
               The Prophet Ieremy cryeth out againſt
wicked Iudges, and ſaith they are
magnified and become rich: they haue
left the Orphanes, and haue not done
Iuſtice for the poore; Shall not I therefore
puniſh theſe things, ſaith the Lord,
and my ſoule take vengeance on ſuch
manner of people?
               Heere alſo the ſentence that S. Iames
pronounceth againſt them at the day of
Iudgement: You haue condemned and
killed the iuſt: you haue liued in wantonneſſe

in this world, and taken your
eaſe: Now therefore (ſaith the Lord of
Hoſts) weepe and howle in your wretchedneſſe
that ſhall come vpon you,
your garments are moth-eaten, your
gold and ſiluer is cankered, and the ruſt
thereof ſhall be a witneſſe againſt you,
and it ſhall eate your fleſh as it were
fire; for the complaints of the poore
are aſcended vpto my Throne.
               Theſe are the complaints that the
Prophets and Apoſtles made againſt
wicked Iudges and Magiſtrates: and
likewiſe the Cenſures that our good
God hath thundered againſt them.
            
            
               CHAP. VI.
               Of Mans eſtate being in wedlocke.
               MAny hold, there is no ioy nor pleaſure
in the world, which may bee
compared to marriage: for, ſay they,
there is ſuch fellowſhip betweene the
parties coupled, that they ſeeme two
mindes to be transformed into one; and

likewiſe that both their good fortune
and bad is common to them both, their
cares to be equall, and their ioyes equall:
and to be briefe, that all things
are in common betweene them two.
               Truely if wee account it pleaſure to
commit our ſecrets to our friends and
neighbors; how much greater is the ioy,
when we may diſcouer our thoughts to
her that is ioyned to vs, by ſuch a knot
of affinitie, that we put as much truſt
in her, as in our ſelues, make her whole
treaſurer, or faithfull keeper of the ſecrets
of our minde?
               What greater witneſſe of feruent
loue, and vndiſſolueable amity can
there be, then to forſake Father, Mother,
Siſter and Brother, and generally
all their kinred, till they become enemy
to themſelues, for to follow a Husband,
that doth honour and reuerence her;
and hauing all other things in diſdaine,
ſhe only cleaueth to him? If he be rich,
ſhe keepeth his goods; if he be poore,
ſhe is companion with him in pouertie;
if he be in proſperitie, his felicitie is redoubled

in her: if he be in aduerſitie,
hee beareth but the one halfe of the
griefe; and furthermore ſhe comforteth
him, aſſiſteth and ſerueth him. If a man
will remaine ſolitary in his houſe, his
wife keepeth him company: If he will
goe into the fields, ſhe conducteth him
with her eye, ſo farre as ſhe can ſee him;
ſhe deſireth and honoureth him: being
abſent, ſhee complaineth, and ſigheth
and wiſheth his company: being come
home, he is welcommed and receiued
vvith the beſt ſhew and tokens of loue.
And for to ſpeake truth, it ſeemeth that
a Wife is a gift from heauen, granted to
a man, as vvell for the contentation
of Youth, as the reſt and ſolace of
Age.
               Nature can giue vs but one Father,
and one Mother, but marriage preſenteth
many in our children, the which
doe reuerence and honour vs, and are
more deare vnto vs then our own ſelues
(for being yong, they prattle, play,
laugh, and ſhew vs many pretty toyes:
they prepare vs an infinite number of

pleaſures; and it ſeemeth they are giuen
vs by nature, to paſſe away part of our
miſerable life. If wee be afflicted vvith
age, they ſhew the duty of children,
cloze vp our eies, & bring vs to the earth
from whence we came. They are our
bones, our fleſh & bloud: for in ſeeing
them, we ſee our ſelues. The father beholding
his children, may be vvell aſſured
that he ſeeth his liuely youth renued
in their faces, in whom wee are almoſt
regenerate and borne againe. Many are
the ioyes & ſweet pleaſures in mariage,
which for breuities ſake, I omit & paſſe
ouer. But if we doe well conſider it, and
weigh it in a iuſt ballance, we ſhall finde
that amongſt theſe Roſes, are many
Thornes growing; and amongſt theſe
ſweet ſhowres of raine, there falleth
much Hayle.
               But with reuerence now I craue pardon
of all vertuous Ladies and Noble
women, that with patience I may diſcouer
my intent; and that my preſumption
may not gaine the leaſt frowne
from their chaſte browes: for to the

vicious I ſpeake, and not to them whoſe
breſts harbour the liberall Fountaines
of vertue and wiſedome.
               The Athenians being a people much
commended for their prudence and
wiſedome, ſeeing that Husbands and
Wiues could not agree, becauſe of an
infinite number of diſſentions that
chanced, were conſtrained to ordaine
certaine Magiſtrates in their countrey,
whom they called Reconcilers of the
married ones: the office of whom was
to ſet agreement betweene the Husband
and the Wife. The Spartanes and
Romanes had alſo ſuch like lawes and
orders amongſt them: ſo great was the
inſolence and raſhneſſe of ſome women
towards their Husbands.
               In this age there are but few, I thinke,
can beare patiently the charges of marriage,
or can endure the vnbridled rage
of ſome women: and to ſpeake truth
vvithout flatterie, if thou takeſt her rich,
thou makeſt thy ſelfe a bond-ſlaue; for
thinking to marry thine equall, thou
marrieſt a commanding Miſtris. If thou

takeſt her foule, thou canſt not loue her;
if thou takeſt her faire, it is an Image at
thy gate to bring thee company. Beauty
is a Tower that is aſſailed of all the
vvorld, and therefore it is a hard thing
to keepe that, when euery one ſeeketh
to haue the key. This is the concluſion,
riches cauſeth a woman to bee proud,
beauty maketh her ſuſpected, and hard-fauourednes
cauſeth her to be hated.
Therefore Diponares hauing taſted the
Martyrdomes of marriage, ſaid, that
there were but 2. good dayes in all the
life of marriage; vvhereof the one was
the wedding day, vpon which is made
good cheere, the Bride freſh and faire,
and of all pleaſures, the beginning is
moſt delectable. The other good day
is, when the woman dyeth: for then the
Husband is out of bondage and thraldome.
Yet for all this, a woman is to
a man a neceſſary euill, and one vvhom
hee cannot well liue without; ſeeing
that there is nothing more hard to find
in this world then a good woman, a
good Mule, & a good Goat, being three

vnhappy beaſts. And to conclude,
there is nothing more piercing then her
outragious words; more to bee feared
then her boldneſſe; more cruell then her
malice, nor more dangerous then her
fury: beſides many hurtfull diſcommodities
of their Huſwifery.
            
            
               CHAP. VII.
               The vanity and inconſtancie of
women.
               THe moſt part of women are vaine;The Author, as before, craues pardon of all modeſt Religious, and vertuous women, whoſe vertue hee doth honour and reuerence.
not onely out of weakeneſſe and
example, but alſo by expreſſe profeſſion:
All their ſtudy is how to eſtabliſh
vanity, and about this, they haue great
ſtrife and emulation. For amongſt theſe
worldly luſtres, you ſhall ſee women
corrupted with delicacies, ſubiecting
themſelues to faſhions, and aſpects of
others, loſing the vſe of their feet, by
pleaſing their fancy with too much
neatneſſe, imploying the fourth part of
their life in attiring themſelues: wearing

haire bought out of Tire-womens
ſhops, painting their faces, Idolatrizing
their owne bodies, yet neuertheleſſe
crucifying them with a iuſt puniſhment,
ignorant of all things, yet ſtudying to
ſpeake well, viewing themſelues in a
Looking-Glaſſe a thouſand times in a
day, and calling conſultations vpon a
particular haire. Poore creatures! vvho
in altering the colour of their haire, and
adding ſomewhat to their height, by
extraordinary ſhooes, would diſproue
the ſaying of Chriſt, vvhen hee ſought
to verifie,Mat. 15. 36. & 6. 27. 
                  that man could not make one
haire white or blacke, nor adde one cubite
to his ſtature. Make but a collection of
the time that a curious vvoman doth
ſpend through al her life, in dreſſing her
ſelfe, and you ſhall find that it is more
then a fourth part of her age.
               This curioſity hath ſome affinity with
ſeruitude, who amongſt them will apply
ſo much time in doing good works:
and how commeth it to paſſe, that thoſe
habits which were giuen vnto man for
to hide his ſinne, are now conuerted into

to ſinne it ſelfe? What is the occaſion
that that, which God hath ordained to
couer mans ſhame, ſerues now to ſet
forth his glory? That that, vvhich was
an argument of humilitie, is now become
the matter of pride? There is nothing
ſo contrarie to the will and glory
of God, as that vaine vanity: for a woman
that hindreth the going of her
owne feete, by wearing ſuch nice and
high Pantofles: how can ſhe fly away into
a ſtrange Countrey for Gods cauſe?
A fleſh that is ſo delicate, how can it
endure to take reſt, being impriſoned
for the teſtimonie of the Diuine Goſpell?
A vvoman which by reaſon of her
painting, cannot tolerate the heat of the
Sunne; how can ſhee endure the fire
for the Word of God? Obſerue our
Preparations to ſuffer afflictions, and
peruſe our Apprentiſhip to martyrdom,
and in the end you will finde that Salomon
hath not ſeene ſuch things in his
time, and that the vanity of vanities
which he ſpeakes of, is inferiour to the
vanitie of this age.
               
                  
But let ſuch beware, that the ſame
happen not to them, which the Prophets
write againſt the women of Ieruſalem;
who reproued their pride, their
vnſhamefac't lookes, their rowling eies,
their attire, Chaines, Iewels, Bracelets,
and other their vaine-glorious faſhions.
It will happen to you (ſaith the Lord of
Hoſts) that in ſtead of perfumes, you
ſhall haue ſtinke; in ſtead of haire, baldnes,
and the faireſt young men among
you, ſhall paſſe through the edge of the
Sword, and the ſtrongeſt ſhall be ſlaine,
and periſh in the warres.
            
            
               CHAP. VIII.
               Of Couetouſneſse.
               BVt of all the miſeries that happen to
Man in this world, theſe hereafter
following, are the greateſt.
               And firſt, let vs conſider of Couetouſneſſe,
wherewith many men are ſo
farre ouercome, that they will hazard
their life to win a little money; that is,

to loſe their beeing, for to gaine the
meanes to bee: which miſſe the end to
obtaine the acceſſories; as he which ſelleth
his Sword to buy a ſheath; or his
Horſe, to haue ſome prouender; and to
gaine worldly pelfe, not to ſerue his occaſions,
but rather for himſelfe to ſerue
it; to haue riches as one hath a Feauer,
which doth more poſſeſſe the grieued,
than the grieued it. To bee like vnto a
greedy dogs, which lying vpon hay, &
not eating it himſelfe, will ſnarle if any
other commeth neere vnto it. O miſerable
people, that liue poorely, to dye
rich! that are moſt couetous in their
declining age, which is to prouide for a
tedious iourney, when it is euen finiſhed.
But a man that feareth God, for
to auoid ſo great an inconuenience, will
conſider in himſelfe, what is the worth
and eſtimation of ſuch droſſe: and will
conceipt, that theſe things are oft giuen
to wicked men, as ſeducers of mindes
from true piety, and the diuine knowledge
of the Almighty; who ſheweth
vs what eſtimation wee ſhould haue of

riches, in giuing largely to the wicked;
within whoſe breſts it doth fall, as a
purſe into a ſtinking priuy. Ieſus Chriſt
doth giue vs an example what repute is
to be had of it, in committing his purſe
to Iudas, when as he gaue his holy Spirit
to his faithfull Apoſtles. And if hee
had thought wealth to haue beene the
true felicitie, no doubt he would haue
gathered it more abundantly: but hee
had not ſo much, where to lay his head
on. He hath willed vs to loue pouerty
by his example: And the great King of
the World will deſpiſe all things, that
ſhall entice vs to affect the contrary. A
little wealth will ſuffice vs to liue well,
and leſſe to dye happily.1. Tim. 6. Godlines with
contententment is great gaine: we are
come naked into the world, and naked
ſhall we goe out; peaceable pouertie is
much better than troubleſome riches.
But man is ſo fooliſh, that he had rather
draw water out of a great diſturbed Riuer,
with difficulty and perill, then from
a little cleere brooke, with facility and
eaſe; had rather take a great maſſe of

gold with torment and danger, then a
little with peace and ſecurity; & in fine,
he will bee nothing the more ſatisfied.
Moreouer, he thinketh that to bee loſt,
which was neuer gayned by him: This
kind of Auarice is alwayes linked with
enuy. If peraduenture a man loſe his
worldly fortunes, (according vnto that
which Salomon ſaith: That riches betaketh
her to her wings) it doth ſometimes
diſtract humane ſence; for, to ranſacke
a couetous perſon, is to flay his
skin from his body; to take from him
his riches, is to depriue him of his heart;
ſince that ſuch doe wholy deuote both
heart and affection to their wealth.
               Who euer ſaw the ſinne of couetouſnes
more deepely rooted in the world,
then at this day? for all the Cities, Prouinces,
and Kingdomes of the earth, be
very ſhops and ſtore-houſes of Couetouſneſſe
and auarice. This is the world
which the Prophets did fore-ſhew, that
men ioyne houſe to houſe, and land
to land, as though themſelues would
alone dwell vpon the earth.
               
                  
Couetouſneſſe is the well-ſpring of
miſeries:Couetouſnes the ſource and originall of all wickednes and abomination. for from thence proceed war
and deſtruction, and the great effuſion
of bloud, wherewith the earth is ouerflowne.
From Couetouſneſſe proceed
Murders, Treaſons, Thefts, Vſuries, forſwearings,
the corruption of witneſſes,
& peruerting of Iudgements; from Couetouſnes,
the tedious delayes in Law,
and lingring of Suites doe proceede;
And to be ſhort, from thence commeth
all kind of wickedneſſe.
               This grieuous ſinne is growne ſo familiar
among men, that many liue without
mercy, in ſuch ſort, that now wee
may ſee the ſtreets full of poore beggers,
naked and cold with pouerty; with
an infinite number of baniſhed women,
driuen out of their Countries, bearing
their children in their armes; wanting
that which couetous men hoord vp
with ſuch cares, that they rather make it
their god, and will rather let a poore
body dye at their gates, then refreſh him
with food.
               Therefore let vs now leaue theſe wicked

men,Of Enuie, that cruell, abominable, and bloudy vice, which doth generaly raigne now in this our degenerate age. Idolaters of their treaſures,
with the couetous rich man mentioned
in the holy Scripture, and ſpeake of another
Vice, which is called Enuy; a malady
wherwith many minds in this new
world are grieuouſly afflicted.
               The time is now come, that the whole
earth is nothing but a very place of the
Enuious: a vice which is the oldeſt of al
vices, and hath bin vſed in the worlds
infancy: The experience thereof, was
approued in the firſt Age, in Adam and
the Serpent, in Abel and Cain, in Iacob
and Eſau, in Ioſeph and his Brethren, in
Saul and Dauid, in Haman and Mardocheus,
the which purſued not one another
for their riches, but for the enuy
that the one bore to āother. But all this
is nothing to the enuy which is vſed amongſt
men at this day: which wicked
vice not onely raigneth among the
common ſort, but alſo amongſt the
higher: for when they are mounted to
the top of Fortunes wheele, and thinke
peaceably to enioy the fauour of Princes;
behold, ſuddenly the enuy of ſome

other conſpires againſt them, and cauſeth
them to bee diſdained and caſt
out of fauuor. Therefore I thinke there
is no other meanes to auoid Enuy, then
to auoid Dignity and Rule: The reaſon
is, that we are the children of Enuie,
and he that leaueth moſt goods, leaueth
moſt enuy.
               For this cauſe,Of Ambition, the cauſe of our fall and ruine. the Elders counſelled
the rich that they ſhould not dwell
neere the poore, nor the poore, neere
the rich: for the one are enuied for their
wealth, and the other for their pouertie.
               Much like vnto this is Ambition,
which is an extreme deſire to aſpire to
honour and greatneſſe.
                     Bernard. Ambitioſorum Arcana ſunt periculoſiſſima. Amongſt that
multitude of people which preſſe themſelues
in mounting vp, thoſe which follow,
endeauour to march vpon them
that goe before; and at length, three
parts of them being driuen to ſtay behind,
ſwell with enuy and griefe at the
reſt: when as thoſe that haue attained
to the heighth of honour, draw vp after
them their ſcaling-ladders, fearing that

otherwiſe ſome by aſpiring, might paralell
their worth. But oftentimes, when
they haue poſſeſt themſelues with theſe
dignities,Maledictus ſuperbus eſt, tam impudens voluntartè ſe ſepareta Deo. they are like Apes, which hauing
once climbed to the top of a tree
or houſe, doe ſit, and make ill fauoured
faces at paſſengers, and retaine the people
to gaze at their moppes: For then
ordinarily their weakeneſſe doth encreaſe,
and their vices grow eminent,
inſomuch that they find more care and
feare in that ſtate of greatnes,Mans felicitie and happineſse doth not depend onely vpon greatneſſe and degnity: for contentment exceedeth riches. than whē
they were moſt meane. The higheſt
boughes are moſt ſhaken by the winde,
and the points of Steeples moſt beaten
with ſtormes and lightening. A man
hath leaſt mind to ſleepe in beds of
ſilke embroidered with gold. The greateſt
feare of poyſoning, is at Tables furniſhed
with variety of delicate diſhes;
whereas on the contrary, it hath not bin
heard that any haue receiued hurt out
of woodden Cups.
               After an innocent trauell, ſleepe ſeemeth
pleaſing in a bed of ſtraw.
            
            
               
               CHAP. IX.
               Of petty-fogging ſtrifes, and Law-contentions.
               BVt now behold another ſort of vanitie,
which doth much vexe & trouble
man; A roaring, crying, and turbulent
vanity, which is armed with ſtings,
and couered with ſubtilty, which imployeth
all the beſt part of mans life in
petty-fogging ſtrifes,Take Fees with both hands, gull their Clients, and make them like bare-headed Vaſſals, pray and pay ſoundly, for their importunate bawling. and amongſt the
controuerſies of importunate proceſſe.
Doe but enter into ſome great Hall or
place of pleading, you will admire at
the confuſed murmure, the corrupted
diſcipline, the weariſome courſes, and
contentious humours, and will truely
perceiue that in carriage of all theſe
things, there is no mention of God, vnleſſe
perchance in ſwearing. And that
there in the meane time, while that two
perſons do cōſume their eſtates to gaine
a proceſſe, commeth a third and beguileth
them both of the prey, and oftentimes
their charge in following, ſurmounts

the principall. O how many
men do liue by the loſſe of others? How
many would faſt without riches, if all
thoſe that endeuour to conſume one
the other,An excellent Simile. ſhould but enter into familiaritie
and friendſhip, I doe thinke that
God doth perceiue this confuſed and
murmuring multitude, in the ſame faſhion
as we doe ſee a little Hillocke full
of Ants running together pell mell,
without order or reaſon. Some one
knowing theſe things to bee true, vvill
ſay neuertheleſſe, that there is in humane
life, ſome honeſt ſtudy; ſome
laudable knowledge; and many ciuill
and religious vertues, which cannot be
compriſed vnder vanity, but deſerue to
be much eſteemed. In this opinion doth
principally appeare the vanity of mans
ſpirit: for if the beſt of humane actions
be but vaine; how much more is vanity
it ſelfe? Let vs firſt begin to examine
Studies and Sciences.
            
            
               
               CHAP. X.
               Of Philoſophy, and the knowledge of
diuers tongues.
               IN this moderne time, Learning is
onely reputed to be the knowledge of
Languages, and thoſe that are learned,
doe buſie themſelues to finde out how
the Romiſh women did ſpeake two
thouſand yeeres ſince: how the ancient
Romanes did apparell themſelues:
how people did then affect Comedies,
and to refine ſome Latine or Greeke
words, that are now growne out of vſe
by antiquitie. This kinde of courſe is
to vſe a golden Scepter for to take vp
dung, to imploy the vnderſtanding,
which ought to flouriſh in one, to ſome
baſe occupation, and to make a feaſt of
nothing but ſawce. For the knowledge
of theſe things, is onely profitable to
ſeaſon, no way good to nouriſh.
               Alſo there are ſome, that when they
haue attained old age, doe then ſearch
for words, when they ſhould haue the

things.The vanity, ſimplicitie, and folly of aged men. Many there are alſo that begin
to reade Grammar, when they are come
to vſe Spectacles. They learne Rules to
ſpeake eloquently in Latine, when they
are barbarous in their owne natiue language;
So that their life is a continuall
incongruity.
               Philoſophy and the Sciences haue
many things not onely more high, but
alſo harder: like vnto Pine-Apples in
the higheſt part of a Pine-tree, which
many ſeeking to obtaine, doe fall in
climing for them; whereas others doe
breake their teeth, that ſtriue to open
them. Such is this learning, that as it indueth
a man with much knowledge; ſo
alſo it addeth vnto him more care and
trouble of minde. For Salomon ſaith,
that hee that doth augment his knowledge,
doth but increaſe his ſorrow.
Ignorance is neuer without ſome commoditie:
And in concluſion, when we
haue gotten all the precepts of this
knowledge, it extends it ſelfe not farre,
and is of ſmall vſe. For Man cannot by
all his Philoſophy, attaine to the perfect

knowledge of a ſmall fly, or garden
Lettice, much leſſe of his owne compoſition.
We deſire to trauerſe our ſpirits
through all things,Hee that knowes much, and knowes not himſelfe, knowes nothing. but remaine
ſtrangers to our ſelues. Wee will know
much, and performe little. To ſpeake
more properly, our ſtudy is not labour,
but rather an idle action, which doth
torment vs without any hope of aduancement:Simile.
Like vnto the Squirrels
that runne continually within turning
Cages, thinking to get away, when as
after all their paines-taking, they ſtil remaine
in the ſame place. We learne little
with great paine, & that little doth
ſcarcely amend our imperfections, but
rather oftentimes adde more to them.
               One drop of wiſedome, guided by
the feare of God, is more worth then all
humane learning. For what doth it profit
a Lawyer in taking paines, to gaine
the proceſſe of another, if hee himſelfe
be at variance with God? What commodity
reapeth a Phyſician, to iudge of
another mans health, if hee himſelfe
bee not as yet reſolued to feele the

pulſe of his owne conſcience?
               What good is it to any that haue learned
the ancient Hiſtories, if they be ignorant
of thoſe things that paſſe in this
time? Or to haue learned by Aſtronomie
the motions and influences of heauen,
if they know not the means how to
come thither?
            
            
               CHAP. XI.
               Of Ciuill vertues and Pilgrims.
               THere bee ſome that vndertake long
tedious voyages, gaining many
Oaſts, but few friends, promiſing to
learne much in their iourney, vvhen
as oftentimes they returne more fooliſh
then they went; and perchance
hauing circuited the earth, doe ſorrowfully
bequeath their body to it,
for a concluſion to their perfected reſolutions,
as flyes when they haue paſſed
many times round about the Candle, at
length enter into the flame, after they
haue ſeene ſo much land there, onely

require a handfull for to couer them.
With this vanity are they iuſtly afflicted,
which make long Voyages towards
ſome Saint, for to deſire that they may
get children, when it may be, at their returne,
ſome officious neighbour hath
diſcharged them of that care.
               Yet ſome againe, perchance, wil ſay,
that our Ciuill Vertues haue ſome
things that are of more conſequence.
But heere out of this alſo doth bud another
vanity, ſeeing that thoſe vertues
haue no mention but by Vices: for
Choller giues an edge to Valor; Cowardize
doth make a man to bee more
circumſpect and wary; Ambition, Auarice,
and Enuy, are as ſtings to ſtudie
and induſtry.Such minds incite whores rather then chaſte and vertuous women. The feare of an ill report
in many women, is the cauſe of chaſtitie:
many are ſober out of a couetous
humour; other for neceſſity: friendſhips
are contracted, either for the deſire of
pleaſures, or for the hope of profit.
The firſt being no otherwiſe then a paltry
broker; nor the laſt then a Merchandize.
Religion it ſelfe doth often ſerue

for a cloake to ſuch couetous perſons:
for many follow Ieſus Chriſt (in the deſart,
only to haue bread, which is to ſubiect
their vnderſtanding only to the belly,
& the chiefe of vertues, onely to the
meaneſt of vices: but I know not which
is worſe, either to fly away from Chriſt,
or to follow him for gaine; to ſerue him
for money, or to ſerue the diuell for
gaine; whether it doth ſeeme moſt iniurious,
or ignominious towards God,
either to leaue his Sonne Ieſus Chriſt,
or in following him wrongfully, to
make him a Vallet to our concupiſcences.
What can theſe vertues then be,
that march vnder the pay of the diuell?
Surely this is alſo a great vanity, & manifeſt
corruption. Wherefore ſome (not
perceiuing any thing in the world,
which is exempted out of this vanitie,
and that vices & impietie haue infected
all ſorts of eſtates and conditions in humane
life) doe thinke to wreſt themſelues
out of it, by confining their bodies
to ſome deſart, and condemning
their minde to a perpetuall care:

where beeing ſecluded from all company,
they liue in continuall ſilence,
neuer ſpeaking but with God and themſelues.
               This ſolitary humour in many, doth
proceede from a brutiſh conceit; in others,
from a weake ſpirit, vncapable
of humane ſocietie; in others,
from an ambition to bee remarkeable
for ſome extraordinarie profeſſion,
and in others out of diſcontent-and
enuy, that they are wearied in
ſwimming againſt the current of this
worldly ſtreame; and in hauing receiued
all things ſtill contrarie to their
deſire. Notwithſtanding, I doe not
doubt, but that there bee ſome which
doe imbrace this ſort of ſolitary life, to
baniſh themſelues from the vices of this
world, and to ſerue God with more liberty.
But ſuch are much deceiued,
who willing to forſake the world, doe
returne farther into it by other meanes,
and are aſſaulted by worſe temptations:
for then paſſionate griefes, curious cogitations,
peeuiſh idleneſſe, Hypochondriacall

humours, deſpaire, preſumption,
and ſelfe-admiration, doe inſenſibly
glide into mens ſpirits, vnder the
profeſſion of an extraordinary ſanctity;
all which doe render the ſpirit diſcontented
of an inſolent melancholy, and
preſumptuous deuotion, which oftentimes
degenerateth into madnes, and
want of ſenſe.With good reaſon S. Auſtin ſaid, That Man pleaſeth God the beſt, that, circled with beauties, in the mids of Princes magnificent Palaces, could fly their alluring temptations. A ſolitary man, in the
extremity of his griefes and ſadneſſe,
hath no body to comfort him: and
comparing himſelf with none but himſelfe,
hath this conceit, that hee is ſome
excellent thing. But then luſtfull deſires
doe doubly burne within him: For
man is of this nature, that he thinketh
thoſe things moſt beautifull, which are
fartheſt remote from him. So S. Ierome
being in the middeſt of a Deſart, and
in his greateſt abſtinencie, doth confeſſe
that his minde was then amongſt
the Dances, & Ballads of yong maids;
and that he did burne with incontinency
and deſire. Beſides, the Diuell following
Ieſus Chriſt into the Deſart,
doth plainely ſhew that hee did iudge

that place moſt conuenient for temptation.A notable compariſon to confound the folly of men, who thinke to auoid temptations, by rendring and making themſelues Anchorites and Hermites.
Then if the Sonne of God was
aſſailed by the Diuel in the Deſart, how
ſcapeth an Hermite, or ſecluded perſon,
that can neuer be exempted? Therfore
the ſureſt way for a man to ſeparate
himſelfe from the world, not with
his feet, but with his affection: to expell
it altogether from him & his heart, fearing
otherwiſe that departing from this
world, notwithſtanding hee carrieth it
with him. For as it is poſſible to bee
worldly and vicious, liuing farre
from the world: So it is poſſible to
leaue the world, without flying into
a Deſart, and to liue alone in the middeſt
of company; to be within a Court
or Palace, ſpectator of vanity and troubles,
without participating of them; and
in the middeſt of a babbling multitude,
to talke only with himſelfe, & to entertaine
his thoughts with God. And in
the meane time, to imploy his indeuors
to the edification of the Church, ſtretching
out his hand to the erroneous, for
to re-guide them into the right way of

Saluation, rather then to hide his Talent
in the earth, and to cut himſelfe
cleane off from the body, and all ciuill
ſocietie, as an vnprofitable member. So
did the Apoſtles and thoſe glorious
Lampes, which haue inlightened the
Church of God, and which ſhine amongſt
vs to this day, they beeing
dead.
               I know well, that the opinion of Ariſtotle,
in the beginning of his Politiques
is true, that hee which is of a ſolitarie
diſpoſition, is either of a moſt diuine,
or very baſe ſpirit, becauſe that he
doth eſtrange himſelfe from all ſociety,
either for that hee hath vertues more
then humane; or that hee is ſo contemptible,
and meane, in reſpect of
Man, that he is vnworthy to approach
neere him. But let him know which
doth affect ſolitarineſſe, becauſe he doth
ſurpaſſe all men in vnderſtanding and
vertue, that he ought to repell that humour,
and to condeſcend by humilitie
and meekeneſſe, to the imperfections of
others, labouring for the good of the

Church or Common Wealth, either by
word or worke: For what are all thoſe
perfections more then ſhaddowes, and
obſcure traces of thoſe perfections that
are in Ieſus Chriſt;Non quaere-Chriſtus Ieſus glariam ſuam omnia. Igitur relinqnere debes etiam te ipſum ſpernere & abnegare vt frauris amicitia Iheſu Chriſti. notwithſtanding he
tooke vpon him our ſhape, and conuerſion
among men, that thereby he might
ſaue them, and winne ſoules to heauen.
Therefore to conclude this point, If to
flie from the World bee a vanity, how
much more to follow it? If vices and
torments do harbour in the deſart, how
much more in preſſes and throngs of
people? Truely, if vanity bee in euery
place, let vs ſay, that all is torment and
affliction of Spirit.
            
            
               CHAP. XI.
               Of old and decrepit age.
               BVt in the meane time that man is
buſied about al theſe vaine conceits,
while he is puſhing time with his ſhoulder,
endeauouring nothing all dayes of
his life, but to riſe, and to goe to bed, to

apparell himſelfe, and to make himſelfe
vnready, to fill his belly, and to euacuate
his ſtomacke: which is no more
then a circle of the ſelfe ſame importuning
occupations; much like vnto a Millers
horſe, that alwaies treads one compaſſe.
While he is thus buſied with ſuch
occaſions, behold, old age ſtealingly arriueth,
to which few doe attaine, and
all deſire: But if any doe peraduenture
gaine that time they deſire, to haue it
prolonged to the vtmoſt; this age (being
as Grapes which haue loſt their
iuyce, and as the ſincke of mans life) is
without queſtion, the moſt vnhappy for
thoſe men that are worldly, as no the
contrary it is moſt bleſſed for ſuch as are
godly: For worldly men in this age are
doubly poſſeſt with way wardnes; their
feare and diſtruſt doth increaſe, their
iudgement waxeth weake, & begins to
diminiſh: Wherefore we do wrongfully
call a melancholy humor, wiſedome;
a diſ-abilitie, ſobriety; becauſe old age
leaueth not pleaſure, but pleaſure leaueth
it.
               
                  
And therefore he doth vndeſeruedly
complaine, that the time and manners
of men are changed into worſe, while
nothing is changed but himſelfe: for
in his youth all things pleaſed him, if
they were neuer ſo bad; in his old age,
all things diſlike him, if they were neuer
ſo good: Like vnto thoſe which
being in a Ship, thinke that the banks
moue, when it is onely themſelues. It
is alſo a vice incident to this Age, to
ſpeake much, becauſe they are no more
able to performe any thing; and that
they alſo thinke themſelues moſt fit to
propoſe precepts to youth, and to declare
things of time long ſince: Like
vnto a declining State, as that of the
Romane Empire, where there are many
talkers, but few valiant, & not much different
from the aged time of the world,
where are many curious diſputers, but
few of the true Religion. In this Age
alſo, doth increaſe the loue of wealth;
and earthly cares doe ſummon new
forces againſt man, he waxeth all gray,
and euery thing in him beginneth to

wither, onely his vices excepted.
               That auncient man, of whom the Apoſtle
maketh often mention, beeing
ready to dote, waxeth not old in worldly
age, but then he is in full vigour: He
therefore feareth approching death, and
holdeth his life like vnto an Eele, which
ſlideth away.Simile. In the meane time, he determineth
of tedious deſignes,A pittifull example of Mans Wolfe-like appetite, his inſatiate deſire of riches, and vgly terror of deformi
                        •
                     y. and heapeth
vp riches, as if death ſtood a farre
off, and durſt not appeare.
               But now that age is come, and the
time that he ought to reſt; his griefes
and dolours are renewed, the heart afflicted,
the braine troubled, the face withered,
the body crooked, the ſight dimmed,
the hayres falne, and the teeth rotten;
and to be ſhort, the body is as it
were, aſimilitude of death: yet doth
he prepare himſelfe leaſt, to gaine
the future bliſſe; and though many
times death takes for a gage one part
or other of his body, as an arme, an
eye, or a legge, to ſerue for an aduertiſement
that he will ſhortly fetch the reſt,
yet he is ſo affianced to the earth, that

he is vnwilling to goe to it, when nothing
remaineth in him, but euill.
            
            
               CHAP. XIII.
               Of DEATH.
               THus after Man hath ſorrowed all
his dayes,Than the Day of Death there is nothing more certaine, nor nothing vncertaine. vnder the heauy burthen
of his ſinnes, and in concluſion of all
this vnprofitable & weariſome trauell,
behold the approch of death, before he
hath learned to liue, much leſſe to dye:
The moſt part beeing taken out of this
world before they know to what end
they entred in; they would willingly
prolong the date of their life, but death
admits no compoſition: for it hath feet
of wooll, but armes of iron; it cōmeth
vnſenſibly, but hauing taken once hold,
it neuer looſeth her prize. To this pace
or ſtep, man commeth ſo ſlowly as poſſibly
he can: For if a Ship ſhould ſinke
among the waues two hundred leagues
from Land, notwithſtanding euery Paſſenger
would ſtriue to ſwim, not with

an intent to ſaue his life, but to repell
death for ſome minutes, and to render
nature her laſt ineuitable tribute. Euery
man trembleth at this paſſage, and laboureth
to ſettle himſelfe here, yet is
forced at laſt to yeeld vnto Death; and
yet by no meanes may bee knowne after
what manner hee ſhall end his life.
Some there bee that are forced to dye
by hunger; others, by thirſt; others,
by fire; others by water; others, by
poiſon; others, are ſmothered; others
are torne in pieces by wilde beaſts; others,
deuoured of the Fowles of the
aire; others are made meat for Fiſhes,
and others for Worms: yet for all this,
Man knoweth not his end; when hee
thinketh himſelfe moſt at reſt, hee ſodainly
periſheth.
               What a dreadfull ſight is it, to ſee
him lying in his bed that is oppreſſed
with the paines of Death? What ſhaking
and changing of all the bonds of
nature will he make? the feete will become
cold; the face pale; the eyes hollow;
the lips and mouth to retire; the

hands diminiſh; the tongue waxeth
blacke; the teeth doe cloze; the breath
faileth; the cold ſweat appeareth by
the violence of ſicknes. All which is a
certaine token that nature is ouercome.
               But now when it commeth to the
laſt gaſpe, or at the ſorrowfull departure
that the ſoule maketh from his habitation,
all the bands of Nature are
broken. Beſides, when the Diuell or
wicked ſpirit is aſſured of our end,
what furious aſſaults will hee make againſt
our ſoules, to make vs deſpaire of
Gods mercy? It is the houre when as
Satan doth his power to ſtriue againſt
GOD, for to hinder the ſaluation of
mankind; and he is more boiſterous in
theſe latter dayes, for that he knoweth
that his time is but ſhort, and that the
end of his kingdome is at hand, and
therefore he is the more enflamed: for
he neuer more tormenteth thoſe whom
he doth poſſeſſe, then when he knoweth
that he muſt depart.
               But now when Man hath paſſed the

bitter anguiſh of Death, where is then
become his glories?Nota. This is weighty to be obſerued, not ouely of the poore and inferiour perſons, but more to be apprehended with feare, by thē moſt mighty Soueraignes and greateſt men of this world, that they may not build their happineſſe vpon the deceitfull ground of their riches, and tranſitory poſſeſſions. Where are his
pomps and triumphs? Where is his
Voluptuouſneſſe and Wantonneſſe?
Where is his Maieſtie, excellency and
holineſſe? They are vaniſhed as the
ſhadow, and it is chanced to them, as to
the garment that the wormes haue eaten;
or as the wooll that the moth
hath deuoured.
               Let vs behold Man, when hee is in
the graue! Who euer ſaw a Monſter
more hideous then the dead carkaſſe of
Man? behold his excellency, Maieſtie
and Dignity, couered with a lumpe of
earth. Heere you may ſee him that was
cheriſhed, reuerenced, and honoured,
euen to kiſſe his hands and feet, by a ſodaine
mutation, become a creature moſt
abominable; and to them it happeneth
as Salomon writeth in his booke of
Wiſedome; What hath it profited (ſaith
he) the pride and great aboundance of
riches? All theſe things are paſſed as is
the Arrow ſhot to the white, or
as is the ſmoke that is diſperſed with
the winde.
               
                  
The ſole memory of Death,Death is a terrour to thoſe ignoble minds, whoſe pride of life, makes them weake, timerous, & moſt vndoubted Cowards to the leaſt obiect Death ſhal preſent. mournfull
Funerals, and the reading of Inſcriptions,
engrauen in Sepulchers, doth
make the very haire to ſtare and ſtand
an end, and ſtrikes Man with an horrour
and apprehenſion of it.
               Some repreſent Death terrible to the
aſpect, and depriued of fleſh; other conſider
it with compaſſion, mixt with
dread. Some particular man, which not
long ſince was clad in Silke, and ſhined
with Diamonds, is now aſſaulted with
troupes of Wormes, and breathes forth
intolerable ſents, while that his heyre
doth laugh in ſecret, and enioyeth the
fruit of all his labour, which he himſelfe
neuer enioyed.The Rich vnprofitable Mizerburns in Hell for his Auarice, while his ſonne in the world, dancing a Whore on his Lap, ſets all prodigally flying. And neuertheleſſe
in this his very duſt & corruption, doth
appeare an Ambition, and pride doth
reſt within his Tombe. For then behold,
ſtately Sepulchers, engraued
ſtones, that report ſome famous actions,
and proud titles vpon his Tombe,
ſet out with falſe Narrations, to the end
that Paſſengers by may ſay, Here lyeth
a goodly ſtone, and a corrupted body.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XIV.
               Of the terrible Iudgement Seat of God.
               BEing dead in this world, hee muſt
then appeare before the Iudgement
Seat of God, with ſuch a terrour to
thoſe that conſider it well, that there
is no member but trembleth. It is the
Day that the Lord will come like a
tempeſt, when euery ones heart ſhall
faile them, and all the world ſhall bee aſtonied:
for euen as Lightning which
riſeth from the Eaſt, and extendeth to
the Weſt; ſo ſhall the comming of the
Sonne of Man be. Tribulation ſhal then
be ſo extreme and great, as the like hath
not beene ſeene ſince the beginning of
the world, till now, nor euer ſhal be the
like: The Sunne ſhall be darkened, and
the Moone ſhall giue no more light:
the Starres ſhall fall from Heauen, and
the waues of the Sea ſhall rage, & men
ſhall bee amazed with feare, and the
powers of Heauen ſhall moue.
               
                  
Woe ſhall be in thoſe dayes to them
that are with child, and to them that
giue ſucke. For as it was in the dayes before
the Flood, they did eate & drinke,
marry, and were married, euen vnto the
day that Noah entred into the Arke, and
knew nothing till the Flood came, and
tooke them all away: So ſhall the comming
of the Lord be; and then all kinreds
of the earth ſhall mourne, and ſhall
hide themſelues in Dens, and Caues,
and in the Mountaines, and ſhall ſay
vnto them, Fall vpon vs, & hide vs from
the face of him that ſitteth vpon the
Throne.
               Blow out the Trumpet, ſaith the Prophet
Ioel, that all ſuch as dwell in the
world may tremble at it: for the Day
of the Lord commeth, and is hard at
hand; a darke day, a gloomy day; yea,
and a ſtormy day. Before him ſhall be a
conſuming fire, and behinde him, a burning
flame. Then the dead that are in
the graues ſhall riſe, and come forth; the
bones and the other parts ſhall finde out
their ioynts, for to ioyne againe together

with the body, that the earth hath
putrified, and corrupted.
               All thoſe that the Beaſts and Birds of
the ayre haue deuoured; all thoſe that
the Sea hath ſwallowed vp; all thoſe
that are vnvapoured in the earth, and all
thoſe that the fire hath conſumed, ſhall
bee reduced and brought to their former
eſtate.
               All the bloud that Theeues,Tunc: Poſt vnam voluptatem ſequuntur mille dolores. Pyrats,
Murderers, Tyrants, and falſe Iudges
haue vniuſtly ſhed, ſhall then appeare
before the Maieſtie of God. So that
there ſhall not one drop of bloud bee
loſt, from the time of Abel, that was
the firſt ſlaine of men, vnto the laſt, ſo
that there ſhall not one haire periſh.
               If the vaile of the Temple did breake
with the Earthquake,Simile. Moſt worthy to be read and conſidered with terrour and true repentance. the Sunne darken
and change his brightneſſe, for the
wrong that was done vnto IESVS
CHRIST being on the Croſſe, although
in nothing he did offend: what
countenance may the poore ſinners
ſhew, that haue offended him innumemerable
times? who then ſhall abide

the ſhining brightneſſe of Gods Maieſtie,Ver Aeternum pleniſfima delitiarum quam pura es.
ſitting vpon his Throne of glory?
               It is the dreadfull houre, when wicked
Monarkes, Kings and Princes ſhall
giue account of their vnlawful exactions
that they haue made vpon their
Subiects;The Maieſty of God in the generall Judgement Day, ſhall be more terrible to the impious Monarks of the earth, then either the world on fire round about them, Hell gaping to ſwallow the vgly Fiends to torture, or the paines of Hell can affright them. and of the bloud that they
haue wrongfully ſpilled. It is the houre,
wherein Merchants and ſuch as haue
traded in the circle of the world, that
haue beguiled and ſold by falſe weights
and meaſures, ſhall render a iuſt account
of the leaſt fraud that they haue committed.
It is the houre that couetous
men and Vſurers, that haue beguiled
ſome, & vndone others, ſhall pay themſelues
the cruell intereſt of that which
they haue ill gotten. It is the houre,
when Magiſtrates and wicked Iudges,
that haue corrupted, violated, and ſuſpended
Iuſtice, ſhall be accountable for
their corruption and iniquities. It is the
very houre, wherein Widdowes, Orphanes,
and other afflicted perſons ſhall
make their complaints before God, of
the wrong and oppreſſion that haue

beene ſhewed them. It is the houre
wherein the wicked ſhall ſay (repenting
in themſelues, troubled with horrible
feare) Behold, theſe which in times paſt
we had in deriſion, infamy, & reproach,
are now accounted among the children
of God, whoſe portion is amongſt the
Saints. It is the houre wherein fooliſh
and dumbe perſons ſhall be more happy
then the wiſe & eloquent. Many Shepheards
and Carters ſhall bee preferred
before Philoſophers; many Beggers,
before rich Princes and Monarches;
and many ſimple and ignorant, before
the witty and ſubtile.
               Let vs therefore that are Chriſtians,
looke to our ſelues, and take heed wee
bee not counted vnder the iudgement
and ſentence of the moſt greateſt miſeries
of all miſeries. The which ſentence
is recited in the 25. Chap. of S. Mathew,
where it is ſaid; Goe yee curſed into
euerlaſting fire.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. XV.
               Of HELL.
               MAny and great are the miſeries
which man ſuffreth in this world,
but yet all of them are but as Roſes, in
reſpect of the Thorns which follow: for
the vanity and trauaile of the temporall
life is a happineſſe, in regard of the torments
of eternall death, which doth
ſwallow the moſt part of men. It is a
large way which leadeth to perdition,
and few doe find the way of Saluation.
Death commeth here to leuy ſoules for
Hell, and doth enroll great and ſmall,
learned, and ignorant▪ rich, and poore;
yea, many which are eſteemed holy,
and liue couered vnder the cloake of
Hypocriſie, to the end that they might
goe to Hell with the leſſe noiſe, and not
be ſtayed by the way.
               This Hell is a place of flames, and
yet there is perpetuall darkneſſe, where
ſoules doe waxe old, and yet neuer die,

and where they liue, continually to die:
Where they burn without conſuming;
where they mourne without compaſſion;
are afflicted without repentance;
where torment is without end, and paſt
imagination. There the vnpappy rich
man,Remember Hell tis not a feined, but a place moſt fume, moſt fearefull. which refuſed to giue poore Lazarus
a crumme of bread, doth now beg
of him a drop of water, although whole
Riuers bee not ſufficient to extinguiſh
his heat. What if the rods that
God doth puniſh his Infants withall,
doe ſometimes make them almoſt
deſpaire, and euen curſe the day of their
Natiuitie,Poenitentia ſera raro vera. as Iob and Ieremy did? What
are thoſe afflictions that hee doth oppreſſe
his Aduerſarie withall? It is a
horrible thing (ſaith the Apoſtle) to fall
into the hands of the Liuing God. For
becauſe hee ſaith in his anger, as it is
written in the 32. Chapter of Deuteromie,
I haue lifted my hands towards
heauen, and ſaid, I am the euerliuing
God; If I whet my glittering ſword,
and my hand take hold on iudgement, I
will execute vengeance on mine enemies,

and will reward them that hate
me. Praiſed be God, which hath deliuered
vs, and drawne vs from that burning
furnace of hell, by his Sonne Ieſus
Chriſt: who (as S. Paul ſaith to the
Galatians) was reuiled for our ſakes,
& hath called vs our of perpetual darknes,
to his maruellous light: 1. Pet. 2. 9.
Is it poſſible for vs to be ignorant what
that torment is, & not know how much
he hath ſuffred for to retaine vs in feare,
and to make vs know the greatneſſe of
the grace of God, and the excellence of
our Redemptiō in Ieſus Chriſt his Son,
who is alſo God eternally bleſſed.How Gods incomprehenſible Prouidence fruſtrates the deſignes of men, making their enterpriſes of no validity.
               
               This precedent diſcourſe hath led vs
through all ages, and through all the
moſt ordinary conditions of humane
life; yet in this voyage, we haue knowne
nothing but vanity and torment of ſpirit:
And it hath chiefely appeared, when
we haue caſt our eyes vpon the diuine
prouidence of God, which doth from
the higheſt Heauens view all the actions
of man, not as an idle ſpectator, but as a
wiſe Conductor, and iuſt Iudge: And

there from aboue, he laughes at the deſignes
of great men, & fruſtrateth their
enterpriſes, deſtroyeth their tongues
& ſpirits of Babylonian builders, ruineth
their greatnes, and breaketh their Scepters
into ſhiuers; teaching man that he
is nothing but duſt, and his wiſedome
but meere blindnes, to the end that hee
may learne to contemne the world, aud
tranſport his hopes from earth to heauen;
& that hauing ſeene ſome beames
of this terreſtriall ſplendour, which vaniſheth
as Lightening, he doth ſay with
S. Peter,
                  Luke 9. & 99. It is good that we be here, let
vs make our ſelues heere Tabernacles.
Happy is that man, which hauing well
knowne the vantiy of this world, doth
retire towards God; thot he beeing in
a ſure Hauen a farre off, and that being
vnder his ſhaddow, as vnder a ſure couered
place, may contemplate the ruine
of the wicked, the inſtability of their
deſignes, the folly of their hopes, and
the effects of the Iudgement of God.
Thereupon the Prophet Dauid, in Pſal.
92. ſaith alſo: O LORD, how glorious

are thy workes! and thy thoughts are very
deepe: an vnwiſe man knoweth it not, and
a foole doth not vnderſtand this. When
the wicked grow as the graſse, and all the
workes of wickednes doe flouriſh; then they
ſhall be deſtroyed for euer. It behoueth
vs, heere to note carefully, that this
Pſalme is intituled, A Song for the Sabbath
day: for by it hee doth aduertiſe
vs, that this meditation requireth a quiet
and reſting ſpirit, which beeing reſtrained
from the preſſe of humane actions,
doth retire it ſelfe into the Houſe
of God; according to that which hee
ſaith in the 73 Pſalme; where he doth
confeſſe, that the proſperity of wicked
men hath offended him, and that hee
could hardly digeſt it, vntill that he had
entred into the Sanctuary of the Almighty,
and conſidered the end of ſuch
men: For, to vnderſtand what the true
happineſſe is, and to vnmaske himſelfe
to the imaginary felicitie of this world;
it is not neceſſary to goe to Philoſophicall
ſchooles, or to build his reſolutions
vpon the opinion of the Vulgar,

but to enter into the holy Houſe of
God▪ and there learne what the difference
is betweene the riches which he
ſcattereth vpon this great multitude,
and that which he reſerueth for his little
ones,Conſider the ſubtilty of Satan, and mans ſudden ruine. what the vncertainty of this
worldly proſperitie is, in reſpect of the
certainty of Gods promiſes. But vvith
what inſenſible chaines doth Satan
lead men into perdition?Memento decimo ſexto die Octobris, 
                        ••
                     ilo Antiquo & quinto die Octob. ſlilo Nouo. MDCXXIII▪
                   How doth he
triumph ouer thoſe which triumph in
this world? how they that thinke themſelues
moſt ſure, are vpon the point of
their ruine and perpetuall deſtruction?
               Let vs furthermore conſider how
vaine the glory of man is,Of the vaine glory of men moſt corruptible and tranſitory▪
                   in that ſome
one doth boaſt of his particular ſtrēgth,
wherein it is impoſſible for him euer to
equall a Bull.
               Some other doe glory in their
beauty, when as it is onely a ſuperficiall
colour, which couereth the bloud,
bones, and braines, hideous things to
ſee. It is alſo a thing that age and many
maladies haue power to deforme.
               Some other doth glory of his honour

and greatneſſe, when indeed he is
poſſeſt in this ſtate, with moſt trouble
and feare, and leſſe liberty: beſides, he
is mounted ſo high, that he cannot fall
but with breaking of his owne necke.The iuſt reward of Kings proud mounting Fauorites.
               
               Some other doth glory to bee more
drunke then his companions, but if his
belly bee greater in capacitie then others,
notwithſtanding it will neuer exceed
a Barrell.
               Theſe former things are generall; for
vanities and miſeries are common to
all men, ſince that ſinne hath ſubiected
mankinde to them. But notwithſtanding
there are ſome more then other,
which are made examples of extreme
miſery; As poore beggers, which are
conſtrained through neceſſitie to lye
vpon the bare pauement;Neceſsitas non habet legem. as Gallyſlaues,
and as thoſe miſerable ſlaues
which are made mercenaries.
               The hundreth part of humane kinde
doth imperiouſly and impiouſly torment
the reſt, and thoſe that are feeble
and meane, ſerue as preyes to the
mighty.
               
                  
Amongſt the Turkes and Pagans,
which poſſeſſe three parts of the world,
men are bought and ſold in the ſame faſhion,
as horſes in a Faire: for the buyer,
marketh their fight, maketh them
ſhew their teeth, and feeleth the ſinnewes
of their armes and legges.
               Great Princes keepe millions of chained
Slaues for to labour, in making of
Sugar, in working of Mines, to ſerue in
Gallies at Sea, and to performe ſuch
kinde of ſeruilitie, that Death is more
tolerable to them then this kinde of
life.
               There are certaine people, which
haue for the ſpace of ſixe moneths
continuall night, who liue in Cauernes,
and in the extremity of the extremeſt
degree of coldneſſe, hauing no heat to
comfort them, but onely cruelty.
               Others there are on the contrary, who
liue amongſt Sands, continually ſcorched
by the Sunne, a countrey barren in
fruits, and fertile in Serpents and
Lyons.
               Our climate, in reſpect of ſuch intemperature,

is as the garden of Nature,
where God hath planted moſt wealth
and riches: but where hee hath reaped
leaſt fruit of gracefull actions: And
where theſe naturall bleſſings are ſo ill
husbanded,Of the vanitie of humane thoughts, deſires, and iudgements. that amongſt all that abundance,
there is nothing to be ſeene but
miſery and pouerty.
               Now that we haue formally and ſuperficially
repreſented as with a coale
the vanity and miſery of our Nature,
and the actions of Man: Let vs now
examine his thoughts. Dauid in the 94.
Pſalme ſaith: The Lord knoweth the
thoughts of man that they are vanity.
               
               For if any could but make a true collection
of his thoughts, which haue only
paſſed through his brain in one day:
the confuſed multitude, and varietie of
them, beeing all very fooliſh, would aſtoniſh
him. The diuers fictions▪ and
ſtrange Ideas that Painters conceit in
reſpect of theſe,Idle & moſt vnprofitable thoughts. are nothing. For ſome
man, when he hath ſettled himſelfe in
his ſtudy, or ſome place where he thinketh
to haue his ſpirit buſied about the

moſt ſerious affaires, doth then begin to
count the Quarrees of his window; or
as the Emperour Domitian,
                  Read Swetons Worke. to purſue
little flies both with eye and hand.
               Some one againe perceiuing himſelfe
deſtitute of company, and being very
penſiue, doth aduiſe with himſelfe what
he would doe if he were a King:A true Simile of thoſe that build Caſtles in the Caſtles in the ayre. or if
that he had a million of Crownes, how
he would ſpend them: or thinking of
his own domeſticke affaires, doth thred
a chaine of tedious hopes, and by degrees
becommeth very rich in his diſcourſe:
at the concluſion of which, he
fruſtrateth all that imagination, and returning
to the conſideration of his preſent
pouerty, hee moderateth his paſſions.A principall and moſt worthy obſeruation.
Yea alſo during the time of Sermons
and Prayer (when God ſpeaketh
vnto vs, or we to him) our minds are abſtracted,
& thinking of ſome other thing.
               There if our beſt actions are infected
with idle cogitations; how much moreouer
vnprofitable houres are ill ſpent
time?
               Theſe friuolous thoughts, mixed

with vaine deſire, and a like ignorance,The profit of ſolitarineſse.
do labour the mind, and giueth
it no repoſe: for man in his ſolitary
thoughts doth ruminate the euils paſt,
vexing himſelfe with the things preſent,
and fore-fearing things to come,
yea, thoſe things that ſhall neuer happen:
he changeth his doubtfull feare,
into certaine miſeries: many being miſerable,
out of a feare that they ſhall bee
miſerable; and many dying, out of a
feare that they ſhall die.Death terrible to the foole. Euery day
hath ſufficient affliction to torment vs.
For who can euer bee in eaſe, if all the
paſt and future euils doe render themſelues
preſent to vs: the firſt by our memory,
and the laſt by our feare? This
naturall vnreſt, is the cauſe that Man loueth
change, like vnto one that is ſicke,
who deſireth continually to change his
bed: Yet notwithſtanding findes himſelfe
more diſtempered in the laſt then
in the firſt,Mans vncertainty where to reſt. thinking no repoſe to be but
in wearineſſe. For he alwayes carrieth
his griefe with him, and findes little eaſe
in changing of ſides; yea, I dare ſay, if

God had placed Man betwixt good
and euill, to take his choiſe of either,
and as it were to cut what hee thought
good out of the whole earth, his blindneſſe
is ſuch, that hee would quickly
conuert it into ill. If God ſend ſuch no
griefes, they wil ſend themſelues ſome.
If their owne griefes doe not trouble
them, the happineſſe of others will torment
them: and enuy is more ſtinging
then affliction.
               From it alſo doth it proceed,Fooliſh and vaine deſires. that men
deſire alwayes they know not vvhat
themſelues: they are greedy to deſire,
but weake to put in Execution: as a
Bird that doth couet to fly, but vſeth
onely one of her wings.
               Alſo men are diſtracted with contrary
cogitations.
               One complaineth that his Wife is
dead.
               Another that ſhee will not dye.
               One mourneth for the loſſe of his
children.
               Another that hee hath ſome that be
very wicked.
               
                  
One diſturbed with buſineſſe, praiſeth
domeſticke repoſe, and that opinion
of Saul, who did rather affect
to liue obſcurely in the baſeſt pouerty,
then to bee exalted to the higheſt Dignity.
               Another being excluded from publique
command, doth notwithſtanding
breake his own necke to attaine it.
Euery thing doth ſeeme to vs beautifull,
but that which we haue; and nothing
delighteth vs, but that which wee
cannot obtaine. Nothing doth ſo much
reioyce vs, as the hurt of another man:
of ſome decay in Fortune wee ſmile;
but it grieueth vs to ſee him receiue any
Honour.
               In this vanity of thoughts, and vncertainty
of deſires, doth appeare a
great weakeneſſe of ſpirit: for our affections
are ſwayed more by geſtures,
and externall appearance, then by the
thing it ſelfe. Like vnto ſome Spectators
at a Tragedie, who notwithſtanding
that they know the argument to be
fabulous, & nothing concerning them,

doe weepe out of compaſſion, when as
they will not ſhead a teare for their own
vnfained griefes.
               Some there bee alſo that hang themſelues
out of deſpaire,Deſpaire animates man to haſten the deſtruction. which the ſelfe-ſame
houre would haue runne away
from the thruſt of a ſword, becauſe that
this laſt kinde of Death commeth accompanied
with horrour and feare,
whereas the former is ſo quickly diſpatched,
that the ſight of it doth nothing
amaze one. Opinions doe more
gouerne vs, then the things themſelues:
many doe ſometimes eate meat which
they know not, and yet they finde it
pleaſing to the taſte; but after, vvhen
ſome one hath told them what it is,The ſtrong operation of conceit. their
conceit will make them ſo ſick at heart,
that they will vomit it vp againe.
               Some others haue more feare of a
Mouſe, or a Hem, or a Toad, then of a
ſword; certainely ſuch peeuiſh weakeneſſe,
or fantaſticall actions doe gouerne
our imaginations.
               Truely I know not how, but men
ſtudy to deceiue themſelues. Some one

will recite a tale for truth, which hee
knoweth to be moſt falſe, and that ſo
often, and with ſo great aſſurance, that
himſelfe in fine doth beleeue it.
               A Husband that knoweth his Wife
to be deformed, notwithſtanding, becauſe
ſhee is painted and diſguized, will
begin to perſwade himſelfe that ſhee is
faire, and ſhee her ſelfe will beleeue it,
and thinke to be reputed ſo.
               How many bee there which beleeue
in a Religion, becauſe they will beleeue
it, which conteſt againſt their owne
ſenſe, which ſay among themſelues, that
ſurely is abſurd, and not agreeable
with the Scripture, I will haue it thus,
and will beleeue ſo. This is to haue a
conſtrained beliefe, not to haue his will
ſubiected to Religion, but Religion to
his will.
               The infirmitie of mans iudgement
doth eſpecially ſhew it ſelfe in Religion:
for what he thinketh touching the
ſeruice of God, doth manifeſtly appeare
by his exteriour actions. In matters
of newes wee doe ſooner beleeue

one that hath ſeene it, then the common
report.
               But in matters of Religion it is contrarie,
for moſt doe follow the vulgar
opinion, which is as much as to maintaine
that which is moſt abſurd, and
then to hide himſelfe amongſt the multitude.
               Obſerue many other things,The vaine and ſuperſtious follies of ignorant Idolaters. which any
may eaſily perceiue to be moſt ridiculous:
               As to cloath in Silke and Gold the
images of men; while that a poore Begger
goeth naked, which is the Image of
God.
               To weare a Croſſe hanging downe
vpon the belly, while that the belly is
an enemy to the Croſſe of Chriſt.
               In going to a Bawdy-houſe, or returning
from ſome wicked fact, to ſay certaine
Pater-noſters.
               To kneele downe at the boxe which
keepeth the Hoſt, when it returneth
empty from ſome ſicke body, as when
it went full.
               To adore the Hoſt paſſing by a little

boxe, and not to reſpect it in a mans bodie,
which is come newly from receiuing
it.
               To make their Creator with words,Groſſe errors which like a foggy miſt blind and confound the ſight and ſenſe of men.
and preſently to deuoure him vvith
their teeth.
               To bee inſolent and deboſhed one
day before Lent; and the next day
following to bee very graue and ſorrowfull.Adherents of the Church of Rome.
               
               To imploy their bleſſed Beades for
to obtaine remiſſion of their ſinnes.
               After the death of any great Perſonage,
to cloath with blacke the Image
of our Lady, to the end that ſhee may
participate of their griefes.
               To whip themſelues in publique, for
to content God, or to releaſe a ſoule
out of Purgatory. In honour of the
Saints, to burne Candles in the midſt of
the day.
               To conclude, man hath forged many
ſtrange things in his braine, and would
haue God to approue them. Nay, he is
come to that paſſe, that hee doth aſſume
to himſelfe the diſtribution of Offices

in Paradiſe, making one Protector of a
Countrey, another a healer of ſome
particular diſeaſe, as if little Ants had
power to diſpoſe of affaires belonging
to the Crowne of France.
               
               This is alſo a vanity of vanities, and an
extreme imbecilitie of iudgement.
               Our ſelues which haue the true Word
of God for a rule to frame our actions
by, are not exempted: and our folly
and vanity doth mixe it ſelfe with our
beſt actions. For in our ciuill actions, if
we haue need of counſell, wee preſently
addreſſe our ſelues to ſome friends.
But in matters of Gods diuine ſeruice,
we take counſell of our minds, and concupiſcences,
which are our domeſticall
enemies.
               If money be due vnto vs from one,
we had rather alwayes haue the money
then his promiſe: in celeſtiall matters it
is contrary. For the holy Goſpell is an
obligation, by which God hath promiſed
vs ſaluation, and hath ſealed it with
the bloud of his Sonne: but we had rather
keepe the obligation, then receiue

the paiment,We muſt not thinke to make with our wealth and worldly riches a compoſition and truce with Death; for Nature requires a tribute at our hands. which is due at the day of
death: nay, wee doe endeuour to prolong
the date of it.
               Some doe record in the Emperor Honorius,
a great ſimplicitie, and childiſh
weakeneſſe: that hauing a Hen, nominated
by him, Rome, which he did cheriſh,
and ſo infinitely affect, that when one
came vnto him, and ſaid that his Rome
was loſt, he anſwered very ſorrowfully,
Alas! ſhe was here but euen now. But
the other replying, ſaid, And it pleaſe
your Highnes, I ſpeak not of a Hen, but
of your Citie of Rome, which hath
beene ſurprized, and ſacked by Alario
Goth.
                  A Simile worthy of obſeruation. The Emperor hearing this, was
ſomewhat comforted, thinking that
loſſe to bee more tolerable.
               Such is our ſimplicitie, wee will not
ſuffer one to touch our riches, butWee are ſo rooted in this worlds abomination, that we prefer a minute of worldly pleaſure, before heauens euerlaſting ioyes, incomprehenſible and immutable. we
will indure any to entice vs to Vice;
to ſeduce vs into errour, and to poiſon
our ſoules.
               It is a great folly to refuſe a medicine,
becauſe the Phyſician is not eloquent:
Why doe wee not then make account

and eſtimation of the preaching of the
Goſpell, if the Preacher bee not eloquent,
ſeeing that the holy Goſpell is
the medicine of our ſoules?
               Is it not then an extreme brutiſhnes,
for ſome vicious perſon to ſlighten
the holy Writ, becauſe it is not adorned
with Flowers of Rhetoricke?
What is the reaſon then, that the Word
of God doth pleaſe vs, if it be not decked
with Flowers, and compoſed with
Art, ſeeing that it is that ſacred worke,
and Doctrine of Reconciliation with
God? Wee doe not receiue willingly
the correction of our Parents, if it bee
not very milde. This is alſo a vanity,
diſtaſte, and childiſh humour.
               Touching our Iudgement which we
haue of others, either in eſteeming, or
contemning them, it is moſt vaine, and
ridiculouſly ignorant.
               For if there be a queſtion about burthens,
wee account him moſt ſtrong,
which can carry the heauieſt. On the
contrary, about quarrels wee eſteeme
him the moſt valiant, which can beare

nothing; attributing force and valour
to weakeneſſe and impatience.
               In matters of ornament, we doe not
iudge of the goodneſſe of a ſword, by
the beauty of a ſcabberd: nor of the
metall of a Horſe, by the faireneſſe of
a Bridle and Saddle.Men ought not to be regarded not reſpected for their gallant and gorgeous apparell only, but more for their vertues. Why doe we then
meaſure our eſtimation of a man, either
by his good or bad apparell? And if it
be neceſſary that we ſalute one for the
ſtuffe of his cloathes which he weareth;
why doe wee not ſalute the ſame ſtuffe
in the Shops? Why doe wee iudge diſcreetly
in the eſtimation of vaine and
triuiall things; when as in a matter of
ſuch importance, as of the eſtimation of
man, we are moſt voide of reaſon? So
ſome doe reſpect a Merchant, or Rentgatherer,
becauſe hee ſummeth vp exactly
his accounts, when hee liueth in
ſuch faſhion, that he cannot giue an account
vnto God.
               Some labour to till their Gardens,
and other grounds, and by it winne
much praiſe; when as themſelues are
barren, & bring forth no fruit of good
workes.
               
                  
Wee are much vaine and childiſh in
our feares, as in any other thing. For as
little Infants doe play with fire & burne
themſelues, but feare when they ſee
their Father comming, masked with a
frowning countenance towards them:
So men deſiring to dally with pleaſures,Man Iull'd in the Labyrinth of pleaſures, knowes not how to get out.
becauſe of their luſtre, at the length
loſe themſelues amongſt them: yet
notwithſtanding they feare God their
Father, when he commeth vnto them
vnder the maske of afflictions or death.
               Alſo man doth ingender in himſelfe
either fooliſh or pernicious feares.
               Some one being iealous that his wife
doth affect others, endeuoureth to eſpy
and ſearch out that which he feareth to
finde: and by this meanes angreth her
ſo, that ſhe ſeeketh to be reuenged, in
ſuch nature which hee formerly ſuſpected.
               Some other fearing to liue without
honour, committeth ſuch things as ſubiect
his body to ſome cruell torment,
and ſtaineth the memory of him with
perpetuall infamy.
               
                  
Some other feareth the want of
riches,The cuſtome of the world. but hee ſhall want it, and dye
without it.
               Some againe feareth he ſhall die before
marriage,Marriage without loue and meanes, breeds the moſt wofull experience of a miſerable life. but God well obſerues
that time, and by wedlocke will make
him twice miſerable.
               When I conſider what humane wiſedome
is, I finde it agreeable to the induſtry
of Moles, which digge vnderground
with much dexteritie, but
are blind when they come into the
Sunne.
               So wee haue much skill in earthly
affaires, to ſell, to couenant, and to ſupplant
any one.
               But take one of theſe men vvhich is
is moſt ſubtill in theſe things,Worldlings moſt wiſe in knowing the way to get riches: but to ſeeke after the riches of Heauen dull Animals. and bring
him to the brightneſſe and light of the
holy Goſpel, and there he is altogether
blind, and of a ſelfe-conceit will continue
ſo.
               For during the time that hee doth
foreſee future euents, and alterations of
eſtate, hee is ignorant of his owne deſtruction:
while that he diſcourſeth on

the affaires of Kingdomes, hee is a
Slaue to the Diuell: And notwithſtanding
that blind iudgement of his,
dareth conteſt againſt the Euer-liuing
GOD, the folly and fooliſhneſſe
of the children of darkneſſe, againſt
the Diuine wiſedome of the Father
of Light; and the diſcretion of
man, againſt the Prouidence of the Almighty.
For the wicked do couer themſelues
with ſilence, craft, and diſſimulation:
Like vnto little children, which
think that they are ſufficiently hidden,
when their eyes are cloſed; Beleeuing
that no body ſeeth them, when they ſee
no body. But in the meane time, God
perceiueth them both naked, and vncouered;
yea, better then they themſelues.
For God is not onely all hand,
in holding and conducting the whole
Vniuerſe: but alſo all eye, in ſeeing and
diſcerning all things in it. The thickeſt
bodies are to him tranſparant; and darkneſſe
it ſelfe, is to him light: and therefore
the Prophet Dauid doth iuſtly reprehend
that fooliſh wiſedome in the

94. Pſalme, where he ſaith: Vnderſtand
ye vnwiſe among the people, and ye fooles,
when will ye be wiſe? He that planted the
eare, ſhall he not heare? or he that formed
the eye, ſhall he not ſee?
               
               Now, in this place he calleth them
vnwiſe, not which are fooles, and run
vp and downe the ſtreetes: nor thoſe
priuate and particular men, which are
without Office; nor the heauy-ſpirited
Commons; but ſuch as are crafty, and
manage affaires with dexterity, thinking
by their ſagacity, to couer themſelues
from the wiſedome of God: or
to dazle the eyes of his prouidence ſacred:
Like vnto the moſt dangerous Agues,
which are vnder the appearance of
Coldneſſe: So the moſt ridiculous follie,
is that which lieth vnder the appearance
of wiſedome.
               It behoueth alſo the Faithfull to exerciſe
his meditation, and to be a ſpectator
of the actions and thoughts of men,
and of all the vnprofitable labours of
his life: For it is in humane life, as in a
Faire, where there commeth two ſorts

of people; one for to buy and ſell, the
other onely to ſee.
               Man that feareth God, is like to one
of thoſe which come to ſee: he is not
there idle, and to ſearch nothing, but to
contemplate the worke of God, and humane
actions.Omnia ſub ſole vanitas.
               
               But he may ſay (when he hath ſeene
all the delights that the curious vanity
of men can ſhew forth)
               O how many things are there in this
world, which I haue nothing to doe
withall? What if during this contemplation,
ſome one doth iuſtle or throng
vpon him, or if one cut his purſe, that it
doe afflict, or depriue him of any thing?
All that ſuch a one will doe, is, to goe
out of that company; and knowing himſelfe
to be a ſtranger in this world, will
trauell toward his Country, where that
Celeſtiall Habitation is; preſſing alwaies,
(as the Apoſtle ſaith) towards
the marke, for the price of the high calling
of God, in Chriſt Ieſus.
               If the world contemne him, hee will
contemne that contempt, as knowing

himſelfe better then the world, and to
be called to a better hope:Happy the man that followes this bleſt example. hee will eſteeme
the promiſed allurements of the
world, vaine; the occupations of men,
baſe and importunate: and, according
to the example of Mary, in the tenth
of Luke, he will chooſe the good part,
which ſhall not bee taken from him:
concluding all his meditations after the
ſame maner as Salomon doth in the end
of Eccleſiaſtes: The end of all is the feare
of God, and the keeping of his Commandements:
for in it is comprized the ſumme
of mans beeing.
               
               Now therefore after all this meditation,
let vs reſt our ſelues vpon theſe two
Maxime's and Propoſitions, which are
the true foundation that zeale is grounded
vpon.
               The firſt is, for to loue God, it behooueth
to contemne the world.
               The ſecond is, that for to contemne
the world, it is neceſſary for the Faithful
to know his own worth, nobleneſſe,
and excellencie of vocation.
               The firſt Maxime is taken out of S.

                  Iohn, in his firſt Epiſtle: Loue not the
world, neither the things that are in the
world:
               
               If any man loue the world, the loue of
the Father is not in him: For all things
that are in the world (as the luſt of the fleſh,
the luſt of the eyes, and the pride of life) is
not of the Father, but is of the world: And
the world paſſeth away, and the luſt thereof;
but he that fulfilleth the will of God, abideth
for euer.
               Nothing doth ſo farre ſeparate vs
from the loue of God, as our affection
to the world; ſeeing that the holy Scripture,
for to admoniſh vs, doth call the
world, The Kingdome of the Diuell.
               But as the Moone hath no light but
from the Sunne; ſo, our ſoules haue not
any light, but by the regard of God;
and by a conſequent, neither more nor
leſſe: But euen as the Moone doth loſe
her light, when ſhe is hidden within the
ſhaddow of the earth; ſo alſo doe our
ſoules loſe their brightneſſe, (for they
are called in the holy Scriptures, The
children of light) when they moleſt and

wrap themſelues within the ſhadow of
earthly things, cares and worldly concupiſcences:
which wee ought to tread
vnder our feete, according to the example
of the Church; which, as it is
vvritten in the 12. of the Apocalypſe,
hath vnder her feete the Moone; that
is, the mutable inſtabilitie of theſe inferiour
things.
               To this purpoſe Ieſus alſo would
that the penny ſhould bee reſtored to
Caeſar, becauſe that it had his Image
on it.
               Let vs therefore then giue our
ſelues to God, ſeeing that we beare his
owne Image.
               But the inconuenience is, that wee
doe often aboliſh the Image, in rubbing
it againſt the earth, and polluting
our ſoules with worldly thoughts and
deſires.
               That wee may therefore contemne
the earth, and all that the world doth
promiſe, it requireth that wee come to
the ſecond point, which is, to know perfectly
what the worth and excellency

of the faithfull is. For when as men by
an vnfriendly amity, and cruell well-willing,The world's a Where, full of deceitfulneſse.
doe ſollicite ſome one to doe
ill, which hath the feare of God, and
to offend his Conſcience, in offending
God, it behooueth the faithfull to think
in himſelfe:There is no true friendſhip but among good men, very ſcant in this Age. What? I that am a Child of
God, and am of a celeſtiall nobleneſſe;
that am one of the firſt-borne, whoſe
names are regiſtred in Heauen! ſhall I
eſteeme the promiſes of the world,
which when they are moſt certain, they
are too baſe for mee to meditate on?
To delude the ſonne of a Prince with
an Apple; To entice with Siluer the
Sonne of the King of Heauen: to offend
his Father; and after the example
of Eſau, to ſell my birth-right for a
meſſe of pottage? Such perſwaſions
ſhall not by any meanes poſſeſſe mee:
God will not afflict me vvith ſo great a
blindneſſe. We are vnworthy to be followers
of CHRIST, if wee doe not
eſteeme our ſelues to be better then the
world.
               Was it not for the loue of the faithfull,

that the world was framed?God in his infinite mercy ruinates the building of ſinne in the body, to re-build the Soule an euerlaſting Manſion in Heauen. Will
not God ruinate it againe, for to reedifie
for them a faire houſe in Heauen,
where ſhall bee the fulneſſe of glory?
For this Heauen or climate, is inferiour
to the worth and dignity of the children
of God.
               You that feare God, and truſt in his
Sonne, know, that it is you that vnderprop
the world, and that nouriſh the
wicked in it.
               Therefore the enemies of God are
bound in obligation to you. For hee
doth conſerue the world out of a reſpect,
which he hath towards his choſen
and elect, whereof ſome are mixed
among the euill, and others are yet vnborne.
It is written in the ſixt of the
Apocalypſe; That GOD doth attend,
vntill our fellow-ſeruants be accompliſhed.
               
               And therefore this is one of the reaſons
why that Chriſt doth call the
faithfull, The ſalt of the earth; which is
as much as a little part amongſt men,
which conſerueth the reſt, and delayeth
their deſtruction.
               
                  
For God conſerueth the ſinfull, becauſe
of the good, to the end that they
ſhould ſerue as medicines to them; and
that the might and power of our Aduerſaries
might ſerue to compell vs to
the feare of God, and to truſt in his
promiſes.
               Such being the excellency of Gods
elect aboue the reſt: it behooueth vs to
reſpect the pleaſures, riches, and greatneſſe
of the world, as things that are
moſt ridiculous, and as the painted kingdomes
which the Diuell ſhewed vnto
Chriſt.
               Like thoſe which from the higheſt
part of the Alpes,The Alpes be inexaſible high & great Mountains, which diuide France from Italy. doe looke into Campania,
where the greateſt Cities ſeeme
like vnto little Cottages; how much
leſſe and baſe will they ſeeme then, if
they were diſcerned from Heauen?
From thence therefore it behooueth
that the faithfull contemplate humane
things, and that hee tranſport inſtantly
his heart to Heauen, ſince that there is
his treaſure.
               And conſidering from thence the

Palaces of Princes, hee will eſteeme
them as habitations of Ants, and the
turbulent murmuring of men, as the
buzzing of an angry ſwarme of Bees,
and contemplating from thence, vvhat
things are moſt great and apparant in
the earth, he wil ſay, The vanity of vanities,
all is vanity.
               
               That holy glory will not hinder
Chriſtian humilitie. For wee knowing
the worthineſſe of our ſelues, doe finde
our dignity in Ieſus Chriſt.
               
               If Repentance doth humble vs, Faith
doth exalt vs.
               If we are nothing before God, wee
are ſomewhat in God, & in his fatherly
affections.
               And therefore in this the faithfull are
contrary to worldly men: for they doe
lift their eyes to heauen by too much
pride, but preſſe downe their heart on
the earth with Auarice and Incontinency:
whereas the godly on the contrarie,
hath his eyes vpon the earth by
humilitie, as the Publican which durſt
not lift his eyes to Heauen, but hath his

heart in Heauen by faith and hope.
The contempt of this world proceeds
not out of a loue to himſelfe,
but out of a true affection
to God.
            
         
         
            
            THE
MISERY OF
MANS FRAILE AND
NATVRALL
INCLINATION
AND
Of the Wickedneſſe and
Peruerſeneſſe that now raigneth
in this wretched AGE.
            
               COnſidering to my ſelfe the
miſeries of Humane condition,
my minde and ſpirit is
ſo confounded with diuerſitie
of thoughts, that I enter (as it
were) into a Labyrinth of confuſion,

whoſe iſſue is moſt difficult. For if I ſettle
my conſiderations vpon Nature,
humane qualities or effects, thoſe three
obiects do ſo obfuſcate my powers, that
all the knowledge that I can gather, is
impoſſibilitie neuer to attaine to the
perfect knowledge of the numberleſſe
number of thoſe miſeries, mis-haps, and
vanities affected, as inſeparable to humane
kinde; and to that end doe chalenge
all the moſt profound and ſerious
ſences of the wiſeſt and moſt learned
men,Man borne in miſery & moſt miſerable euen frō his Cradle. to effect the definition therof. Let
them conſider from its ſource & originall;
yea, euen from the Cradle, where
humane nature ſhall bee found ſenſeleſſe,
depriued from the vſage of all the
nobleſt faculties of the Soule; and ſo
weake, wretched, and capable onely of
teares and weepings; expreſſing thereby
in complaining her miſeries, which
doe increaſe faſter then ſhe growes in
yeeres: She hath no ſooner giuen ouer
the Milke of her Nurſe, but ſhe begins
to goe, or rather to fall, ſith her going
is in danger of ſore hurts by a continuall

experience in falling. Can ſhee
goe? She knowes not whither to goe,
but muſt haue a conduct during the
time of her ſecond Infancy: what forme
of bringing vp ſoeuer ſhee takes vpon
her, the firſt impreſſions thereof are
moſt coſtly, in reſpect of the time, and
their labour and trouble which haue
the care thereof, which is incredible.
For as ſhee receiues ſome document of
worldly ſcience and diſcipline, which
if it be a true doctrine, will inſtruct her,
that whatſoeuer qualities, ſciences, and
learning ſhe poſſeſſeth, yet ſhe is ſtill ignorant,
and knowes (in a manner) nothing,
and all that ſhe knowes not, can
neuer bee by her learned or conceiued,
although ſhe haue ſo many liues, as this
world abounds with creatures.
            And which is more,Mans life aſsaultod by peril I and eminent dangers. ſhe hath not ſo
ſoone eſcaped, and paſſed ouer the perils
of her Youth, but ſhe commeth and
entreth into thoſe infinite dangers of
her ripe age: and that which is moſt
deplorable, and lamentable, is, that in
that fiery and burning age, ſhee vtterly

conſumes & waſts her ſelfe. Or if ſhe eſcape,
& moderates the fury & violence
of the heat of that age, it is but for a time
for what way ſo euer ſhe treads Nature,
ſhee ſtill approaches neere vnto death,
being alwayes in the ready way to her
graue, where by degree, time hunts her
vnder the conduct of old age, not without
many croſſes, ſorrowes, and tribulations;
for ſhe muſt paſſe through cruell
and tedious ſtraights of anguiſh and
miſeries, no leſſe innumerable, then infinite;
which aſtoniſheth and weares
out, euen the moſt conſtant, who are in
a manner not able to indure them with
patience.
            If we will ſee the body of this Tree,
we muſt breake the barke of our condition:
for it is the true portraiture of our
ſelues, and ſo wee may cleerely apprehend
it with the very ſame reaſon; conſidering
what an infinite number of
miſ-haps, miſeries, and miſchiefes wee
are ſubiect vnto in this tranſitorie
world, that the infinitie of them is impoſſible
to be related: for if examples be

vaine to manifeſt it vnto vs by compariſon,
our imbecilitie in expreſſing it alone,
may be in ſome faſhion eloquent:
for to treate ſome part thereof, and
that wherewith the afflicted are moſt
comforted, is, through the aſſurance
they haue that all men together are ſubiect
to the like miſeries, and ill fortunes,
except none but thoſe who are not yet
borne, or thoſe, who in their Cradle
ending their liues, finde their Sepulchres:
otherwiſe let the moſt happy
and the moſt contented man that now
liueth on earth gaine-ſay it, alledging
this for his reaſon, that he knowes not
what miſ-haps and miſeries meane, and
that in ſo ſweet ignorance he hath paſſed
not onely the ſpring of his Youth,
but likewiſe the Summer, and part of
the Winter of his age, that it is well hitherto,
but it is without conſequence,
times paſt can conclude nothing of the
future; and though it ſeemeth to this
happy man, that although croſſes, troubles,
tribulations, and miſeries, ſhould
as it were aſſault him in the end of his

race, time ſhould bee wanting to make
durable and laſting the griefe of his
euils and afflictions: Foraſmuch as death
doth alwaies and lawfully ſucceed old
age, which ſhould hinder and interrupt
the courſe and proceeding thereof:
but to that I will truely anſwer without
many needleſſe proofes: for ſurety that
his laſt day onely is able ſufficiently to
make him feele and haue tryall of the
moſt cruell and ſenſibleſt griefe & torments,
wherewith any mortall body
can be vexed: therefore the moſt fortunate
man that is, cannot account himſelfe
happy, but at the end of his racei
ſith oftentimes before an hauen Town
many ſuffer ſhipwracke, that haue eſcaped
miraculouſly many eminent dangers,
in the middeſt of Stormes and
Tempeſts.
            But to proceed further,No man free from ſorrows & miſeries. I ſay, that although
there were ſuch a man found in
this world, of ſo happy condition, as to
haue alwayes ſailed in the ſhip of his
life, in this rough and inconſtant Sea
of the earth, with the agreeable winds

of his deſire, and without the leaſt dangers,
but rather continually to haue enioyed
a ſweet and immutable calme; yet
notwithſtanding, this kinde of life full
of Roſes,There is a time pre-ordained for euery thing. will proue full of Thornes at
his death, in conſidering, that loſſe and
depriuation of all thoſe pleaſures, doe
produce and bring forth cruell ſorrows
and griefes to the poſſeſſor thereof,
whoſe minde will bee ſo extremely
vext and tormented, that his paines and
ſufferings can be rather endured, then
expreſſed: which may eaſily bee proued
by the continuall experience that wee
haue in worldly things; by this Maxime,
the greater the contentments are,
the more extreme is the diſpleaſure and
anguiſh in the deprauation of them,
euen as gaine and profit produce feelings
of ioy; ſo loſſe and dammage by
different effects, breede ſencible torments
and griefes: which moues me to
conclude, according to my firſt Propoſitions,
that there is no life, although neuer
ſo happy, that can bee free and exempted
from ſorrowes and miſeries:

and to adde my opinion to it, I hold,
that the moſt vnfortunate, are the happieſt,
conſidering the concluſion and
end of all things; how the calme followes
ſtill the tempeſt; the day ſucceeds
the night; faire weather, raine; and ioy
is ſtill attended with annoy and ſorrowes,
according to the maxime of
Heauen & Earth: all the difference there
is, is, that this worlds happineſſe and
ioyes are temporall, and limited; and in
the other World, eternall and infinite.
            But to returne to our condition: to
make it appeare vnto you all together
wretched & miſerable; we muſt conſider
how time playes with it; ſomtimes
raiſing vs as it were to proſperity, & in a
moment caſting vs headlong into aduerſitie;
it ſerueth for a Marke to aime and
leuell at, and an habitation and lodging
of all euils: For hope deceiues our condition;
vanity flouts it; ambition
mockes it; vices are her beloued children,
and vertues her greateſt enemies:
pleaſure cheates her; the fleſh tempts
her; riches commands her, as her Soueraigne;

and finally, the Diuell maintaines
a continuall warre with her vntill
her end.
            Let vs iudge then if pride and arrogancy
become vs well, conſidering all
theſe our infirmities and defaults. Wee
muſt not therefore wonder,Humilitie, the Queene of Vertues. if Humility
bee the Queene of all other vertues,
ſith Arrogancy hath beene, and is ſtill
Princeſſe of Vices.Pride, the Princeſse of Vice. I hold opinion with
that worthy Philoſopher, which in one
leſſon only taught all ſorts of Sciences,
comprehended & abridged in that admirable
precept and inſtruction of Cognoſce
Teipſum; and truely who in that
knowledge is not ignorant, and that in
knowing himſelfe, will auow that hee
doth not perfectly know himſelfe. The
way that we leade to arriue at this bleſt
iourneys end vnto which wee aſpire, is
moſt long and tedious. So that it vvere
much better for vs to arme our ſelues
with a generous reſolution, to forſake
the world, before it doth leaue and abandon
vs; for the ſooneſt we can, will
bee late enough, to execute ſo glorious

an enterprize: For when I thinke and
behold the miſerable ſtate of this tranſitorie
world, and how it is infected
with all ſorts of execrable ſinnes, a
trembling horrour vnties my bodies ligatures,
my very knees beat together,
and I could vnfainedly wiſh my ſinnowy
ſtructure, to be transformed, into a
lumpe of ſnow, that the ardour of my
ſoules vexation, might diſſolue it into
penitentiall teares: for men do act ſinne
with an auaritious appetite, and all varieties
of abominations are lifted to
their Arcticke point. Doth not Satan
coyne them ſo faſt, as men would willingly
put them in practize? Did pride
euer ſo ſtrut it vpon the Tiptoes, as
now it doth?
            Can the Diuell, out of his ſhape of
faſhions, lay open more Antike-like
formes then are forged on the Anuill
of mans inuention? In Court, the Nobilitie
are hardly diſtinguiſht from their
followers. In Citie, the Merchant is
not knowne from his Factor. In Countrey,
the Gentry cannot be deſcryed or

deſcribed from the Ruſticke; and in generall,
the body publike is ſo ouerſpred
with the Leproſie of that gariſh
Strumpet, Pride, as there is ſcarce any
difference betweene Counteſſe and
Curtezan; Lady, and Chamber-Maid;
Miſtreſſe, and greaſie Kitchin
Wench; Gentleman, and Mechanick.
As for Knight and Taylor, there
goes but a paire of Sheares betwixt
them. How many miſ-ſpend and profuſely
lauiſh their fore-noones houres,
in the curious pranking of their ſinnepolluted
bodies! but how few reſerue
one poore brace of minutes, wherein to
prouide ſpirituall indewments to houze
their naked ſinfull ſoules! Neuer was
the Apophthegme of old Byas the Philoſopher
more verified, then in theſe
our franticke times.
            Moſt men carry their wealth about
with them, not as Bias did, in learning
and vertue; but vpon their back in gorgeous
apparell. Women doe ſo commonly
ſophiſticate their beauties, that
one (though Linceus-ſighted) can hardly

iudge, whether they poſſeſſe their own
faces, or no? and, which is more than
moſt lamentable, euery ſnowy-headed
Matron, euery toothleſſe Mumpſimus,
that one may ſee the ſun go to bed thorow
the furrowes of her forehead, muſt
haue her box of odoriferous Pomatum,
and glittering Stibium, wherewithall to
parget, white-lime, and complectionate
her rumpled cheekes, till ſhe lookes as
ſmugge as an hanſome painted Cloſe
ſtoole, or rotten poſte. But as for them
that lap vp their bodies in the pleaſant
miſts of aromaticke perfumes, let them
withall ſwallow this Pill: Within a
ſweet and ciuet lurking body, often is
impriſoned a loathſome ſtinking ſoule.
            Murther is accounted but manly reuenge,
and the deſperate Stabber cares
no more to kill a man, then to cracke a
Flea. Vſurie and Extortion are held
laudable vocations; Couetouſneſſe is
ſtiled thrift; Luxury and whoredome
are reputed but youthfull trickes: And
as for Drunkenneſſe, why that's a tolerable
recreation: Doe not men purſue

it with ſuch inordinate affection, that
they oft neglect their functions, bid
farewell to that domeſticke care they
ought to entertaine; diſlodge that humane
prouidence which ſhould be ſhut
vp in the Cabinet of their reaſonable
part, and ſolely proſtitute themſelues
to quotidian carouſing, till their breaths
ſmell no ſweeter then a Brewers apron,
whileſt their families are wrung and
grip't in the clutches of pouerty, lockt
vp, and impriſoned from thoſe neceſſarie
ſupplements, which ſhould keepe
both breath and body together at vnion?
This is a worthy Fathers opinion:
That a man poſſeſſed with a Diuell,
may be thought to be in a more hopeful
ſtate then a Drunkard: for albeit that
he be poſſeſſed, yet is it compulſiuely,
and againſt his will; but the Drunkard
wholly adopts and dedicates himſelfe,
with all the powerfull faculties of his
ſoule, voluntarily to the ſeruice of Satan.
S. Auguſtine likewiſe deſcribes
three fearefull properties in a Drunkard:
It confounds nature, ſaith he, loſeth

grace, and conſequently, incurres
Gods wrathfull indignation to be powred
out vpon the imbracer thereof.
            Swearing, and blaſpheming Gods
great and glorious Name, is reckoned
for a morall vertue, the grace of birth
and honour, the cognizance of an high-bred
ſpirit.
            What Chriſtian can refraine, (that
hath any ſparke of Diuine intellect in
him) to vnſluce the flood-gate of his
eyes, and let his melting heart guſh
through with teares; when in the ſtreets
he ſhall heare little Children, ſcarce able
to goe, or ſpeake, to be vnderſtood;
volley foorth moſt fearefull oathes, and
with ſuch procliuitie, as if they had bin
tutored in their mothers wombes;
whileſt their parents ſtanding by, offer
not to check them, with ſo much as a
ſowre reproofe; but ſeeming rather to
ſolace themſelues in their Childrens
ſinnes, and delight in their owne damnations:
like thoſe who dye in a Sardinian
laughter? If the penall Law of Lodovicus
were put in practice; who hearing

one ſweare, ſeared vp his lips with
an hot iron) ſcarce ten, in as many Pariſhes,
but would be glad to be in league
with the Apothicaries lippe-ſalue. How
many miraculous Iudgemēts hath God
ſhot out againſt the blaſphemers of his
ſacred Name; whoſe inſtances would
be too prolixious? What ſinne can be
more damnable, & yet more practiſed?
None can ſooner plunge the ſoule into
the implacable gulfe of perdition, and
yet no ſinne, by intentiue endeuour,
more eaſie to be cropt off, and weeded
vp: for that it is no incidentall iſſue of
naturall corruption, but an accidentall
monſter, inegndred of corrupted cuſtome.
A learned Father confeſſeth, That
at euery other word he once vſed to
ſweare, but at length, endeuouring to
locke vp the doore of his lips, to ſet
watch before his tongue; imploying
diuine aſſiſtance therein, and entreating
moreouer his friends to ſmite him with
the rod of reprehenſion; in forty daies
he vtterly loſt the abuſiue vſe thereof:
So that now, ſaith he, nothing is more

eaſie to me, then not to ſweare at all.
            It is recorded, that Lewis the 7. King
of France, diuulged an Edict, that whoſoeuer
was knowne to warr againſt heauen
with oathes, ſhould be branded in
the forehead, as a capitall offender:
Should not then euery Chriſtian labour
to ſet a watch before his mouth, & keep
the doore of his lips, that no rebellious
words ſalley forth againſt his Creator?
If not for feare of temporall Iuſtice,
yet, leſt the God of Iuſtice ſhould brand
his ſoule with the dreadfull ſtigme of eternall
damnation, which no ſalue can
heale, Haliacmons Floud waſh out, nor
length of time weare off. O lamentable▪
when the Turkes and Ethnicks out-ſtrip
vs in their cloudy and ignorant zeale:
they will diſpute in the heart of their
higheſt Streets, about their Alcoran, and
Mahometiſh religion, with holy intended
deuotion. But what voice is heard
in our Streets? Nought, but the ſqueaking
out of thoſe obſceane and light
Iigges, ſtuft with loathſome and vnheard-of
ribauldry, ſuck't from the poiſonous

dugges of ſinne-ſwelled Theaters;
controuerſall conferences about
richeſt beere, neateſt wine, or ſtrongeſt
Tobacho, wherein to drowne their
ſoules, and draw meager diſeaſes vpon
their diſtempered bodies.
            And tell them moreouer, that by their
nocturnall ſuperfluities, and inſatiable
quaffings, they ſet but feathers in Times
wings, and (as a worthy home-bred
Author ſaith) ſpurre but the gallopping
horſe; haſten on their ſpeedy deaths,
and digge their owne vntimely graues.
            More haue recourſe to playing houſes,
then to praying Houſes; where
they ſet open their eares and eyes, to
ſucke vp variety of abominations, bewitching
their minds with extrauagant
thoughts, and benumming their ſoules
with inſenſibility, whereby ſinne is become
ſo cuſtomary to them, as, that to
ſinne, with them is deem'd no ſinne at
all: conſonant to that Theologicall
Maxime; The cuſtome of ſinning, taketh
away the very ſenſe and feeling of
ſinne. And ſemblable to Pythagoras his

conceipt of the Sphericall harmony:
Becauſe (ſaith he) we euer heare it, wee
neuer heare it.
            Many ſet faire out-ſide colours vpon
their profeſſiō of religious honeſty, but
beeing ſtrictly lookt into by the penetrating
eye of practiſe and performance,
proue ſeldome di'de in graine. Some
glitter like gold in their conuerſation,
but put once to the Touch, are found
but counterfeit Alcumy. Others will
needs ſeeme a ſubſtantiall body in integrity
of life; but ſhaken and ſifted with
the hand of tryall, become but an Anatomy
of bones.
            To giue almes, is thought but a phantaſticall
ceremony, and to refreſh the
comfortleſſe Lazarus, is deem'd but the
maintenance of idle and exorbitant vagabounds.
O where is Charity fled?
Is ſhe not whipt & foyſted out of great
mens Kitchens, glad to keepe Sanctuary
in ſtraw-cloath'd Cottages? Are not
larger beneuolences often diſtributed at
the doore of one ruſſet-clad Farmer,
then at ten mighty mens Gates? The

Magnificoes of this world reare vp
ſumptuous buildings, onely for ſhew
and oſtentation; whiffing more ſmoke
out of their noſes then their chimneys;
and it begets more wonder to ſee them
ſhake downe their bounty into the
poore mans lap, then to ſee a Court-Lady
vnpainted, or to finde an openfiſted
Lawyer, that without a Bribe will
faithfully proſecute his Clients cauſe.
Notwithſtanding al this, ſo parcimonious
are they in their domeſticke prouiſion,
that not a Rat of any good education,
but ſcornes to keepe houſe with
them.
            In thoſe golden times of yore, Charitie
was the rich mans Idoll: for they
did emulate each other in ſupplying the
Widdowes want; in comforting the
Orphanes miſery; and in refreſhing the
Trauellers wearineſſe.
            And it was their earthly Summum bonum,
to be open-hearted and handed to
each hungry ſtranger: This inſcription
commonly engraued vpon the front
of their gates:
            
               
O gate, ſtand ope to all, be ſhut to none.
            But in theſe our moderne dayes, they
can cunningly tranſpoſe the point, and
and thus peruert the ſenſe,
Stand open (gate) to none, be ſhut to all.
            
            Doe not theſe heauen-tempting Nimrods
depopulate and leuell vvith the
ground whole townes, crowd and
iuſtle many honeſt and ancient Farmers
out of their Demeſne, deuaſtate their
Poſſeſſions, and expoſe them with their
Wiues, Children and Families, to be
Camerades with palefac'd beggery,
onely to lay the Baſis of their Babel-out-brauing
Palaces, abillimented with
Punkiſh out-ſides, to cheate the ſpeedy
approaching Traueller of his hungry
hopes, as Zeuxis did the ſilly Birds with
his liuely-limbed Grapes: as if they be
in-lined with quaint garniſhing, and
coſtly furniture, & beautified with curious
pencild pieces, wheron thy eye may
glut it ſelfe by gazing, yet perhaps maiſt
thou be chap-faln for want of victuals?
            Theſe glittering obiects are the Meduſas
               
that inchant the violent inſtigations,
that ſpurre on young luxurious
heires to hurle out their Angle to catch
their fathers liues, and languiſhingly to
long, till they ſee their moſſie-bearded
Sires topple vp their heeles into their
graues.
            And when their Fathers ſurrender
vp their breathes to him from whom it
was firſt diffuſed: then doe they mourne
(forſooth) though ceremonially, not for
that they are dead, but becauſe they
died no ſooner.
            The premiſſes pre-conſidered; what
can be expected then, but an imminent
deſolation, or concluſiue diſſolution of
this fooliſh doting world, ſince vniuerſally
it is but an indigeſted Chaos of
outragious enormities? Religion is
made the Canopy to ſhrowd the putrifaction
of Hypocriſie, and it's growne
the higheſt Maxime in mundane policies,
to ſeeme (not be) religious: equall-handed
Iuſtice is ruſh'd aſide, by ſtubborne
authoritie, and all Morall vertues
imbraced in their contraries.
            
               
How long then (moſt milde & more
merciful God) wilt thou forget to bee
iuſt! Oh how long wilt thou ſhut vp the
veſſels of thy wrath, and protract reuenge?
Art thou not the powerful God
of Iuſtice? how canſt thou then be any
thing but thy ſelfe? What infinities of
ſinnes are ſhot vp to Heauen againſt
thee? Yet ſtill and ſtill thou wooeſt vs
with the heauenly breath of thy holy
Goſpell, vncouering thoſe inexpreſſible
wounds thou receiuedſt for our Redemption
from ſinne, and Satan, that
we might with pittifull commiſeration
behold them, and vnceſſantly crying
out vnto vs: How oft (O my deare
children, whom I haue bought with
the price of my moſt precious bloud)
would I haue gathered you together,
euen as the Hen doth her Chickens,
and yet, nor yet, you will not be collected!
            How oft hath hee thundered and
knockt at the doores of our hearts, with
the power of his Spirit, to wake from
the profound Ecſtaſm o f ſoule-killing

ſinnes! yet ſtill lye we ſnorting on the
bed of ſecuritie, and cannot be rowzed.
            How often, O how often hath hee
out-ſtretched his all-ſauing hand, to
heaue and helpe vs out of the ſlimie
mudde of our impieties! yet ſtill lye we
groueling and ouer-whelmed in the inſenſible
Lethargy of abominable tranſgreſſions.
            How many warning-pieces hath he
diſcharged vpon vs! How oft hath hee
diſplayed his milke-white Enſignes of
peace vnto vs! What deuouring plagues;
what fires; what inundations, what vnſeaſonable
Seaſons, what prodigeous
Births, what vnnaturall Meteors, what
malevolent Coniunctions, what ominous
apparitions, what bloudy aſſaſſinations
of mighty Kings: what Rapes,
what Murthers, what fraudulencies betwixt
brother and brother? what horrible
conſpiracies by ſonnes againſt fathers?
All theſe ſent as Heralds againſt
vs, yet will wee not come and bee reconciled.
            Theſe prodigious precurſions, or

precurſiue prodigies, ſhould deterre
each humane creature from ſpurning againſt
his Creator. Theſe pre-monitions
ſhould inſtruct vs, that Gods dreadfull
vengeance waits at our dores & like
a ſtaru'd Tiger gapes for our deſtruction:
And notwithſtanding he doe for a
while fore-ſlowe to let fall his flaming
rod of fierie indignation vpon vs, yet is
the Axe already laid to the roote of the
tree, and God muſt and will aſſuredly
come to iudgement; ſeeing that now
not any of thoſe ancient predictions myſtically
pointed out vnto vs, in the ſoule-ſauing
Writ by the holy Prophets, remaine
vnfiniſhed, but onely the finall
deſtruction of that Romiſh ſeuen-headed
Monſter, together with the recollection
of the vagabond Iewes, into the
ſheepe-fold of Ieſus Chriſt.
            Doth not an vncouth terrour ſeize
vpon a man, whē in the depth or noone
of night this ſudden and vnthought of
out-cry of fire, fire, ſhall fill his affrighted
eares, and chaſe him out of his ſoft
and quiet ſlumbers; whereat skipping

from his eaſefull bed, and diſtractedly
gazing through the Caſement, ſhall behold
his owne houſe o're-ſpred with a
bright-burning flame, and himſelfe together
with his Wife and Children,
ſeruants goods and all, moſt lyable to
the deuouring rapacitie of imminent
danger? O conſider then, wicked man,
how thy ſoule will be beleaguered with
anguiſh and horrour, when in that laſt
and terrible Day thou ſhalt behold with
thy mortall eyes, the Cataracts of heauen,
vnſluced, and huſhing ſhowres of
ſulphurious fires diſperſe themſelues
through all the corners of the earth and
aire: the whole Vniuerſe o're-canoped
with a remorſeleſſe flame; when thou
ſhalt ſee the great and glorious Iudge
appeare triumphantly in the skies, whileſt
mighty-winged clouds of deuouring
flames fly before him, as Vſhers
to his powerfull and terrible Maieſtie,
attended with countleſſe multitudes of
beautious Angels, golden winged
Cherubims, and Seraphims, ſounding
their Trumpets, whoſe clamorous

tongues ſhall affright the empty ayre,
and cal & awake the drowzy dead from
their darke and duskie cabins, when
thou ſhalt ſee the diſſipated bones of all
mortals ſince the Creation (concatenate
and knit in their proper and peculiar
form) amazedly ſtart vp, & in numberles
troupes flocke together, all turning vp
their wondring eyes, to gaze vpon their
high and mighty Creator. Then, O
then will thy conſcience recommemorate
afreſh thy paſt committed ſinnes,
and with the corroding ſting of guilt,
will ſtab thorow thy perplexed ſoule.
Then, O then, will it be too late to wiſh
the Mountaines to fall vpon thee; for
they themſelues for feare would ſhrinke
into their Center. Alas, it cannot then
bee auaileable to woo the waters to
ſwallow thee, for they would bee glad
to diſclaime their liquid ſubſtance, and
be reduced to a nullity. What will it
boote thee then to intreat the earth to
entombe thee in her dankiſh wombe,
when ſhee her ſelfe will ſtruggle to remoue
from her locall reſidence, and to

fly frō the preſence of the great Iudge?
The aire cānot muffle thee in her foggy
vaſtitie: for that wil be cleerely refin'd:
in her will be celeſtiall flames, before
contaminated with humane pollution.
In fine, how will thy ſoule tremblingly
howle out, and breake forth into bitter
exclamations, when thou ſhalt heare
that definitiue, or rather infinitiue ſentence
denounced againſt thee, I know
thee not, Depart and goe into euerlaſting
torment, whileſt Legions of diuels,
with horrid vociferations muſter about
thee, like croking Rauens about ſome
dead carkaſſe waiting to carry thee?
            O thou Vſurer, and thou that grindeſt
the faces of the poore, thy gold cannot
ranſome thee. Then, thou mighty man
that rackeſt the Widdow, and circumuenteſt
the Orphane of his ſucceſſiue
right, thy honour cannot priuiledge
thee: then, thou murtherer, adulterer,
and blaſphemer, thy colourable excuſes
will not purge thee.
            Then, O thou vncharitable Churle,
who neuer kneweſt, that a rich man

treaſures vp no more of his riches, then
that he contributes in Almes.
            Thou that neuer imbracedſt the
counſell of that reuerend Father, who
cryes, Feede him that dies for hunger.
Whoſoeuer thou art that canſt preſerue,
and wilt not, thou ſtandeſt guilty of famiſhing:
then I ſay, in that day ſhalt
thou pine in perdition.
            Then, O thou luxurious Epicure, that
through the fiue ſenſes, which are the
Cinque-Ports, or rather ſinner-ports of
thy ſoule, gulpeſt downe delightfull
ſinne like water, they will bee to thee
like the Angels bookes, ſweet in thy
mouth, but bitter in thy bowels.
            Then O thou gorbellied Mammoniſt,
that pileſt vp & congeſteſt huge maſſes
of refulgent earth, purchaſed by all vnconſcionable
courſes, yet carrieſt nothing
with thee but a Coffin and a winding
ſheete! Thy faire pretences will be
like Caracters drawne vpon the Sands,
or Arrowes ſhot vp to Heauen-ward,
they cannot releaſe thee from Satans inexpiable
ſeruitude.
            
               
Then O thou Canker-worme of
Common-wealthes; thou Monſter of
Man; thou that putteſt out the eye of
Iuſtice with Bribes, or ſo cloſely ſhutſt
it, that the clamorous cry of the poore
mans caſe cannot open it. Thou that
makeſt the Law a noſe of Waxe, to
turne and faſhion it to thine owne priuate
end, to the vtter diſgrace of conſcionable
Iuſtice, and to the lamentable
ſubuerſion of many an honeſt and vpright
cauſe: thy quirkes, dilatory demurres,
conueyances and conniuences
cannot acquit thee, but thou ſhalt be remoued
with a Writ, into the loweſt and
darkeſt dungeon of damnation. No,
no, the Lord of heauen and earth (who
is good in infiniteneſſe, and infinite in
goodneſſe,) will winnow, garble and
fanne his corne, the choyce wheate he
will treaſure vp in the garners of eternall
felicitie; but the Chaffe and Darnell
muſt bee burnt with vnquenchable
fire. There muſt you languiſh in torments
vnrelaxable; there muſt you fry
and freeze in one ſelfe-furnace; there

muſt you liue in implacable and tenebrous
fire, which, as Auſtin defines,
ſhall giue no light to comfort you.
            Then will you wiſh (though then too
late) that you had beene created loathſome
Toades, or abhorred Serpents,
that your miſeries might haue clozed
vp with your liues: but you muſt bee
dying perpetually, yet neuer dye, and
which enuirons mee with a trembling
(terrour) when you haue languiſh't in
vnexpreſſible agonies, tortures, gnaſhings,
and horrid howlings ten thouſand
millions of yeeres; yet ſhall you bee as
farre from the end of your torments, as
you were at the beginning.
            A confuſed modell, and miſty figure
of hell haue wee conglomerate in our
fancy, drowzily dreaming, that it is
a place vnder earth vnceſſantly (Aetna-like)
vomiting ſulphurious flames: but
we neuer purſue the meditation thereof
ſo cloſe, as to conſider what a thing
it is to liue there eternally. For this adiunct,
Eternall, intimates ſuch infiniteneſſe,
as neither thought can attract, or

ſuppoſition apprehend. And further, to
amplifie it with the words of a worthy
Writer, though all the men that euer
haue or ſhall be created, were, Briareus-like,
hundred-handed, and ſhould all at
once take pens in their hundred hands,
and ſhould doe nothing elſe in ten hundred
thouſand millions of yeeres, but
ſumme vp in figures as many hundred
thouſand millions as they could, yet neuer
could they reduce to a Totall, or
confine within number this Triſillable
word, Eternall.
            
            Can any Chriſtian then (vpon due cō
               ſideration
hereof) forbeare to proſtrate
himſelfe with flexible humility before
the glorious Throne of Grace, & there,
with flouds of vnfaigned teares, repentantly
abiure and diſclaine the allurements
of carnall corruption, the painted
pleaſures of the world, and the bitter
ſweetneſſe of ſinne, which is the death's
wound of his ſoule? for a Weapon
wounds the body, and ſinne the ſoule:
For what profits it a man to winne the
whole world, and loſe his owne ſoule?

The ſoundeſt Method therefore, to preuent
our excluſion from the Throane of
Gods mercy, is, to imagine, we ſtill ſee
him preſent in his Iuſtice, whatſoeuer,
or when ſoeuer we attempt any blacke
deſigne: Let vs but adumbragiouſly
fancy (as one hath it) the Firmament to
bee his Face; the all-ſeeing Sunne, his
right Eye; the Moone, his left; the
Winds, the breath of his Noſtrils; the
Lightening and Tempeſts, the troubled
action of his Ire; the Froſt and Snow,
his Frownes; that the Heauen is his
Throne; the Earth his Footſtoole: that
he is all in all things; that his omnipotence
fils all the vacuities of Heauen,
Earth, and Sea; that by his power, hee
can vngirdle and let looſe the Seas impetuous
waues, to o'rewhelme & bury
this lower vniuerſe in their vaſt wombs,
in a moment that hee can let drop the
blue Canopy (which hath nothing aboue
it, whereto it is perpendicularly
knit) or hurle thunder-bolts thorow
the tumorous cloudes, to paſh
vs precipitate through the center, into

the loweſt dungeon of Hell.
            Theſe alluſiue cogitations of Gods
omnipotent Maieſtie, will curbe in and
ſnaffle vs from ruſhing into damnable
actions, if we vnremoueably ſeat them
in our memories.
            Make then a couenant with thine
eyes and heart, O man, leſt they dote
on earthly graſſe, ſurfeit on the ſugared
Pils of poyſonous vanities, and ſo inſenſibly
hurle downe thy better part
into the gulph of irreuocable damnation,
if not for thy ſelfe ſake, yet iniure
not thy Creatour, who halh drawne
thee by his owne patterne, moulded
thee in his owne forme; and, to make
thee eternally happy, hath infuſed his
owne eſſence into thee; for thy ſoule,
by the Philoſophers confeſſion, is infuſion
celeſtiall, no naturall traduction,
and in that reſpect another calls it an
arrachment, or cantell, pulld from the
celeſtiall ſubſtance which cannot terminate
it ſelfe within a lumpe of fleſh:
Euen as the beames of the Sunne,
though they touch the earth, and giue

life to theſe inferiour creatures, yet ſtill
reſide in the body of the Sunne whence
they are darted: So thy ſoule, though
it bee ſeated either within the filme of
the braine, or confined in the center of
the heart, and conuerſeth with the ſences,
yet it will ſtill haue beeing whence
it hath its beginning.
            Remember then thy Creatour in the
dayes of thy youth, call vpon him
while it is called to day; for as the Poet
no leſſe ſweetely then diſcreetly ſung,
Who knowes ore night that hee next
morne ſhall breathe? Then take Dauids
Early in the morning, not the Deuils
Stay till to morrow: for thou knoweſt,
God will bring thee to Iudgement,
yet thou knoweſt not when, nor in
what yeere, nor in what moneth of the
yeere, nor in what weeke of the moneth,
nor in what day of the weeke, nor
in what houre of the day, nor in what
minute of that houre, nor in what moment
of that minute; for hee will come
like a thiefe in the night ſuddenly, before
with a winke thou canſt locke vp

thine eye, or in thy braine create the
nimbleſt thought▪ Canſt thou then
hope to ſtand iuſtified in thy Makers
preſence, when thou haſt cramd the
deuill with thy ſappe of ſtrength, and
full gorg'd him with the pureſt Acorne
Maſt of thy ſiowy virility, if at laſt
thou come limping on Times tottering
crutches, to preſent vnto him the off all
huskes, and moroſity of thy doting decrepit
age.
            What thanke is it to pardon our
enemies, when wee cannot hurt them?
to giue away our goods, when wee
can enioy them no longer? to abandon
our pleaſures, when wee cannot
vſe them? to forſake ſinne, when
it biddes farewell to vs? and at laſt
onely to ſurceaſe to offend, when ability
of offending is taken from vs? No,
no, hee will then paralell thee with the
ſluggard, that neuer would acquire
foode till hee was firſt ſtarn'd, and
ranke thee with the ſottiſh ideot, that
could not know a fiſh, till hee was already
ſtung with a Scorpion: thy palſie-ſhaken

prayers will bee like Cains oblation,
vnacceptable to the Lord, and
noiſome to his noſtrils. Thinkeſt thou
to expiate Gods Iuſtice, when thou
haſt prodigally ſwealed out the blazing
lampe of thy brighteſt day in the Deuils
chappell, if at laſt thou come creeping
(when thy breath lies twinkling
in the ſocket of thy noſtrils) to ſet it
vp in Gods Sanctuary, hoping then
and there to haue it repleniſh't with his
all-ſauing grace and mercie? O mocke
not thy ſoule with theſe deluding phantaſma's:
for as Alexander ſeeing one of
his ſouldiers whetting his dart when others
of his fellowes went foorth to
fight, caſheer'd him, ſaying, Hee's vnfit
to beare armes, that hath them to
make ready when hee ſhould skirmiſh:
So will God ſend thee packing (as hee
did the fooliſh Virgins) with this retorſion,
Thou comeſt disfurniſh't, with
no oyle in thy lampe, and thou deſerueſt
no mercie, that neuer deſiredſt it till
now in miſerie. Gather thy ſelfe betimes
then within the weapons of

Faith, Hope, Charity, Repentance, and
Perſeuerance, and let Prayer ſtand perpetuall
Sentinell: for if the Diuell once
get footing within thee, he will hardly
bee eiected, ſo wily is he in peruerting
thee, that thou canſt not bee too wary
in preuenting him; For as Iphicrates anſwered
his Generall, (who asked him
why hee ſurrounded his ſouldiers with
a Wall, when there was no feare of
foe-mens approach?) A man cannot
be too prouident in preuenting obuious
and occurrent dangers. So canſt thou
not bee too cautelous in repelling the
perillous ſtratagems of the Diuels aſſaults:
therefore may I cloze vp the
precedencie with that worthy ſaying
of a more worthy Epigrammatiſt, No
man needes feare, that feares before
hee needes. O cleanſe and purifie thy
heart then by earneſt prayer and powerfull
ciaculations, which is made the
loathſome cage of ſinne, the ſilent receptacle
of diabolicall cogitations, and
the diſmall dungeon of malignant motions,
that the Spirit of grace may

there finde harbour, and take delight
to bee thy inmate.
            Remember, O thou mighty man,
that ſwelling titles of Honour are but
the leaues of vanity.
            Remember, O thou rich man, that
terrene and tranſitorie pleaſures are like
the Bee, though they yeeld honey, yet
carry they a ſting, and are but as the Lillies
of the earth, more delectable in
ſhow, then durable in continuance.
            Remember, O thou extortioner, thou
cruell man, thou Murtherer, thou Adulterer,
thou deceitfull man; thou vnconſcionably
deteineſt the hirelings
wages; and thou that acteſt inexorable
villanies ſecretly in the darke, impriſoned
from the worlds dull eye, that
if the Eagle can diſcerne, as one hath it,
the Hare vnder the Buſh, and the Fiſh
vnder the Waues, much more can God,
who is the Creator of creatures, penetrate
the cloſet of thy heart, with his
all-ſeeing eye, and diſcerne thy clandeſtine
ſinful practices before, and in their
very conception, and for them hee

will bring thee to iudgement.
            Remember, O thou that ſwayeſt the
Sword of Iuſtice, to ſtrike or ſaue, as
thou art ſuggeſted by thine owne ends,
profits, or affections, that though thy
couert proiects be not envulgard to the
worlds generall eye; yet a day of Reuelation
will come, when all thy partiall
and priuate practices ſhall bee ſtript,
euiſcerate, and laid as apparantly open,
as the ſheepe vpon the Gambrell.
            But now with reuerence and Douelike
humilitie to you (which are Iehouahs
Embaſſadors) the light of the
world, and ſalt of the earth, doe I addreſſe
my ſpeech, muſtered vp in the
meaneſt and mildeſt ranke of words.
O, I could wiſh that all of you ſtood
without the liſt of that reprehenſion of
Vices, which once an ancient and honeſt
Hiſtorian twitted the Monkes of
Canterbury with. Some riſe early in the
morning, to ſee their hounds purſue the
prey, but not to pray: ſome delight
to catch Fowles, but not Soules; ſome
take pleaſure to caſt a Dye well, but not

caſt to die well. Doth the wilde▪ Aſſe
bray, ſaith Iob, when he hath graſſe; or
loweth the Oxe when he hath fodder?
But I dare not ſay, No more doe ſome
of you preach, when you haue once got
a Benefice. If there bee any that entertaine
Religion with their Lord, preach
the praiſe of their Patrons; preaching
in the Pulpit, chatter in their Chambers,
ſuiting their Linſie Wolſey profeſſions▪
with their ſeuerall ends: O let
thoſe remember how God met with a
miſchiefe that notorious Nestorius, who
for his temporizing inconſtancie, ſet
wormes a worke to eate out his tongue.
O let them looke into the Story of one
Hecebolus, a Sophiſter, who accommodating
his profeſſion to the faſhions of
the Emperours, fained himſelfe in the
dayes of Conſtantius, to be a moſt feruent
Chriſtian.
            But when Iulian the Apoſtata was
Ruler, preſently he turned Paynim, and
in his Orations proclaimed Iulian a
god. And when Iulian was dead in
Iouinians time, hee would haue turned

backe to Chriſtianitie. Wherevpon for
his mutabilitie and lightneſſe in his Religion,
his horrid conſcience draue him
to the Church gates, and there hurling
himſelfe flat, cryed and bellowed with
a lowd voice, Trample me vnder your
feete vnſauoury ſalt that I am; entirely
wiſhing out of his ſoules agony, that he
had neuer ſeene the light; or at his conception,
his tongue had been riuetted to
the roofe of his mouth.
            Laſtly and indefinitely to all; Remember
ſo to liue, as you ſtill may bee
prepared for the ſtroke of Death: then
will you deſire to be diſſolued, and to
ſleep in peace recluſiuely frō the turbulent
ſea of earthy carefull miſeries, diſcerning
cleerely by the ſpirituall eye of
vnderſtanding, that mans life is a wayfare,
becauſe it is ſhort and a warfare,
for that it is ſharpe, and that worldly
delights are deceitfull, and of no durabilitie;
like the water-Serpent, no ſooner
bred, but dead. Collecting likewiſe
out of humane experience, that the beſt
life is but a weary and tedious pilgrimage,

& feeles no touch of true ſolace,
till at the euening of his dayes he lodge
at the Inne of death: for death is the
path of life, a Gaole-deliuery of the
ſoule, a perfect health, the hauen of heauen,
the finall victory of terreſtriall
troubles, an eternall ſleepe, a diſſolution
of the body, a terrour to the rich, a
deſire of the poore, a pilgrimage vncertaine,
a thiefe of men, a ſhadow of
life, a reſt from trauell, an Epilogue to
vaine delight, a conſumption of idle
deſires, a ſcourge for euill, a guerdon for
good: it diſ-burdens vs of all care, vnmanacles
and frees vs from vexation,
ſolicitude and ſorrow.
            Of all thoſe numberleſſe numbers
that are dead, neuer any one returned
to complaine of death, but of thoſe few
that liue, moſt complaine of life. On
earth euery man grumbles at his beſt
eſtate.
            The very elements, whereby our
ſubſiſtence or being, as the ſecondarie
cauſe, is preſerued, conſpire againſt vs:
the fire burnes vs; the water drownes

vs: the earth annoyes vs; and the aire
infects vs; our dayes are laborious, our
nights comfortleſſe; the heat ſcorcheth
vs; the cold benummes vs; health ſwels
vs with pride; ſickneſſe empaleth our
beauties; friends turne Swallowes;
they will ſing with vs in the Summer of
proſperitie, but in the winter of tryall,
they will take wings and be gone. Enemies
brand our reputations with deprauing
imputations; and the enuious man
hurleth abroad his gins to enſnare our
liues: who would then deſire to liue,
where there is nothing that begets content?
for this world is a Theater of vanities,
a Chaos of confuſions, an Embaſſador
of miſchiefe, a Tyrant to vertue,
a breaker of Peace, a Fauorite of
Warre, a friend of Vices, a coyner of
Lies, an Anuile of Nouelties, a table of
Epicuriſme, a furnace of Luſt, a pit-fall
to the rich, a burthen to the poore, a
Cell of Pilgrims, a den of Theeues, a
calumniator of the good, a renowner of
the wicked, a cunning Impoſtor, and a
deceiuer of all.
            
               
How is the progreſſe of poore proud
mans life violently agitated (like the riuer
Euripus) with contrarious motions?
The pleaſure of the wyly world thus
inueigles him; Come vnto mee, and I
will drowne thee in delight. The corruption
of the luxurious fleſh thus
ingles him; Come vnto me, and I will
infect thee; the Diuell he whiſpers this
in his eare, Come vnto mee, and I will
cheate and deceiue thee: But our ſweet
and ſacred Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt, with
perſwaſiue inducements thus intreates
him; Come vnto me (I pray thee) that
art heauy laden, and I will receiue and
exonerate thee, and with the mighty
arme of my mercy and compaſſion
lift off that vnſupportable loade, which
cruſheth downe to Hell thy groaning
ſoule.
            Study then to liue as dead to the
world, that thou maiſt liue with God:
for the iuſt man is ſaid, neuer to liue till
after death. Endeuor thy ſelfe to march
faire through this worlds Labyrinth,
not to ſquander and looke aſquint vpon

the Circean allurements thereof. But
without turning either to the right
or left hand, runne ſtraight on in that
Eclipticke line, which will conduct thee
to that celeſtiall Ieruſalem, where (with
that immaculate Lambe Ieſus Chriſt)
thou ſhalt enioy pleaſure without pain;
wealth, without want; reſt, without labour;
ioy without griefe; and immenſiue
felicitie without end.
            Moreouer the contempt of the world,
born of the loue of God, ſhall at length
grow to hatred of the world, when
that beſides the vanity and miſery of it,
he ſhall contemplate the miſchiefe and
enmitie againſt the Almighty vvhich
there raigneth; when beſides that vanity
which ſome doe lay open to the
view of all, hee will repreſent to himſelfe
the iniquities which are cloſely
kept, and the Treaſons, Adulteries,
Murthers, which are priuately and lurkingly
committed, when he ſhall conſider
the vials of Gods wrath and diſpleaſure
powred generally vpon all
man-kinde: for in the conſideration of

this world, it behooueth vs to leaue out
no part of it, but to obſerue all manner
of nations and people: amongſt which
there are many Pagans, which not onely
by a conſequent, but alſo by expreſſe
profeſſion, adore the deuill. The Eaſt
Indies dedicate their temples to him, and
reuerence him with all reſpect. The
Weſt Indies are afflicted and tormented
ordinarily with euill ſpirits. In moſt
part of the North, lurking deceits, and
aſſuming ſtrange ſhapes, are very common
among the Inhabitants. Sorcery
is there an ordinary profeſſion, and the
Diuell reigneth without contradiction.
In that Countrey which did once
flouriſh, where the Apoſtles had planted
ſo happily the holy Ghoſt, the
Churches are now changed into Moſques,
and Temples of Idolatry. In the
Weſt, the head of the viſible Church is
become an earthly Monarch, and banks
are erected in thoſe places, where, in
times paſt was the Houſe of God. Amongſt
thoſe erroneous and enuious
people are ſcattered the Iewes, which

blaſphemed againſt Ieſus Chriſt, and
hauing perſecuted him in his life, doe
iniuriouſly wrong him after his death.
The Countrey from whence came Decrees
and Orders for Religion, hath in
it publike Brothel-houſes, and Sodomy
is there an vſuall cuſtome. Here it is
alſo, where doubts in Religion that concerne
a mans faith, are decided in the
middeſt of corruption. There onely
remaineth in the world a handfull of
people which ſerue Ieſus Chriſt in
truth and verity; and they can ſcarce
receiue breath in this ayre which is ſo
contrary to them; beeing here as fiſhes
without water; as the remainders of
great Maſſacres; as pieces of boords
ſcattered after the breaking of a great
veſſell; and yet neuertheleſſe, among
theſe few that are ſubſtracted out of the
reſt of the world, corruption doth increaſe
as a Canker or Vlcer, Quarrels,
Vanity, Superfluity in Apparell, Auarice,
Ambition; Sumptuouſneſſe, which
ſpendeth fooliſhly, doth infect the one
part of this ſmall troupe; for GOD

is ill ſerued in priuate families, their
almes are cold, they pray ſeldome, and
reade neuer: IN briefe, a contagion of
vices by conuerſing with our aduerſaries,
doth infect vs, which is the firſt
ſteppe to ſuperſtition; for errour creeps
in to vs by vice, and ſpirituall fornication
by corporall. If therefore where
God is moſt purely knowne, hee bee
there ill ſerued, how much more amongſt
the reſt of the world? If vices
doe harbour in the Sanctuary, how
much more in the body of the church
and habitation of the wicked? Therefore
Chriſt doth rightly call Satan,
The prince of the world; and Peter doth
iuſtly write in the ſecond of the Acts,
Saue your ſelues from that peruerſe generation,
for Satan lieth in ambuſh for
vs all. This age is infectious, vices are
like vnto glue, temptations ſtrong, our
enemies mighty, our ſelues feeble and
ignorant, and the way of ſaluation narrow
and full of thornes; And few there
bee (ſaith Chriſt) that finde it: And
thoſe which finde it, doe not alwayes

keepe it; but many hauing knowne the
trueth, doe leaue it, and returne to their
vomit. Let vs know then a place ſo
dangerous, that wee may paſſe by as
ſtrangers, which doe not onely paſſe,
but alſo runne from it, flying from the
world, to come vnto God, for wee ſhall
neuer haue repoſe, vnleſſe wee reſt our
ſelues vpon him. The heauen moueth
alwayes, and yet it is the place of our
reſt. On the contrary, the earth reſteth
alwayes, and yet it is the place of our
motion. The Quadrants and Horologies
imitate the motion of heauen; but
the faith of the beleeuers doth imitate
the Reſt which is aboue all. Vlyſses did
more eſteeme the ſmoake of his owne
houſe, than the flame of anothers; How
much more then would he eſteeme the
flame of his owne chimney, than the
ſmoake of anothers? Wee are heere
ſtrangers, this is not our houſe: our habitation
is in heauen. Let vs compare
the ſmoake of this ſtrange houſe, and
the darkeneſſe of the earth, with the
beauty and ſplendor of our owne dwelling,

which is the in Kingdome of heauen:
Here is the reigne of Satan, there
the Kingdome of God; here is a valley
of teares, there the height of mirth;
here wee ſowe in ſorrow, there wee
reape in ioy; here wee ſee the light of
the Sunne through two little holes,
which are called the eyes; there wee receiue
light from God on euery ſide, as
if wee were all eyes. Therefore, becauſe
God is all in all; to him be honour
and glory in this world,
and in the world to
come. Amen.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            ON
THE WORTHY
NAME OF MY NOBLE
and learned Author, that excellent
Diuine, Monſieur PIERRE DV
MOVLIN, the Mirror of
our age.
            
               
                  PRaiſe miſ-beſtow'd on him, t' whom none belongs,
               
                  ILl fits the Praiſed, and the Praiſer wrongs:
               
                  ERror in praiſing, may the prais'd defame,
               
                  RAiſing vp worth on an vnworthy Name.
               
                  REſt weake-wing'd Muſe: ſtriue not this worth to raiſe;
               
                  ELated by its ſelfe, its ſelfe can praiſe:
               
            
            
               
               
                  DV MOVLIN'S worth, I meane, whoſe ſacred skill,
               
               
                  VNder ha's broughtBelarmine. 
                  Romes Champion to his will.He alſo by his moſt excelent and admirable Booke, intituled, [The BVCKLER OF THE FAITH] doth vtterly confound the Romane Church: And many Ieſuites, in preſuming to diſpute with this rare Diuine, are put to their Non plus vltra! Yea, the moſt famous of thē, Mr. Arnoux the Ieſuite, is put to his Shifts and, Euaſions.
               
            
            
               
                  MY Muſe, bee mute: forbeare his worth t' expreſse.
               
               
                  O! Wrong not that, by praiſe, to make it leſſe.
               
                  VNto the world's broad Eye, what riches reſt
               
                  LOck't in the cloſet of His pious breſt,
               
                  IS cleerely ſeene; and ſpecially appeares
               
                  NOw more tranſcendent in's Heraclits Teares.
            
            
               Deuoted to your Vertues,
ABR. DARCIE.
            
         
         
            
            THE
TRANSLATOR TO
the vnpartiall Reader,
all Proſperity.
            
               ALl is corrupt and naught, all eu'ry where:
            
               BElow high Heau'n Ther's not a corner Cleare.
            
               RIch ſubtill worldlings wiſe, cramd with wealths ſtore,
            
               ARe but the fooles of Fate, exceeding poore;
            
               HOnor, Wealth, Beauty, Pompe, i'th' beſt degree,
            
               ARe ſubiect all to change; no State liues free,
            
               MONARKS, nor Kings; the glory they liue in,
            
               
               DEath ſhall deface, as if th' had neuer bin.
            
               ATtend faire Ʋertue then, Vice diſ-reſpect:
            
               REbuild thy ſunke foundation, Architect.
            
               CLimbe Heau'n, braue ſpirits, let your Teares expell,
            
               IN faire Repentance ſhowr'd, the worſt of hell,
            
               EVer to gaine thoſe Ioyes no tongue can tell.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   