
      
         
            
            
            THE LAWES OR STANDING ORDERS OF THE EAST INDIA COMPANY.
            1621.
         
         
            
            
            A Table Contayning the ſeuerall Heades from whence all the Orders in this Booke are Drawne. Anno Dom. 1621.
            
               A.
               
                  ARmorer Pag. 49
               Auditors in the Court of Committees 68
               
               Auditors Generall 69
               
               Accomptants Generall 66
               
               Audit of Accompts. 70
               
            
            
               B.
               BOatſwaine Generall 25
               
               Boatſwaines of Ships 46
               
               Beadle of the Company 64
               
               
                  Boat-maker. 34
            
            
               C.
               
                  COurts 1
               Clarke of the Yarde 20
               
               Clarke of the Cordage 27
               
               Clarke of the Yron workes 29
               
               Clarke of the Slaughter-houſe. 35
               
               
                  Cooper 34
               Chirurgions of Ships 48
               
               Committees of the Yarde 41
               
               Comittees of the Warehouſe. 58
               
               Clarkes of the Warehouſes 57
               
               Carpenters in Ships 49
               
               
                  Cookes 49
               Committees Generall 9
               
               Comittees for Commiſsions. Pag. 49
               
               Committees for Entertaining of Marriners 42
               
               Clarke of the ſtores in London. 16
               
               Chirurgion Generall 32
               
               Committees for Prouiſions of Victuals, Stores, and Prouiſions to the Ships 44
               
               Comittees which take Accompt of olde Prouiſions and Stores 39
               
               Committees to Appraiſe the Ships which returne home 40
               
               Comittees which diſcharge the Companies Ships 56
               
               Clarke of the Jumpreſt money 43
               
               
                  Caruer. 34
            
            
               D.
               
                  DEputy. 5
            
            
               E.
               ELection of Officers. 11
               
            
            
               F.
               FActories in the Jndies 50
               
               
                  Freedomes. 71
            
            
               
               G.
               
                  GVnner Pag. 49
               
                  Gouernour 4
               
                  Generality 6
               
                  Gratifications 63
               Guardians to Recouer olde ſtores returned in the Ships. 38
               
            
            
               H.
               
                  HVsband. 14
            
            
               I.
               
                  IOyner. 34
            
            
               K.
               KEeper of the Stores in the Downes. 34
               
            
            
               L.
               LAwes or Orders. 74
               
            
            
               M.
               MEaſurer of Timber 19
               
               
                  Maſt-maker 34
               Maſters and their Mates. 45
               
               Method of the generall Accompts. 75
               
            
            
               P.
               
                  PYlot 23
               Purueyers for Timber and Planckes 17
               
               
                  Paynter 34
               Purcer Generall 25
               
               Porter of the Lodge 26
               
               Purcers and their Mates 46
               
               
                  Penalties 72
               Porter of the Companies Houſe in London. Pag. 65
               
            
            
               Q.
               QVarter Maſters. 46
               
            
            
               R,
               
                  REmembrancer. 13
            
            
               S.
               
                  SHipwrights 22
               Seruers of Iron workes to the building of the Ships. 30
               
               
                  Smith 30
               
                  Steward 49
               
                  Secretary 12
               Solicitor in the Law 60
               
               Solicitors for Bils of Debt 60
               
               Sales of Marchandize. 59
               
            
            
               T.
               
                  TReaſurer 8
               
                  Trade 64
               
                  Taphouſe. 31
            
            
               V.
               VOuchers of Accompts. 79
               
            
            
               W.
               WOrkmen in the Yards. 37
               
               Watchmen in the Yarde 36
               
               
                  Wages 61
               
                  Warrants. 17
            
         
      
      
         
            
            LAWES OR STANDING ORDERS, MADE AND ORDEYNED BY THE GOVERNOVR AND COMPANY OF MARCHANTS OF LONDON TRADING TO THE EAST INDYES, For the better Gouerning of the Affaires and actions of the ſaid Company heere in ENGLAND reſiding. Anno Dom. 1621.
            
               Courtes.
               
                  I.
                  
                     THERE ſhall be generall Courts ſummoned, and kept euery yeare by the Gouernour or his Deputy on the Firſt day of the moneth of Iuly, or on all the fiue dayes next following if neede ſhall require, for the Election of a Gouernour, a Deputy, Treaſurers, and Committees, according to his Maieſties Letters Patents.
               
               
                  
                  II.
                  Alſo there ſhall be a generall Court ſummoned by the Gouernour or his Deputy to be kept yearely on the laſt Tueſday in the Moneth of May, in which Court the Lawes or ſtanding Orders of the Company ſhall be publiquely read, if it be required. And then if there be occaſion, or that inquiry be made, the Auditors in the Court of Committees ſhall ſatisfie the Company concerning the performance of their ſaid Lawes or Orders.
               
               
                  III.
                  The Gouernour or his Deputy vpon the Arriuall of the Companies Ships out of the Jndyes, or any other needfull occaſions, ſhall ſummon a generall Court, and there deliuer and debate the Affaires of the Company ſo farre as ſhall bee found conuenient.
               
               
                  IIII.
                  The Gouernour or his Deputy and the Committees ſhall keepe their ordinary Courts, and as many other extraordinary Courts and priuate meetings, as ſhall be needfull for the ſpeedy diſpatch, and ordering of the Companies affaires.
               
               
                  V.
                  It is ordered, that vpon receipt of publique Letters from the Indyes, there ſhall be Courts ſummoned and continued dayly, by the Gouernour or his Deputy and Committees, vntill all the ſaid Letters bee openly read by the Secretary, or by any other whome the Court ſhall appoint.
               
               
                  VI.
                  All Courts ſhall begin at Eight a clocke in the Morning, and Two a clocke in the afternoone, and ſhall diſſolue at the riſing of the Gouernour or of the Deputy in his abſence.
               
               
                  VII.
                  It ſhall not bee accompted a Court of Committees except (beſides the Gouernour or his Deputy) there be alſo preſent, thirteene Committees at the leaſt, neither ſhall it bee lawfull for a leſſer number to choſe a Commaunder, Factor or Officer, or to diſplace any of them, or to make their wages, or to gratifie and reward any man, or to conclude any other important matter in the affaires of the Company.
               
               
                  
                  VIII.
                  In debating the Affaires of the Company in a Court of Committees, where the matter is brought to the queſtion, of the Gouernour, Deputy and Committees onely (and no other perſons whatſoeuer) ſhall haue their voyces, and the reſolution of the greater number, ſhall ſtand for an order.
               
               
                  IX.
                  In the firſt Court of Committees after euery Quarter day, the Treaſurers ſhall bee intreated to ſignifie in writing what Summes of money the Company are indebted at Intereſt. And the Auditors ſhall be then called alſo to teſtifie the true and faire paſſage of the buſines, in the behalfe of the Company.
               
               
                  X.
                  At the firſt or ſecond Court of Committees next after their Election, yearly the particuler imployments of the ſaid Committees for the buying of ſeuerall prouiſions and other dutyes ſhall bee aſſigned them by the Court.
               
               
                  XI.
                  It ſhall not be lawfull for the Gouernour, Deputy, Treaſurers, or any of the Committees to make a Motion, or ſpeake in Court in the behalfe and for the entertainment of any, who hath bin iuſtly condemned as a Malefactor or wrong doer to the Company, except they doe ſhew a manifeſt neceſſity for the imployment of ſuch offenders.
               
               
                  XII.
                  No man ſhall be preſent in Court, whileſt himſelfe or his Cauſe paſſeth the Iudgement of the Court.
               
               
                  XIII.
                  It ſhall not bee lawfull to alter, diuert, or breake any Order of Court of Committees, where there ſhall not concurre as great a number of Committees as were aſſembled to the making of ſuch an Order.
               
               
                  
                  XIIII.
                  At the firſt Court of Committees after euery Quarter day, the Billes of all Expences disburſed by the Gouernour, Deputy, Treaſurer, Committees, and all other inferiour Officers, concerning Boat-hire, Horſe-hire, Poſtage of Letters, Dyet, and all other petty charges in their occaſions for the Company, ſhall be openly read, and after deliuered to the Auditors to be examined, approued and Signed, before any Warrant paſſe for payment of the ſaide Expences.
               
               
                  XV.
                  And to preuent the dangerous diſturbance of the generall Courts by vnciuill intruders, and ſuch as are no members of this Company, It is ordered that the Court of Committees, ſhall appoint ſome of the Companies Officers to withſtand the entrance of ſuch perſons into the ſaid generall Courts, for Elections and other Conſultations.
               
            
            
               Gouernour.
               
                  XVI.
                  THE Gouernors office is to ſummon and keepe the Courts ordinary and extraordinary, in all which, hee is to haue a caſting or double voyce.
               
               
                  XVII.
                  He is to haue a care that the Deputy, Treaſurers, Committees, and Officers, doe take their Oathes as they are choſen; or being abſent, at the next Court they come vnto, and that they keepe their meetings in all occaſions of buſineſſe for the Company▪
                  
               
               
                  XVIII.
                  The Gouernour at his pleaſure ſhall ſit in any Court or Aſſembly of Committees, ordinary or extraordinary (except the matter doe concerne himſelfe) and he is to moderate the Courts, cauſing grauety and good order to be obſerued.
               
               
                  
                  XIX.
                  He is to haue care that all the Orders of the Courts be duly performed, and that the Committees, or other Officers appointed to ſeuerall buſineſſes doe proſecute the ſame, and giue reaſonable Accompt of their doings to the Court.
               
               
                  XX.
                  The Gouernour vpon receipt of publique Letters from th Indyes, ſhall preſently aſſemble a Court of Committees, and in their preſence, and by their Aſſents, ſhall cauſe them to be opened, regiſtred, and after read in open Court. And the like ſhall be performed with all the Letters directed to particuler men from the Companies Factors or Commanders in the Indyes.
                  
               
               
                  XXI.
                  Hee is to propound and put all thinges to queſtion, which the Court ſhall require (being not contrary to his Maieſties Letters Patents) or the ſtanding Orders of this Company.
               
               
                  XXII.
                  The Gouernour is to attend his Maieſty, and the Honourable Lords of his Counſell, vpon all occaſions requiſite, and to be accompanied with ſuch perſons as the Court ſhall appoint.
               
            
            
               Deputy.
               
                  XXIII.
                  THE Deputy (in all matters which concerne the Company) is to aſſiſt the Gouernour, in whoſe abſence he ſhall performe his Office, to keepe the Courts vpon all occaſions requiſite, and in them hee ſhall haue a double voyce.
               
               
                  XXIIII.
                  Hee is to haue care that the Gouernour take his Oath openly in Court when he is choſen, or being abſent, at the next Court he commeth vnto.
               
            
            
               
               Generality.
               
                  XXV.
                  A Speciall care is to bee had in the choyſe of the Gouernour, Deputy, Treaſurers, and Committees, that they be not onely fit men and of the beſt experience in Marchandizing, but alſo ſuch as may and will attend the buſines.
               
               
                  XXVI.
                  In matters which concerne the Company, all the perticular members thereof ſhall be ſubiect to the generall Courts. And if any man refuſe to obey the ſaid Court, hee ſhall be both Disfranchized, and further proceeded againſt as the cauſe ſhall require.
               
               
                  XXVII.
                  All the perticular members of the Company, who haue vnderwritten any Aduentures, in the preſent ſecond Ioynt Stocke, or ſhall hereafter vnderwrite Aduentures in any other Stocke or Voyage, ſhall bring in their iuſt proportions of money vnto the Treaſurer of the Company, at the times appointed by a generall Court, wherein if any man faile, he ſhall pay the Brokes impoſed vpon ſuch defaults. And alſo if vpon further warning, and a certaine day giuen him by the ſaid Court, hee doe neglect to make due payment, the Company haue power to Disfranchize him.
               
               
                  XXVIII.
                  And whereas it falleth out at the ſetting forth of any Voyage, or at the returne home; that good Summes of money is ſodainly to be taken vp at Intereſt for payment of mens wages and other occaſions; for which diuers perticular men of the Company are intreated by the Court of Committees to giue their Bonds; It is therefore ordered and agreed, for the better ſecurity and incouragement of ſuch as ſhall at any time hereafter giue their Bonds to this effect, That they ſhall not onely be ſaued harmeleſſe by the generall Company, but alſo for their better indempnity, they ſhall likewiſe haue ſeuerall Counter-bonds vnder the Companies Seale, if they ſhall ſo thinke good.
               
               
                  
                  XXIX.
                  It ſhall not be lawfull for any man to tranſport his Aduentures to another man, otherwiſe then in open Court of Committees, and not before it doe appeare vnder the Accomptants hand, that the party tranſporting is not indebted, or his Aduenture engaged vnto the Company.
               
               
                  XXX.
                  If any man in Office, or otherwiſe a member of the Company, be found through Bribery or corrupt Reward, directly or indirectly receiued, to preferre a Suter, performe a Bargaine, make a motion in Court, or doe any other thing, tending to the hurt or damage of the Company, he ſhall forthwith be made vncapeable of any Office in the Company, and alſo be fined as the Court ſhall ſee cauſe.
               
               
                  XXXI.
                  Euery man ſpeaking in Court ſhall ſtand vp and be barcheaded, and ſhall addreſſe his ſpeach to the Gouernour, or Deputy in his abſence, as repreſenting the Court: and all priuate ſpeaches, or directed to particuler perſons ſhall be forborne.
               
               
                  XXXII.
                  No man in Court ſhall ſpeake aboue thrice to one matter, ſaue the Gouernour and the Deputy, being to moderate the buſines.
               
               
                  XXXIII.
                  No man with his Speach ſhall interrupt the Speach of another before he haue finiſhed, (except the Gouernour) or in his abſence the Deputy ſee cauſe to put any to ſilence, for impertinency or other vnſeemely ſpeaking, and ſuch perſons as doe obſtinately offend herein, ſhall be Fined at the diſcretion of the Court.
               
            
            
               
               Treaſurers.
               
                  XXXIIII.
                  THE Office of the Treaſurers is to keepe the generall Caſhes of the Company for receipts and payments. In which they ſhall performe nothing concerning Payments, without ſufficient Warrant from the Gouernour or his Deputy, and foure Committees at the leaſt, vnder their handes to vouch the parcels in the Audite of their Accompts, onely the payments to Aduentures vpon Stocke, ſhall paſſe by the Warrant of the Auditors in the Courts of Committees.
               
               
                  XXXV.
                  They ſhall giue perfect Acquittances to all the Aduenturers, or any others who pay in Summes of money to the Company, and they ſhall likewiſe for their diſcharge take plaine Receipts for euery parcell of money, which they ſhall pay forth vpon Warrants.
               
               
                  XXXVI.
                  They are to keepe a Caſh of purpoſe for all the Spaniſh Ryals which ſhall be receiued and Iſſued for the Company.
               
               
                  XXXVII.
                  They ſhall at the diſpatch of any of the Companies Ships, deliuer vp vnto the Accomptants a true and perfect note of euery Cheſt or bagge of Ryals, ſeuerally ſetting downe the numbers of Peeces and the iuſt Weight, to the end they may bee Inuoiced accordingly vnto the Factors in the Indyes.
                  
               
               
                  XXXVIII.
                  They are to keepe the Bonds and other Billes, for Debts owing to the Company, and to call for the payment of all when they fall due.
               
               
                  XXXIX.
                  In the firſt Court of Committees after euery Quarter day, they ſhall there ſignifie in writing, what Summes of money the Company are indebted at Intereſt.
               
               
                  
                  XL.
                  They are to acquaint the Court of Committees with the names of ſuch Aduenturers, or other Debtors, who neglect to bring in their monyes at the due times, ſo that ſome ſpeedy courſe may bee taken for Recouery of the Debts.
               
               
                  XLI.
                  They are to haue the Cuſtody of his Maieſties Letters Patents to the Company: alſo all the Orders, Letters, Directions, and other writings from his Maieſty, the Lords of his Counſell, and other great Officers; together with the Letters from the Eaſt India Company in Holland, and the Coppies of the ſeuerall Anſwers made vnto them. Alſo the Companies common Seale, the Treaty with the Dutch, and Contracts for bargaines. All which Writings, together with the Companies money, Ryals and other Treaſure, are ſafely to be kept in ſome conuenient place of the Companies houſe, for their ordinary meeting in London and not elſewhere.
               
               
                  XLII.
                  They ſhall not pay a Warrant in full payment for any Wares whereunto the Bill of parcels is not faſtened, and alſo ſubſcribed by two Committees at the leaſt who bought the goods, and the party who ſolde them for the vſe of the Company.
               
               
                  XLIII.
                  They ſhall keepe faire Bookes of Accompts of their proceedings in the Affaires of the Company, And they ſhall prepare them to be Audited once euery Quarter at the leaſt. And at the times of the ſaid Audits, they ſhall alſo preſent a view of all the money and Ryals which ought to be in Caſh, if it be required by the Court.
               
            
            
               Committees generall.
               
                  XLIIII.
                  THE Committees generall, being to bee Twenty foure in number, ſhall be yearely choſen, according to the Tenor of his Maieſties Letters Patents.
               
               
                  
                  XLV.
                  They ſhall diligently keepe their Courts ordinary and extraordinary, whenſoeuer occaſion of buſines ſhall require, being Summon'd by the Gouernour of this Company, or his Deputy.
               
               
                  XLVI.
                  They ſhall performe the Orders of Courts for ſetting out of Ships, ſelling of goods, buying of Prouiſions, Victuals, Stores and Marchandize: wherein eſpeciall care is to be had, that no one man alone is to be intruſted with the making of thoſe prouiſions, but Two at leaſt appointed vnto it by the Court: and if any one Committee be abſent, the other ſhall not conclude any bargaine for the Company, before hee haue acquainted the Court of Committees and from thence receiue his Order.
               
               
                  XLVII.
                  They ſhall deliuer vp to the Treaſurer, Billes of parcels vnder written by thoſe perſons of whom they ſhall buy any Marchandize or prouiſions for the Company. And in the ſaid Billes, the quantity, quality, price, and all other circumſtances concerning the Bargaines made, ſhall be plainely ſet downe to vouch their proceedings.
               
               
                  XLVIII.
                  They ſhall not Aſſigne or intruſt the buying of any of the ſaid Marchandize, Prouiſions, Victuals, or Stores, vnto the Huſband or to any others, but they ſhall perſonally performe the charge appointed them by the Court, with their beſt endeauour and skill: But they may vſe the Aſſiſtance of the Huſband, or any other the Companies Officers vpon all neceſſary occaſions.
               
               
                  XLIX.
                  And to preuent confuſion, diſturbance, or diſcontents, it ſhall not be lawfull for any Committee to intrude, inter-meddle or deale in the thinges which are ordered by Court vnto the charge of other Committees, more then by aduiſe and counſell for the good of the Company, in which if any finde themſelues neglected, they ſhall make complaint thereof to the Court.
               
               
                  L.
                  They ſhall haue power and Authority at their pleaſure, to examine and review any of the Accompts, which ſhall haue bin Audited and allowed by the ſeuerall Auditors, and if they finde any errors or wrongs done to the Company, they are preſently to make it knowne vnto the Court.
               
               
                  
                  LI.
                  Euery Committee ſhall take an Oath as hee is choſen, or being, abſent at the next Court he commeth to, and ſhall faithfully performe all the thinges which are contained in the ſaid Oath.
               
            
            
               Election of Officers.
               
                  LII.
                  ALL the Offices of this Company vpon yearely Salary within the Realme of England, ſhall be voyd once euery yeere on the Foure and Twenty day of Iune, or within Three dayes next following.
               
               
                  LIII.
                  The Gouernour of his Deputy, and Thirteene Committees at the leaſt, who ſhall be preſent in their ordinary place of meeting, on the Foure and Twenty day of Iune yearely, or within three dayes next following, ſhall proceed to an Election of new Officers, and eſtabliſhing of their Wages, by the order of the Ballating box, or by erection of hands, as vnto the greater number of them preſent ſhall ſeeme moſt conuenient.
               
               
                  LIIII.
                  There ſhall bee a faire admittance of all men, but firſt and eſpecially of the free Brethren of this Company, who ſhall concurre at the time appointed, to the Election and preferment of any Office in the ſaid Company.
               
               
                  LV.
                  Euery Officer as hee is choſen ſhall take his Oath openly in Court, or if he be abſent, then at the next Court which hee ſhall come vnto being called, and ſhall giue Bonds with ſuch ſufficient Suerties for their true performance, as the ſaid Court ſhall require.
               
               
                  LVI.
                  Any of the ſaid Officers, vpon perfect knowledge of their inſufficiency or other miſdemeanors, ſhall looſe their places within the terme of the yeare at the diſcretion of the Gouernour, or his Deputy, and Thirteene Committees at the leaſt, who ſhall make choyſe of others as vnto them ſhall ſeeme needfull, and the like in occaſion of any Officers Death.
               
            
            
               
               Secretary.
               
                  LVII.
                  THE Secretaries Office, is to attend the Gouernour, Deputy and Committees, in all their Courts, ordinary and extraordinary, and alſo in the generall Courts, to take note of their proceedings, which hee ſhall faithfully and truely ingroſſe, into a faire Booke for that purpoſe.
               
               
                  LVIII.
                  At the beginning of euery Court, hee ſhall reade his collections of the Court next before, and he ſhall faithfully obſerue that nothing of importance be regiſtred at the breaking vp of any Court when the Committees are departed, or doe not remaine in the number of 13. at the leaſt.
               
               
                  LIX.
                  Hee ſhall in due time remember and put the Courts in minde, of ſuch perticular Affaires as are ordered to be handled once euery Quarter, or at other certaine times appointed.
               
               
                  LX.
                  Hee ſhall be bound by Oath not to diſcouer any of the Secrets of this Company, neither yet to drawe vp any part of the ſaid Courts, by the perſwaſions or directions of any perticular men whoſoeuer, but onely by the Authority of the Court, according to the very truth of their reſolutions and Orders.
               
               
                  LXI.
                  Hee ſhall vpon Reference of any buſines from the Court to perticuler Committees or others, giue a true Note thereof vnto the Remembrancer, that he may acquaint the parties, with the Order of the Company.
               
               
                  LXII.
                  He ſhall keepe a Booke, and therein by Alphabet ſet downe the names of euery perticular member of this Company, and alſo another Booke, in which hee ſhall note downe the Names of them, who ſhall hereafter be made free Brethren of this Company, with the Conditions: and the like for Commaunders, Factors, and others who ſhall be entertained by the Court of Committees.
               
               
                  
                  LXIII.
                  Hee ſhall performe the Meſſages, and write the Letters of the Company, to ſuch noble Perſonages and others, which ſhall bee giuen him in charge by the Gouernour, Deputy, and Committees, and the Coppies of the ſaid Letters, he ſhall regiſter in a faire Booke for that purpoſe.
               
            
            
               Remembrancer.
               
                  LXIIII.
                  THE Remembrancer ſhall take ſuch information and Notes from the Secretary, as ſhall concerne the Reference of Affaires from the Court to a ſelected Committee, whom hee ſhall acquaint with the Buſines, the time and place appointed for the ſame.
               
               
                  LXV.
                  Hee ſhall attend the Gouernour, Deputy, or Committees, at their generall meetings in the Yard, where he ſhall take true Notes of their proceedings, and bring the ſame to the conſideration of the next Court of Committees.
               
               
                  LXVI.
                  He ſhall from time to time (in a Booke for that purpoſe) deliuer vnto the Accomptant generall, all ſuch Orders of Court as doe concerne the Entertainment of Commaunders, Factors, Maſters, Purcers and the like▪ or the Alteration of any of their Wages, or any other thinges which doe appertaine to the Companies Accompts: that true Entry may be made thereof according to the Acts of Court.
               
               
                  LXVII.
                  Hee ſhall ſupply the Office of the Secretary in any occaſion of his abſence, to performe all the Duties of his place.
               
            
            
               
               Husband.
               
                  LXVIII.
                  THE Husband ſhall attend and take the Reſolutions of the Court of Committees, concerning the Shipping which they yearely appoint for their Voyages into the Jndyes, and thereupon he ſhall preſently drawe out a Table of each Ships proportions of Victuals, ordinary and extraordinary, together with all other Munitions needfull: which hee ſhall performe in a Booke for that purpoſe, to remaine in the common Comptinghouſe of this Company, for direction vnto them who ſhall bee appointed to make the prouiſions.
               
               
                  LXIX.
                  He ſhall vſe his beſt endeauours, and faithfully prouide in due times to the beſt aduantage of this Company, all ſuch petty prouiſions and Stores as ſhall be giuen him in charge by the Court of Committees.
               
               
                  LXX.
                  Hee ſhall deliuer vp all the ſaid Prouiſions and Stores, into the Warehouſes of this Company, and for his Diſcharge he ſhall take a Receipt from the Clarke of the ſaid Ware-houſes, vnto whom he ſhall giue a Note of the perticular coſt of euery thing ſo deliuered, that hee may accordingly make Entry thereof in his Booke.
               
               
                  LXXI.
                  He ſhall take a Bill of Parcels vnder the parties owne hand Writing of whom hee ſhall buy any thing for the vſe of this Company, and the ſaid Billes he ſhall deliuer vp for his Vouchers vnto the Auditors of his Accompts.
               
               
                  LXXII.
                  He ſhall ſolicite and aſſiſt the Committees or any others, who ſhall haue charge to buy any Prouiſions, Stores, or Marchandize for the Voyages of this Company, ſo that all thinges may be performed in due time.
               
               
                  
                  LXXIII.
                  He ſhall defray the charges of Lyteridge, Cranage, Wharfage, Portage, Rents of Ware-houſes, and petty Expences diſburſed by the Committees or others in the Affaires of this Company, taking Notes vnder their hands, viewed by the Court and after warranted by the Auditors, to vouch the parcell in the Audit of his Accompts.
               
               
                  LXXIIII.
                  He ſhall receiue all the Yron both Engliſh and Spaniſh, which ſhall bee bought by the Committees for the vſe of this Company, and he ſhall deliuer of the ſaid Yron to the Smith in their Yard, and to the other Smiths which make the Hoopes, and he ſhall keepe Accompt with them of their ſeuerall workes, ordinary and extraordinary, at ſuch rates as are already or may hereafter be agreed vpon for this Company. And the like he ſhall performe with the Coopers for Caske, and hee ſhall defray the charges of workmanſhip, both with the ſaid Smithes and Coopers.
               
               
                  LXXV.
                  He ſhall ouerſee the Clerkes in the ſaid Ware-houſes, to giue them inſtructions and directions for the fitting and furniſhing of each of the Companies Ships with their proportions of Stores and prouiſions, and for the ordering of their Accompts.
               
               
                  LXXVI.
                  He ſhall vpon all occaſions make Entry in the Cuſtome-houſe of the Companies Ships and goods, and likewiſe performe any other Seruice, which ſhall be thought fit for his imployment by the Gouernour, Deputy, and Committees.
               
               
                  LXXVII.
                  He ſhall keepe faire Bookes of Accompts of all his proceedings in the Affaires of this Company, and he ſhall deliuer them once euery Moneth to the generall Auditors to be peruſed.
               
            
            
               
               Clarke of the Stores in London.
               
                  LXXVIII.
                  THE ſaid Clarke ſhall receiue all the prouiſions, Stores, Victuals or Marchandize, which ſhall be deliuered him by the Committees, or the Huſband, or any other for the vſe of this Company, by meaſure, weight or number, and ſhall giue Receipts for the ſame, and the like hee ſhall performe for all thinges whatſoeuer which ſhall bee ſent and deliuered him, out of the Companies Ships which returne home from the Jndyes, or from any other place.
               
               
                  LXXIX.
                  Hee ſhall deliuer of the ſaid Victuals, Marchandize, Prouiſions, and Stores, both new and olde, vnto the Companies Ships and Yardes, or otherwiſe as occaſions ſhall require, by the directions of the Huſband or any other in Authority; and ſhall ſend ſome of the Companies Seruants to ſee the ſame ſafely deliuered, with a Note of the perticulars and their prizes directed to the Clarke of the Yard, or in the Ships to the Purcers, together with the ſeuerall Officers whom the Stores ſhall concerne, and to bring from them Receipts for all, without which, the ſaid Clarke ſhall not be diſcharged in the Audit of his Accompts.
               
               
                  LXXX.
                  He ſhall deliuer the Companies Yron, Lead, Tinne, Elephants teeth, Corrall, Quick ſiluer, Vermillion and the like, vnto the Purcers of each Ship by weight, and all other thinges which he ſhall ſend vnto the ſaid Ships, or to the Yardes, he ſhall performe it with as much plainneſſe as poſſible he can for his Diſcharge, and to auoyde all ſuſpition and error.
               
               
                  LXXXI.
                  Hee ſhall keepe faire Bookes of Accompts of all his proceedings in the Affaires of this Company, and ſhall deliuer them vp once euery Quarter to bee Audited by the generall Auditors.
               
            
            
               
               Warrants.
               
                  LXXXII.
                  HEreafter all Warrants to the Treaſurers for money, or to the Committees of the Warehouſes for wares ſhall be framed and made, onely by the Accomptants generall, and by the Huſband, with their ſubſcription for a leading hand vnto the Gouernour, Deputy, and Committees.
               
               
                  LXXXIII.
                  The Warrants vnto the Treaſurers for money, ſhall be vnderwritten by the Gouernour, or his Deputy, and Foure Committees at the leaſt.
               
               
                  LXXXIIII.
                  The Warrants vnto the Committees of the warehouſes for Wares to be deliuered vnto the Aduenturers, ſhall be ſubſcribed by the Gouernour, or his Deputy.
               
               
                  LXXXV.
                  The Warrants vnto the Treaſurers for money vpon Deuidents to the Aduenturers, ſhall be vnderwritten by the Auditors of the Court.
               
            
            
               Purueyers of Timber & Plancke.
               
                  LXXXVI.
                  THE ſaid Purueyers ſhall take notice from time to time of the Clarke of the Yard, concerning the Stores of Timber, Planckes, Sheathingboards, and Treenayles which remaine in the Yard, and ſo by the counſell and direction of the Committees of the Yard and of the Mr. Shipwright, they ſhall proceed to the Purueying of thoſe Materials whereof there ſhall be any want and occaſion, for the Companies buildings.
               
               
                  
                  LXXXVII.
                  They ſhall vſe their endeauour to prouide the Timber and Plancke ſeaſonable felled, and at the beſt hand, for the moſt aduantage of the Company. And they ſhall bring all the Bargaines of the ſaid Materials vnto the conſideration and reſolution of the Gouernour, Deputy, Treaſurer, and Mr. Shipwright, by whoſe Order and in whoſe names the Bargaines and Contracts ſhall be made in the behalfe of the Company.
               
               
                  LXXXVIII.
                  There ſhall be power left to the ſaid Purueyers to make Bargaine of themſelues (rather then to looſe opportunity) for ſome ſpeciall pieces of Timber or Knees which cannot euer be had, prouided alwayes that the Bargaine exceed not the ſumme of Ten pounds, and that they giue preſent notice thereof to the Gouernour, Deputy, Treaſurer, and Mr. Shipwright.
               
               
                  LXXXIX.
                  They ſhall as neere as poſſible they can, auoyde all darke bargaines by Girt Meaſure in the Woods▪ but when ſome ſpeciall occaſion ſhall vrge them to that courſe. They ſhall be faithfull and true in the Accompt of the charges, and in the meaſure which they ſhall deliuer into the Yardes, ſquared, according to ſuch aduantage as is vſuall, and ſhall happen in the hewing from Girt into ſquare meaſure.
               
               
                  XC.
                  They ſhall ſet a Marke and number, and keepe the contents of euery piece of the Companies timber before it be lodged in the Yardes at Reading, and other places, to preuent the great wrongs, which might happen by the change of the ſaid Timber.
               
               
                  XCI.
                  They ſhall appoint the Wharfingers by euery Barge from Reading and thoſe places, to ſend vp a true Note with the marke, number and content of euery piece of Timber, that ſo the Clarke of the Yard may receiue the ſame accordingly.
               
               
                  XCII.
                  The ſaid Purueyers ſhall keepe Bookes, thereby to giue a true Accompt of all their proceedings in the Affaires of this Company.
               
            
            
               
               Meaſurer of Timber and Plancke.
               
                  XCIII.
                  THE Meaſurer ſhall giue his diligent Attendance dayly in the Yard at the Water▪ſide, to take vp all ſuch Timber, Plancks, ſheathing Bordes, Maſtes, or other Materials, that concerne him to receiue by Meaſure, which he ſhall carefully and iuſtly performe that the Company may not be wronged in the goodnes of the ſaid Materials, neither yet through any wants in the ſaid Meaſure.
               
               
                  XCIIII.
                  He ſhall not receiue any prouiſions into the Companies Yard, without a Note or writing from thoſe perſons, who ſhall haue Order to prouide and ſend the ſaid prouiſions, and hee ſhall refuſe to vnlade any ſuch Timber, Plancke, Boardes, Maſtes, or the like, which are faulty and vnfit for the Companies vſe, acquainting the Clarke of the Yard preſently of his proceedings therein, vnto whom alſo he ſhall deliuer the ſaid Notes, that ſome Reſolution may be taken by the Committees of the Yards to determine the buſines.
               
               
                  XCV.
                  He ſhall in the vnlading of the ſaid Timber, Plancke, Boards, Maſtes and the like, from the Fiue and twenty day of March next, marke euery piece in the head with the Letter A. vntill the Fiue and twenty day of March next following, and then he ſhall begin to marke with the Letter B. and ſo euery yeare change a Letter.
               
               
                  XCVI.
                  He ſhall ſee the ſaid Timber, Plancke, and Boardes, lodged in the moſt conuenient places of the Yard neare their vſe, laying the ſtraight Timber, Beame timber, Floore timber, Phittocks, Squire knees, Racking knees, and the ſeuerall fortes of Planckes by themſelues, to auoyde the great labour and charge, which hath bin heretofore in the often remouings of the ſaid Materials in the occaſions of their vſe, when they were mingled all together.
               
               
                  
                  XCVII.
                  He ſhall ſet a number neare the Marke, or at both ends of euery piece of Timber, Plancke, boords, and the like: and he ſhall keepe a Booke, noting downe therein the contents, and the tares by the ſaid numbers; and thereof he ſhall giue a true and perfect Accompt of all, vnto the Clarke of the Yard, to the intent that he alſo may enter the ſame, euery piece particularly in a Booke as is giuen him in charge to performe.
               
               
                  XCVIII.
                  He ſhall deliuer of the ſaid Timber, Planckes, Deales, Tree-nayles and Boords, to the building and repayring of the Companies Ships, or otherwiſe to their vſes, keeping a true Accompt in his booke of the Numbers and contents which ſhall be vſed vpon each perticular Ship, and he ſhall giue a true coppy dayly of all his proceedings herein, vnto the Clarke of the Yard, that thereby he may alſo enter the ſame orderly in his Bookes of Accompts.
               
            
            
               Clarke of the Yard.
               
                  XCIX.
                  THE Clarke of the Yard ſhall call the Workmen and Labourers euery day at the times appointed: and the Fore-man of the Shipwrights, Cawlkers, Carpenters, and Labourers, ſhall bee alwayes preſent vntill the whole Ging be called, to the end that one Workeman anſwer not for another. And hee ſhall haue Authority to ouerſee all the ſaid Workmen that they doe not loyter in the Taphouſe, or in any other place, nor ſuffer more Labourers to be at the carrying of a piece of Timber or Plancke, then are needfull.
               
               
                  C.
                  He ſhall vpon the Arriuall of any Barge, Hoy or other Veſſels, with Timber, Plancke, Sheathing bordes, or▪whatſoeuer other materials, demaund a Note or writing from thoſe Committees or other perſons who ſhall haue Order to make the ſaid prouiſions, and according to the contents of the ſaid Notes he ſhall receiue all into the ſaid Yard, and make true Entry thereof in his Booke.
               
               
                  
                  CI.
                  He ſhall aſſiſt the Meaſurer in the Yard, to order the Receiuing and beſtowing of the Companies Timber and Plancke, laying each ſort by it ſelfe, to preuent much labour and charge in the often remouing. And hee ſhall keepe a Booke of purpoſe in the forme of an Inuoyce for euery ſort, marked and numbred with the contents and tares, to the end that the Committees may with eaſe examine the meaſure of any piece or pieces of Timber or Plancke, when they ſhall miſtruſt and deſire to be ſatisfied.
               
               
                  CII.
                  He ſhall receiue the Accompts of the Yron workes, Timber, Planckes, Pipe ſtaues, or any other Materials, which ſhall be iſſued by other ſubordinate Clarkes in the Yard, to the building or repairing of any of the Companies Ships, Boates, Maſtes or the like, and he ſhall truely and orderly digeſt them in his Bookes vpon their ſeuerall Accompts.
               
               
                  CIII.
                  He ſhall giue a Receipt, and ſtand charged to yeeld a true Accompt of all the olde prouiſions and Stores which ſhall bee ſent to the Yardes, out of the Companies Ships that returne home, except onely thoſe prouiſions and Stores which ſhall be deliuered vp to the Clarke of the Cordage, and the Clarke of the Yron workes. And he ſhall alſo giue Receipts vnto the Huſband, or to any other man who ſhall deliuer prouiſions to his charge in the Yard.
               
               
                  CIIII.
                  He ſhall cauſe the Barrels of Pitch, Tarre, or any other Materials which are light and eaſie to be conueyed from the Wharſe, to be carried a ſufficient diſtance from the Water-ſide, to preuent the danger of ſtealing: and hee ſhall not ſuffer any olde Timber, Plancks, Chips or the like, (whereof there is no vſe for the Company) to be carryed out of the Yard, before that ſome of the Committees haue firſt ſeene and giuen Order to ſell the ſame, whereof hee ſhall after giue a true Accompt.
               
               
                  CV.
                  He ſhall appoint honeſt and truſty Watch-men euery Euening when the Workmen come to their Call, and hee ſhall remember them carefully to performe their Charge, and hee ſhall preſently after the departure of the ſaid Workmen, call all the Officers who are Lodged in the Yard to walke the Round with him, to ſee that the Fires bee well put out, where Plancke hath bin burned that day, or vnder the Pitch Kettles, Coopers houſe, or other places to preuent danger.
               
               
                  
                  CVI.
                  He ſhall rebate from euery Workman and Labourer (vpon the pay day) what they ſhall owe to the Taphouſe, Chirurgion, or otherwiſe within the Yard, and hee ſhall diligently obſerue that no diſorders be vſed in the ſaid Taphouſe by drawing of ſtrong Beere, entertainment of Strangers, or otherwiſe, and he ſhall generally looke into all other abuſes in the Yardes to giue notice thereof in due time vnto the Gouernour, Deputy, and Committees.
               
               
                  CVII.
                  He ſhall keepe faire and true Bookes of Accompts, of all thinges committed to his charge for the Company in the Yard, and hee ſhall deliuer them vnto their Auditors to be peruſed and examined, at all times when they ſhall require.
               
            
            
               Mr. Shipwright.
               
                  CVIII.
                  THE Mr. Shipwrights duty, is to build and repaire the Companies Ships, vpon which workes, he ſhall not make any Entrance or beginning without Order of Court, obtained for his Warrant and direction, ſubſcribed by the Gouernour, or his Deputy, and thirteene Committees at the leaſt.
               
               
                  CIX.
                  He ſhall bring in conuenient time vnto the ſaid Court of Committees his Plots and Models compleat, of all the new Ships which are intended to be by him builded for the Company.
               
               
                  CX.
                  He ſhall haue a ſpeciall care that his Deputy or Foreman, and all other Carpenters, Cawlkers, or Labourers in the Companies Yard, be able, honeſt and skilfull men to the buſines which they ſhall vndertake, and hee ſhall hire them with as much aduantage as poſſible hee can for the Company, without any ſiniſter reſpect in the rate of their wages, or in keeping them longer in pay then there ſhall be neceſſary occaſion of their worke.
               
               
                  
                  CXI.
                  Hee ſhall not breake vp any part of the Companies old Ships indocked, before the Appraiſers haue valued the hulles, neither ſhall hee launch out any of their Ships from the docke where they are built or repaired, before he haue obtained an order of Court for his Warrant.
               
               
                  CXII.
                  He ſhall aſſiſt with his beſt endeuour and skill thoſe Committees, who ſhall be appointed with him to contract bargaines for Timber, Planck, ſheathing Bords, Treenayles, and the like, or to let out the Ioyners Worke, the Caruers Worke, the making of Maſts, Boats, Painting, or any other the Companies Workes in the Yard by the great, or to hier Carpenters to the ſhipping and voyages of this Company.
               
               
                  CXIII.
                  He ſhall giue diligent attendance in his owne perſon, to the ordering of thoſe Workes in the Yards which concerne his charge: And hee ſhall alſo giue accompt vnto the Court of Committees of his proceedings in the ſaid Yards weekely, or ſo often as ſhall be needfull. And for the better performance of this Article, hee ſhall not vndertake or performe the Building of any Ships or other Veſſels, but onely for this Company, without an order of Court obtained for his Warrant to the contrary, ſubſcribed by the Gouernour or his Deputy, and thirteene Committees at the leaſt.
               
            
            
               Mr. Pylot.
               
                  CXIIII.
                  THE Mr. Pylot his Office is, to commaund and order the workes which concerne the ſetting vp & taking downe of Maſts, Yards, Rigging, vnrigging and proportioning the quantities, ſorts and ſizes of Cordage to the Companies Ships, both new and old, and to vſe care and diligence both by himſelfe, and his Deputies, that the Company may not be ouercharged with idle, vnskilfull, or a needleſſe number of Workmen, or in the rate of their wages.
               
               
                  
                  CXV.
                  Hee ſhall at conuenient times, Suruay the building and repairing of the Companies Ships, at Deptford and Blackwall, aſſiſting alſo to the indocking and launching the Companies ſaid Ships, and being launched, to ſee them ſafely Moored, with ſuch mooring Cables and Anchors as are beſt fitting, and moſt for the Companies profit; And to prouide a competent number of Ship-keepers for each Ship.
               
               
                  CXVI.
                  Hee ſhall aſſiſt with his beſt endeuour and skill, thoſe Committees vnto whom he ſhall be ioyned by order of Court, for the hiring of Saylors to the ſhipping and voyages of this Company. And hee ſhall in like manner aſſiſt thoſe perſons who ſhal be appointed with him to prouide Canuas, and to deliuer the ſame proportioned to be made into Sayles for the Companies ſhipping, and for ſtores, or the like.
               
               
                  CXVII.
                  He ſhall ſollicite by his Deputies, and eſpecially in his owne perſon, the diſpatch of the Companies Ships, at Deptford, Blackwall, and Erith, giuing notice from day to day of their ſeuerall wants, that they may be ſpeedily ſupplied, and once euery weeke at the leaſt, he ſhall acquaint the Court of Committees of the ſtate and forwardnes of the ſaid Ships.
               
               
                  CXVIII.
                  He ſhall after order of Court giuen him, at conuenient and fit times, Pylot downe the Companies Ships to Erith and Graueſend, attending them there, vntill they ſhall be diſpatched into the Downes, and he ſhall likewiſe take charge to bring vp the Companies Ships from Graueſend, vntill they be ſafely moored at an Auchor, or indocked at Blackwall, and he ſhall keepe a Booke, in which he ſhall truly and orderly ſet downe all the proportions of Cordage by their length and ſize, which he ſhall appoint to the Rigging, and alſo for the ſtoring of each of the Companies Ships to Sea ſeuerally: And the like diligence ſhall he performe for the quantity and quallity of Canuas, to be ſpent in their Sayles, and for their ſtores to Sea.
               
            
            
               
               Boateſwaine generall.
               
                  CXIX.
                  THE Boateſwaine generall, ſhall attend the workes vnder the Mr Pylot, to proportion and ſerue Cordage to the Rigging of the Companies Ships, and to ſollicite the Saylors or Labourers to their worke, to ſet vp or take downe Maſtes, rigge and vnrigge the Ships; to new lay Ropes; to lodge in appointed places, the Companies Boates, Anchors, Cables, and the like, when the Ships ſhall be Docked; To attend and be preſent at the call of the Saylors and Labourers, and to giue notice of thoſe, who are vnable or vnwilling to doe their worke; To aſſiſt them that ſhall be ſent to the Companies Ships, when they returne home to take Accompt of the prouiſions, Stores and Victuals remaining, which are to be conueyed to the places and Officers appointed to take charge of them; To haue a ſpeciall care that nothing be imbeazeled by day or by night, for want of good Watch, and to doe any other worke which ſhall be thought fit for his imployment.
               
            
            
               Purcer generall.
               
                  CXX.
                  THE Purcer generall, his Duty is, when the Companies Ships are afloate, to receiue money of the Treaſurers once euery weeke (or as often as need ſhall require) to pay the wages of Saylors and Labourers, who ſet the Maſtes and rigge the Ships, As alſo the Harbour wages, to Officers and Maryners, who goe the Voyage, and other petty charges incident.
               
               
                  CXXI.
                  He ſhall repaire once euery weeke (or as often as ſhalbe needfull) aboard all the Companies Ships, at Deptford, Blackwall, and Erith, to conferre with the Purcers, or their Mates, concerning the Dayes and rates of payment due to the ſaid Officers, Saylors or Labourers, which when he ſhall haue paide and ſatisfied, then ſhall the ſaid Purcers or their Mates, certifie by him the perticulars vnder their hands to the Treaſurer in a Booke for that purpoſe, to vouch the Parcels in the Audit of his Accompts.
               
               
                  
                  CXXII.
                  He ſhall euery time when hee returneth from paying of Wages (as is aforeſaid) bring Notes with him to the Court of Committees from all the Officers, concerning the wants of prouiſions, Stores, or any other thing which might hinder the ſpeedy diſpatch of all the ſaid Ships.
               
               
                  CXXIII.
                  He ſhall keepe a true Accompt with the Clarke of the ſtorehouſe of the proportions of Cordage, which ſhall be deliuered to the Rigging of the Companies ſhips, and likewiſe for their Stores ſeuerally, which he ſhall ſee iuſtly performed by waight, ſize, and length, and hee ſhall deliuer vp a Booke thereof yearely vnto the Auditors, in the moneth of March, or at any other time, if he be required.
               
               
                  CXXIIII.
                  He ſhall keepe Accompt with the Baker for Bread, Bisket, Meale and Flower: with the Brewer for Beere, and empty Caske in Harbour, and for the Voyage: of all which, he ſhall deliuer vp in due time a true Accompt of the perticular diſpoſing thereof to the Companies ſeuerall Ships, or otherwiſe to their vſes.
               
            
            
               Porter of the Lodge.
               
                  CXXV.
                  THE Porter ſhall carefully, looke to the Yard from time to time, that neither Timber, Planckes, Yron, Lead, or any other prouiſions, doe paſſe out of the Gate, without knowledge of the Clarke of the Yard.
               
               
                  CXXVI.
                  He ſhall vpon iuſt ſuſpition, ſearch any of the Workmen for Yron worke, or other Materials, which they may haue ſtolne in the Yard, and if he take any man in the manner, he ſhall giue preſent notice thereof to the Mr. Shipwright, and to the Clarke of the Yard, that they may proceed againſt the Offender as the cauſe ſhall require: and he ſhall vſe the like diligence in the ſearch of thoſe, who vnder colour of carrying out of Chips, might offend in the like kinde.
               
               
                  
                  CXXVII.
                  He ſhall aſſiſt the Clarke of the Yard to walke the Round, euery euening to ſet the Watch, which ſhall continue all Night, vntill the Bell ring in the Morning to call the workemen to their labour. At which time the ſaid Porter ſhall diligently attend the Gate in his own perſon: And if any workman or Labourers ſhall be abſent at the Call in the Morning or after Dinner, they ſhall not bee admitted into the Yard, but ſhall looſe their pay for that time.
               
               
                  CXXVIII.
                  He ſhall keepe an Accompt dayly of all the prouiſions which ſhall bee caryed out of the Yards (of what kinde ſoeuer) and he ſhall note downe the perticulars (ſo neere as poſſible he can) in a Booke for that purpoſe, to be deliuered to the Committees of the Yardes, at all times when they ſhall require the ſame. And he ſhall not ſuffer any of the Labourers to depart out of the Yard from their worke at vnlawfull times.
               
               
                  CXXIX.
                  He ſhall not receiue any Money or make any profit for letting in of Gentlemen, Strangers or any others into the Yards: Neither ſhall he open the Gates at vnſeaſonable houres, to the Mr. Shipwrights ſeruants, or to any others, but onely vpon vrgent occaſions, as he will anſwer the contrary at his perill.
               
            
            
               Clarke of the Cordage and other Stores.
               
                  CXXX.
                  THE ſaid Clarke ſhall from time to time, orderly & iuſtly receiue into the Storehouſes of this Company, all ſuch Cordage, Marlin, Twyne, Ordnance, great Shot, Braſſe ſheuers, Pullyes, blockes and the like, by the Order and Warrant onely of thoſe Committees, or others, who ſhall be authorized to buy the ſaid prouiſions, whereof he ſhall make true entry in his Bookes, and likewiſe giue his receipt of all the perticulars vnder his owne hand vnto the parties, who ſhall deliuer the ſame.
               
               
                  
                  CXXXI.
                  He ſhall in like manner receiue, and alſo giue his Receipt for euery perticular thing, which ſhall be deliuered vnto him out of the Companies Ships when they returne home, ſetting downe the waight of euery piece of Ordnance, the length, ſize, and waight of the Cables and Hawſers, the waight of the olde Ropes, rigging Ockam and the like, the waight of the Braſſe Shiuers, and generally euery other thing, with aſmuch plainneſſe as poſſible he can, both for the quantity and quality thereof.
               
               
                  CXXXII.
                  He ſhall rancke or place the ſaid Cordage, and other things in the Companies Storehouſes by their ſorts and ſizes, ſeuerally laying the Cables and other waighty things neareſt the Water-ſide, the olde Ropes by themſelues, and ſo of euery other thing, to auoyde confuſion, and great charges in the often remouing.
               
               
                  CXXXIII.
                  He ſhall take directions from the Mr. Pylot, vnder his hand writing, concerning the proportions of Cordage, and other thinges, to be aſſigned to the Rigging and ſtoring of each of this Companies Ships ſeuerally, which he ſhall after deliuer out of the Storehouſe, by ſuch order of Meaſure, waight or tale, as the ſaid prouiſions were receiued into the ſtorehouſes, whereby the Accompt may reſt plaine and without ſuſpect: Wherefore it is further ordered, that the Purcer generall and Purcer of each Ship, or his Mate, ſhall be preſent to ſee the waight and deliuery of euery perticular thing, and to keepe a true Accompt thereof in their Bookes.
               
               
                  CXXXIIII.
                  He ſhall for his Diſcharge in the Audit of his Accompts, deliuer no prouiſions without receipts, and perticularly he ſhall take a faire and plaine Receipt of the Purcer of each of the Companies Ships, for all ſuch prouiſions and Stores as ſhall be by him deliuered to the Rigging and furniſhing of the ſaid Ships to Sea. And he ſhall keepe faire and true Bookes of accompts, of all his proceedings in the Affaires of this Company, to be deliuered and examined by their Auditors at all times, when they ſhall require them.
               
            
            
               
               Clarke of the Iron Workes in the Yard.
               
                  CXXXV.
                  THE Clarke of the Iron Workes ſhall receiue from the Smith in the Yard weekely, or ſo often as neede ſhall require, all the Anchors, Nailes, Spicks, Bolts, Chaineplates, or whatſoeuer Iron Workes, by waight and tale, for the which he ſhall giue a Receipt of perticulars vnto the ſaid Smith for his diſcharge, and the like to the Committees, to the Husband, or to any others, for Lead, Candles, Copper, or whatſoeuer elſe he ſhall receiue of them for the Company.
               
               
                  CXXXVI.
                  He ſhall receiue from the Companies Ships, which returne home, the Carpenters tooles, the Smiths tooles and Stores, all the Anchors, Polts, Spicks, Nailes, Chaines, Chaineplates and the like, by waight and tale, for the which hee ſhall accordingly giue a Receipt of the perticulars vnto the Committees for recouery of old Stores: And he ſhall giue a true note vnto the Clarke of the Yard, of the waight of all the old Iron workes, which ſhal be recouered and deliuered him in the breaking vp of the Companies Ships and ſheathings.
               
               
                  CXXXVII.
                  He ſhall deliuer vnto the building & repairing of the Companies Ships, the Carpenters tooles Lead, Copper, and the like, all kinde of Iron workes, by waight and tale, by the hands of ſuch perſons, who ſhall be put in truſt to ſerue them to the Worke men, & he ſhall take their Receipt in his Booke for his diſcharge, & likewiſe ſubſcribe the true Copies of all in their books, to auoid difference and errour, and he ſhall examine the ſaid Seruers of Iron workes, daily, concerning the expence and vſe of all; and he ſhall likewiſe in his owne perſon (euery euening at the leaſt) view the works, eſpecially taking notice where, and how many great Bolts, or the like things of valuo be driuen or vſed.
               
               
                  CXXXVIII.
                  He ſhall keepe a faire Booke with true Accompts, of all his proceedings in this Companies affaires, plainely and orderly ſetting downe euery perticular to each Ship ſeuerally, and the ſaid Bookes hee ſhall deliuer vp vnto the Clarke of the Yard, ſo often as he ſhall require, to the intent he may examine and digeſt all into his bookes of Accompts.
               
            
            
               
               Seruars of Iron workes to the Companies Ships.
               
                  CXXXIX.
                  THey ſhall receiue from the Clarke of the Iron Workes, the Carpenters Tooles, Lead, Candles, Copper, Bolts, Nayles, Spickes, Chaineplates or the like, which ſhall be required for the Workes in the Companies Ships, and they ſhall giue a Receipt for the ſame; plainely ſetting downe the perticulars by waight and tale, and they ſhall keepe the true Coppies of euery ſuch Receipt to themſelues, ſubſcribed by the ſaid Clarke, to auoid error and difference.
               
               
                  CXL.
                  They ſhall deliuer of the ſaid Iron workes and other things vnto the Workmen in the Companies Ships, where they ſhall attend with diligence, obſeruing the vſe of euery perticular thing, as neere as poſſible they may, and eſpecially of the great Bolts, and other things of value, whereof euery Euening they ſhall giue a reaſon vnto the ſaid Clarke.
               
               
                  CXLI.
                  They ſhall be very carefull that none of the ſaid Iron Workes or other Materials be imbeazeled by the Worke men, or any others; and if they finde any man faulty in this kinde, or in the neglect of their worke, or otherwiſe howſoeuer, they ſhall preſently giue notice thereof to the Maſter Shipwright, and the Clarke of the Yard: and likewiſe to the Committees when they come thither, that ſuch courſes may be taken againſt the Offenders as the cauſe ſhall require.
               
            
            
               Smith in the Yard.
               
                  XLII.
                  THE Smith from henceforth ſhall receiue all the Iron (both Engliſh and Spaniſh) at certaine priſes agreed, or to be agreed vpon from the Husband for this Company, who ſhall deliuer & keepe accompt with him for the ſame, and he ſhall receiue onely ſo much Iron from time to time, as his preſent working ſhal needfully require, for which he ſhall giue Receipts to the ſaid Husband for the vſe of this Company.
               
               
                  
                  CXLIII.
                  He ſhal diligently worke the ſaid Iron in good and ſubſtantiall manner, into ſuch ſeuerall workes, of Anchors, Bolts, Spicks, Chaineplates, Nailes, or the like workes, ordinary and extraordinary, according to ſuch manner, waight, and ſize, as ſhal be appointed him by the Clarke of the Iron works, for ſuch ſeuerall rates and prizes, as are already, or may hereafter be agreed vpon for this Company.
               
               
                  CXLIIII.
                  He ſhall deliuer vp all his ſaid workes, which ſhall be ready made, once euery weeke, or ſo often as ſhall be required, vnto the Clarke of the Iron workes in the Yard, by waight and tale, taking his Receipt for the perticulars, that he may render a true Accompt accordingly.
               
               
                  CXLV.
                  He ſhall make choiſe and triall of all the Iron, which he ſhall receiue of the ſaid Husband: and if he finde any part thereof which ſhall not be good for his vſe, then he ſhall refuſe the ſame, that all excuſe may be taken away in the defects of Anchors, Chaineplates, or any other workes.
               
            
            
               Taphouſe in the Yard.
               
                  CXLVI.
                  THey who now are, or hereafter ſhall be lycenſed by the Companie from yeare to yeare, to keepe the Taphouſe in the Yard, ſhall dwell and abide in the ſaid Taphouſe rent free, for their performance, according to the Articles following.
               
               
                  CXLVII.
                  Firſt, they ſhall not haue, or retale any Beere in the ſaid Taphouſe, aboue the price of ſixe ſhillings the Barrell, neither ſhall they ſell of the ſaid Beere leſſe then three full pynts of Ale meaſure for a penny, and the bread likewiſe which they ſhall retale, ſhall be from time to time of full waight and ſize, made of good and wholeſome Corne.
               
               
                  
                  CXLVIII.
                  They ſhall haue Liberty to ſell or retale to the Companies Workemen in the Yard, and to no other perſons whatſoeuer, viz. ſixe ſhillings Beere, Bread, Peaſe and Milke, Porrage, Egges, Butter, Cheeſe, and no other kinde of victuals, or drinke whatſoeuer.
               
               
                  CXLIX.
                  They ſhall not ſuffer any of the Companies Workemen, to come within Roomes of the Taphouſe, to drinke, reſt, or hide themſelues in the time of worke▪ But they ſhal deliuer them drink for their refreſhing, in places open, to the view of the Yard; neither ſhall they deliuer more then two pence in Beere to one man euery day at breakefaſt, and betwixt Meales.
               
               
                  CL.
                  They ſhall permit the Clarke of the Yard, to haue free acceſſe into all the Roomes and places of the ſaid Taphouſe, when he ſhall ſo require, to ſearch for Strangers, or Loyterers, or any other diſorders which might be committed, contrary to the afore written Articles.
               
               
                  CLI.
                  They ſhall acquaint the ſaid Clarke of the Yard euery pay day of all ſuch ſummes of money, as ſhall be due vnto them for drinke and victuals, intruſted vnto any of the Companies Workemen in the Yard, that hee may rebate the ſame for them, out of their wages.
               
            
            
               Chirurgion generall.
               
                  CLII.
                  THE ſaid Chirurgion and his Deputy ſhall haue a Lodging or a place in the Yard, where one of them shall giue Attendance euery working day, from morning vntill night, to cure any perſon or perſons who may be hurt in the Seruice of this Company, and the like in all their Ships riding at an Anchor at Deptford and Blackwall, and at Erith, where hee shall alſo keepe a Deputy with his Cheſt furnished, to remaine there continually, vntill all the ſaid Ships be vayled downe from thence to Graueſend.
                  
               
               
                  
                  CLIII.
                  They ſhall alſo cut the hayre of the Carpenters, Saylors, Caulkers, Labourers, & any other Workemen in the Companies ſaid Yards, and Ships, once euery forty dayes, in a ſeemely māner, performing their works at Breakfaſt and Dinner times, or in raynie weather, & in an open place where no man may loyter or lye hidden, vnder pretence to attend his turne of Trimming.
               
               
                  CLIIII.
                  They ſhall diſcouer vnto the Clarke of the Yard, and to others who ſhall be in places of Authority, all ſuch perſons whom they ſhall finde decrepit, lame, vncleane, or vnable to the Companies ſeruice, that they may be forthwith diſmiſſed from the ſame.
               
               
                  CLV.
                  In conſideration of the afore-written Attendance and performance, it is ordered, that euery Carpenter, Saylor, Labourer, or other Workeman whatſoeuer in the ſaid Yards, and Ships, ſhall pay two pence euery moneth out of his Wages, to the ſaid Chirurgion generall.
               
               
                  CLVI.
                  And the ſaid Chirurgion generall ſhall aſſiſt the Committees to hire vnto the Shipping, and voyages of this Company, skilfull and honeſt Chirurgions and their Mates, at ſuch reaſonable rates of wages, as poſſible he may: and he ſhall acquaint and ſhew them from time to time, all ſuch Medicines and things as ſhall be furniſhed into the Cheſts, of which they are to take charge for the voyages.
               
               
                  CLVII.
                  He shall vſe diligence to furnish vp all the ſaid Cheſts, in ſuch due times, that they be hereafter brought vnto the Companies houſe, foureteene dayes at leaſt before there shall be occaſion to ship them, that ſo euery perticular thing may be ſeene and allowed, by thoſe Committees, Doctors, Apothicaries, or any others, whom the Court of Committees shall pleaſe to appoint for that purpoſe.
               
               
                  CLVIII.
                  He shal at the returne home of the Companies Ships from the Indies, receiue, & alſo giuen a Receipt, to be accomptable to the ſaid Company, for the Chirurgions Cheſts, Tooles, Medicines, & Ingredients: of all which he ſhal take a due accompt of the ſhip Chirurgion, when he deliuereth vp his cheſt.
               
            
            
               
               Keepers of Anchors and Stores in the Downes.
               
                  CLIX.
                  HEE ſhall haue charge of the Companies Cables, Hawſers, Anchors, Boates, or any other prouiſions already ſent, or hereafter to be ſent into the Downes, and ſhall keepe a true Accompt in his Booke of euery perticular, ſetting downe orderly the time and the parties name, from whom he ſhall receiue ſuch things, & ſhall giue them Receipts for their diſcharge.
               
               
                  CLX.
                  He ſhall vſe diligence when any of the Companies Shippes arriue, in or neere the Downes, to ſee them ſpeedily furniſhed with ſuch part of the ſaid prouiſions as they ſhall need, or require, and for what he ſhall ſo deliuer: he ſhall take a Receipt for his diſcharge of the Maſter and Purſer of ſuch Ships, whereof he ſhal giue preſent notice by his Letters vnto the Gouernour, Deputy, and Committees, that ſo they may demaund an accompt of all accordingly.
               
            
            
               Cowper, Boatmaker, Caruer, Maſt-maker, Paynter, Ioyner.
               
                  CLXI.
                  THey ſhall in their ſeuerall places performe their workes in due time ſubſtantially and well wrought, according to ſuch agreements and rates as now are, or hereafter ſhall be bargained with them in the behalfe of the Company.
               
               
                  CLXII.
                  They ſhall keepe a true Accompt of all the Materialls whatſoeuer, which ſhall be deliuered them from time to time by the Companies Officers, or any others, to the performing of their ſaid works, and ſo the ſaid Accompts orderly kept of each Ships Materials by themſelues, they ſhall deliuer vp, together with thoſe Accompts which they ſhall giue in for their owne workmanſhips, thereby to receiue ſatisfaction & payment from the Company.
               
               
                  
                  CLXIII.
                  They ſhall once euery weeke at leaſt compare their Bookes with the Companies Officers, to ſee how they agree vpon the perticulars, that errors may be auoyded.
               
            
            
               Clarke of the Slaughter-houſe.
               
                  CLXIIII.
                  THE ſaid Clarke ſhall hereafter vſe his beſt endeuour and diligence, to ſee all thoſe Orders duly performed, which are giuen him by priuate Inſtructions in writing, for the pounding, killing, bleeding, cutting, ſalting, repacking, pickling, & all other diligences to be vſed in the Slaughter-houſe, for the better preſeruation of all the Beefes and Hogges, which ſhall be hereafter packed and ſhipped for the voyages of this Company.
               
               
                  CLXV.
                  He ſhall appoint a truſty man to keepe the doore of the cutting Roome, who ſhall ſuffer no man (without good cauſe) to goe out and in, and to haue a ſpeciall care, that they carrie nothing with them, more then their owne, ſetting a Watch likewiſe ouer the windowes, and to ſearch all the Labourers at ſuch times when they leaue worke, and depart the Roome.
               
               
                  CLXVI.
                  He ſhall keepe a true Accompt of the Receipts of all the Beefes & Hogs, by their waight, and thereof ſhall giue a Copie to the Committees (appointed for that buſineſſe) that thereby they may cauſe a Warrant to be framed for the payment of the Debt.
               
               
                  CLXVII.
                  Hee ſhall likewiſe keepe a true Accompt of the deliuery of all the ſaid Hogges and Beefes, by the number of peeces (in each Hogſhead) & waight, and to what ſeuerall Ships: plainely ſetting downe the waſte, ſhancks, Harborough victuals, Sewet, Tongues, and the like, diſtinctly; that the Company may ſee, that all is orderly and iuſtly iſſued to their vſes, and hee ſhall require ſufficient Receipts from the Purſers or others, to whom he ſhall deliuer any thing, that they may ſerue for his diſcharge in the Audit of his Accompts.
               
               
                  
                  CLXVIII.
                  He ſhall keepe a true Accompt of the Charges in the Slaughter-houſe, and of the Salt, Caske, and other things expended there.
               
               
                  CLXIX.
                  He ſhall alſo receiue the Remaines of all the victuals whatſoeuer, which ſhall heereafter returne home in the Companies Shippes from the Indies or other places, and hee ſhall giue his Receipts to bee accomptable for the ſame.
               
            
            
               VVatchmen in the Yard.
               
                  CLXX.
                  THE Watchmen ſhall begin their Watch in the Euening, when the Workemen depart out of the Yard, and ſo continue all night, vntill the ſaid Workemen (at the ringing of the Bell in the Morning) returne to their labour againe.
               
               
                  CLXXI.
                  They ſhall watch diligently at their ſtandings, often calling one to another to preuent ſleepe, and euery houre when the Clocke ſtrikes, they ſhall walke the Round, and likewiſe ring the Bell in the Yards, that the Companies Officers (who are lodged there) may take notice of their watchfulneſſe.
               
               
                  CLXXII.
                  They ſhall haue charge of the Plugs, to performe that worke at due times, for which they ſhall haue allowance as heretofore.
               
            
            
               
               VVorkemen generally in the Yard.
               
                  CLXXIII.
                  ALL the ſaid Workmen ſhall come to their Labour at appointed times, and ſhall attend to anſwer to their Calles ſeuerally, for if any of them be abſent, Then ſuch perſons ſhall not bee entertained into the Companies workes, vntill the next call, when they ſhall bee preſent, and apply themſelues vnto their Labours.
               
               
                  CLXXIIII.
                  They ſhall bee obedient vnto the Mr. Shipwright, to the Clarke of the Yard, the Foremen, and other the Companies chiefe Officers, who ſhall haue Authority to direct and order the Affaires of the Yard, and ſhall ſuffer themſelues to be ſearched, by the Porter of the Lodge, vpon ſuſpition that they may conuey away any of the Companies Yron workes, or other thinges.
               
               
                  CLXXV.
                  They ſhall not loyter nor hide themſelues in the times of worke in the Taphouſe, or in any other place, Neither yet depart the Yard vpon their owne occaſions▪ without licence of the Clarke, or ſome other chiefe Officer in his abſence.
               
               
                  CLXXVI.
                  They ſhall not commit or doe any Ryot, by Fighting, Swearing, breaking of Pots in the Taphouſe, hewing of good pieces of Timber, and Planckes into Chips, or any other waſte or hurt: for being conuicted of ſuch defaults, they ſhall pay the Damage, and ſo be preſently diſmiſſed out of the Companies workes.
               
               
                  
                  CLXXVII.
                  They ſhall rebate out of their Wages, euery pay day, ſo much money as they ſhall be found indebted in the Yard to the Taphouſe, and alſo to the Chyrurgion, after the rate of Two pence a Month per man for their Trimming and Cures as is ordered. And they ſhall make complaint vnto the Gouernour, Deputy and Committees, of all diſorders, which they ſhall perceiue or know to be performed in the Yard by any man, or of oppreſſions or wrongs which might be offered them, by any of the Companies chiefe Officers, that ſuch courſes may be preſently taken for Remedies, as the cauſes ſhall require.
               
            
            
               Guardians for Recouery of olde Stores, Prouiſions and Victuals, which returne home in the Companies Ships.
               
                  CLXXVIII.
                  THERE ſhall be a truſty Guardian ſent to each of the Companies Ships after they returne home, and are come on this ſide of Graueſend, who ſhall carefully receiue all the olde prouiſions, Stores and Victuals, from the cuſtody of thoſe Officers, who ſhall haue had the charge of them in the ſaid Ships.
               
               
                  CLXXIX.
                  He ſhall lade the ſaid Prouiſions, Victuals or Stores, in one or more Lighters▪ to be deliuered into the Companies Yardes, and other places appointed: keeping a true Accompt of all, and ſending a truſty man in each Lighter, with a Note of the perticulars, that nothing may be imbeazeled.
               
               
                  CLXXX.
                  He ſhall ſet downe orderly and plainely, euery perticular thing in his Booke, declaring the names of the Ordnance, the number of the Pieces, and their waight, the great Shot by their number and ſize, the Anchors by their number and waight, the olde Yron workes, Veſſels of Pewter, Braſſe, Copper or the like, by their waight, Oyle, Wine, Syder or the like, by their. Veſſels, and all the Remnants by Gage, meaſure, waight or eſteeme. The Cables, Cablets, Hawſers or Coyles, by their length and ſizes, and generally all thinges with aſmuch plainenes concerning the quantity, quality and vſe, as poſſible he may.
               
               
                  
                  CLXXXI.
                  He ſhall direct, and cauſe to be deliuered vnto the Clarke of the Cordage, all the Cables, and other Cordage, together with the Rigging and all other thinges thereunto belonging, as the Pullyes, blockes, braſſe Sheuers, and the like, Ordnance, great Shot, Sayles and remaines of Canuas.
                  To the Clarke of the Storehouſe in London, the Gunners, Cookes, and Armorers, Stores, the locke Smiths workes, and the Coopers tooles, with the Caske, Yron hoopes, and other ſtores.
                  To the Chyrurgion generall, he ſhall cauſe to be deliuered, the Chyrurgion cheſt with all Inſtruments, Medicines, or Ingredients which ſhall remaine.
                  To the Clarke of the Yard, the Carpenters ſtores.
                  To the Clarke of the Slaughterhouſe, the Beefe, Porke, and all other ſortes of Victuals whatſoeuer.
                  To the Clarke of the Yron workes, the Carpenters tooles, all the Sheetload, Anchors, Boltes, Spikes, Nayles or the like.
               
               
                  CLXXXII.
                  He ſhall ſet downe ſeuerally in his Booke all the perticulars, which hee ſhall haue deliuered (as is afore written) vnto the ſaid Officers, who ſhall after ſubſcribe the ſame, and acknowledge to haue receiued all, for and to the vſe of this Company: and the ſaid Booke ſo ſubſcribed, he ſhall deliuer vp vnto the Committees appointed to take Accompt of the ſaid prouiſions, Victuals and ſtores.
               
            
            
               Committees to take Accompt of olde Stores, returned in the Companies Ships.
               
                  CLXXXIII.
                  THE ſaid Committees ſhall bee Two in number, and at the Returne home of the Companies Ships, they ſhall appoint ſome truſty man for Guardian in each Ship to recouer the olde prouiſions, Stores and Victuals, in ſuch manner and forme, as is ordered in the Articles of the ſaid Guardians.
               
               
                  
                  CLXXXIIII.
                  They ſhall giue order at the Arriuall of euery Ship of the Company, that no Officer be paide his wages without their Warrant, certifying that they haue receiued an Accompt of the thinges committed to their charge.
               
               
                  CLXXXV.
                  They ſhall examine the Purcers Bookes for the prouiſions, Stores and Victuals, which remained in each Officers cuſtody, at their departure from the Jndies, with their diſcharge by the expence thereof, and the Remaine which haue bin deliuered vp; and if they finde any exorbitance in the expence, or wants in thinges which may import, then they ſhall acquaint the Court of Committees thereof, that they may proceed againſt the Offenders in ſuch manner as the cauſe ſhall require.
               
               
                  CLXXXVI.
                  They ſhall be preſent, to ſee ſuch Bisket and other Victuals giuen to the Poore, as ſhalbe found vnfit to be kept for the Companies ſeruice, and hath heretofore in the like caſes bin left to the diſcretion of others to diſtribute.
               
               
                  CLXXXVII.
                  They ſhall cauſe the ſaid Guardians Booke to be ſafely kept (in the Compting-houſe) by the Accomptant, thereby to charge the ſeuerall Officers, with the things which they haue receiued, according to their Subſcriptions: and they ſhall cauſe the ſaid Guardians Bookes to be truely coppyed into a generall Booke of all the Companies Ships, by order as they ſhall returne home, to the end that the Appraiſers of the ſaid Ships from one Stocke to another, may make vſe thereof in their Appraiſement.
               
            
            
               Committees to Appraiſe the Companies Ships which returne.
               
                  CLXXXVIII.
                  THE Committees who ſhall be appointed with any others, to appraiſe the Companies Ships, from one Accompt to another, ſhall proceed with care and diligence, that all thinges may be eſteemed and valued with ſuch skill, that neither party may haue iuſt occaſion to complaine.
               
               
                  
                  CLXXXIX.
                  They ſhall for their better direction make vſe of the Booke of Inuentories, for olde prouiſions and Stores appertaining to the Ships, which they ſhall appraiſe, and therein take notice of the iuſt quantity and quality of euery perticular thing.
               
               
                  CXC.
                  They ſhall after they haue agreed vpon all thinges neceſſary to be conſidered, deliuer vp their Appraiſement in writing, and ſubſcribe the ſame, that it may warrant the Entrance thereof, in the Companies Bookes.
               
            
            
               Committees of the Yard.
               
                  CXCI.
                  THE ſaid Committees, ſhall be Twelue in number, and they ſhall take their turne by Two and two weekely, attended by a Clarke to take notice of all the workmen generally in the yard, and to ſee them paide their wages, which ſhalbe noted downe in a Booke for that purpoſe, whereunto they ſhall ſubſcribe their Names, that thereby euery Weekes payments diſburſed by the Clarke of the Yard, may be vouched in the Audit of his Accompts.
               
               
                  CXCII.
                  They ſhall take good view and information of all the Workemen, concerning their Abilitie to their ſeuerall workes, and alſo the rates of their wages, leaſt through fauour, they might bee ouer-valued, or kept in Seruice longer then there ſhall be occaſion of their worke, vpon diſcouery of which wrongs or any other, the ſaid Committees of the Yard, or the greater number of them ſhall diſmiſſe ſome and place others as vnto them ſhall ſeeme fit, for the good of the Company. And in occaſion of any Difference in opinion among themſelues, they ſhall bring the matter into the Court of Committees for a Reſolution.
               
               
                  
                  CXCIII.
                  They ſhall on the firſt Tueſday of euery Quarter in the yeare (and oftner if need ſhall require) make their generall meetings at the Yard, to take a view of all things there, and to vnderſtand the Complaints or other paſſages of the Companies Affaires, that ſuch remedies and courſes may be ordered, as they ſhall iudge to be needfull.
               
            
            
               Committees for Entertaining of Marriners.
               
                  CXCIIII.
                  THE ſaid Committees ſhall haue a ſpeciall care to entertaine able men, vnmarryed and approued Saylors, as neere as poſſible they may, and they ſhall agree for their wages, with aſmuch aduantage as they can, for the Company.
               
               
                  CXCV.
                  They ſhall keepe a Booke, in which they ſhall note downe, the names of euery perticular man, with the day of his Entertainment, his wages, his place, or Office, and in what Ship, and thereof they ſhall giue a Note vnder their hands to the party hyred, that hee may deliuer the ſame vnto the Clarke of the Impreſt money, to make true Entry thereof in his Booke, and the ſaid Note to keepe by him for his Warrant.
               
               
                  CXCVI.
                  They ſhall euery Moneth at the leaſt, Audit vp the Accompts of the ſaid Clarke, and once euery yeare by the firſt day of May, or as often as ſhall be required, deliuer vp the ſaid Accompts perfectly Audited, & ſubſcribed by them, that they may be by the generall Auditors reueiwed, and ſo entered in the Companies great Bookes by the Accomptants.
               
            
            
               
               Clarke of the Impreſt and Wages.
               
                  CXCVII.
                  THE ſaid Clarke ſhall attend the Committees, who ſhall haue authority to entertaine Saylors for the Voyages of this Company, and in a faire Booke, ſet downe the Impreſt monyes which hee ſhall pay to euery perticular man ſo entertained vpon their ſeuerall bonds with Suerties, and this ſhall he performe onely by a Note from the ſaid Committees vnder their hands, which (together with the ſaid bond) ſhall be his Warrant in the Audit of his Accompts.
               
               
                  CXCVIII.
                  He ſhall vpon the like Warrant pay the wages which is allowed, to the Wiues of the ſaid Saylors vpon Accompt of euery yeares Seruice in the Shipping of this Company, if they bring good Teſtimony that they are the Wiues of the ſaid Saylors.
               
               
                  CXCIX.
                  He ſhall likewiſe pay the wages due vnto all the Marriners, which ſhall returne home in the Companies Ships, or to their Aſſignes, according as he ſhall be directed by ſeuerall Warrants from the ſaid Committees, the chiefe Accomptant and Auditors for the Company, which Notes hee ſhall alſo keepe by him for his Vouchers in the Audit of his Accompts.
               
               
                  CC.
                  He ſhall attend the diſpatch of all the Companies Ships at Graueſend, and in the Downes, and immediately after their departure, deliuer vp his Accompt to be Audited by the ſaid Committees, concerning all the charges which ſhall bee by them diſburſed, in whatſoeuer manner for the ſaid Diſpatch.
               
            
            
               
               Committees for the Buying of Victuals, prouiſions & Stores to the Ships.
               
                  CCI.
                  THE ſaid Committees ſhall be Two at the leaſt, for euery ſeuerall imployment, neither ſhall any one of them conclude a Bargaine, or buy any Wares whatſoeuer for this Company, without the knowledge and conſent of the other who ſhall be ioyned in Commiſſion with him: and if any one be abſent (by whatſoeuer occaſion) th▪other ſhal make it knowne vnto the Court, and from thence receiue his direction and Order.
               
               
                  CCII.
                  They ſhall not buy, directly nor indirectly, any Marchandize whatſoeuer for the vſe of this Company of themſelues, nor from any others, wherein they haue any part or intereſt: for being conuicted thereof, the Bargaine ſhalbe voyde, and the offence ſhalbe offered to the conſideration of a generall Court.
               
               
                  CCIII.
                  They ſhall take Billes of Parcels vnder the parties owne hand writing, of whom they ſhall buy any Wares for this Company, and therein the bargaine concerning waight, tare, price, and the like, ſhalbe plainly ſet downe, which Bill of parcels they ſhall deliuer to the Accomptant, that he may pin the ſame vnto the Warrant, which ſhall be directed vnto the Treaſurers for payment of the Debt.
               
               
                  CCIIII.
                  They ſhall take a ſufficient Receipt for their Diſcharge of the Clarkes of the Storehouſes, or any other, vnto whom they ſhall haue Order to conſigne the ſaid Wares ſo bought, to be diſpoſed for this Company.
               
               
                  CCV.
                  And laſtly, for ſuch Marchandize as they ſhall cauſe to be brought from any of the partes beyond the Seas by Order, and for the vſe of this Company, They ſhall at due time preſent the Factors Accompts thereof, dilidently examined, and ſubſcribed alſo by themſelues, that ſo they may bee reviewed by the Auditors, and after, entred orderly by the Accomptants into the Companies great Bookes.
               
            
            
               
               Maſters of Ships and their Mates.
               
                  CCVI.
                  THe ſaid Maſter and their Mates, after they ſhall be hired for a voyage in the Companies Ships, and are entered into Harborough Wages, ſhall take their Oathes openly in a Court of Committees, and ſhall endeuour to finde out able and good Marriners, whom they ſhall preferre for Entertainement, vnto the Committees appointed to that buſineſſe.
               
               
                  CCVII.
                  They ſhall giue their Attendance in the day time, and lodge euery night aboard the ſaid Ships, to further their diſpatch, and to keepe good order among the Marriners, and ouer euery other thing, to the benefit of this Companie.
               
               
                  CCVIII.
                  They ſhall carefully appoint the quarter Maſters and Boateſwaynes to be daily preſent in the Ships hold, to ſee the victuals, prouiſions, Stores, and Merchandize, well and orderly ſtowed, and that the Boatſwaine, Gunner, Cooke, Steward, Carpenter, and other Officers, doe attend in the Ships, to receiue and take charge of their ſeuerall Stores for the voyage, and to giue a true accompt of the diſpoſing of euery perticular thing vnto the Purſer.
               
               
                  CCIX.
                  They ſhall once euery weeke giue Accompt vnto the Court of Committees, of the forwardnes of their Ships, and of their ſeuerall wants, that order may be taken for a ſpeedy diſpatch of all.
               
               
                  CCX.
                  They ſhall within tenne dayes next after their returne from the Indies, into the Riuer of Thames, deliuer vp vnto the Gouernour, Deputie, and Committees, faire Copies of their Iournell Bookes, concerning their Nauigation, and other worthy obſeruations in the courſe of their whole voyage.
               
               
                  
                  CCXI.
                  They ſhall be aboard the Ships when they vayle downe to Erith and Graueſend, to aſſiſt the Maſter Pylot or his Deputy, in what ſhall be needfull, And for all other Duties, to be by them performed in the whole courſe of their voyage, they are at large ſet downe in the Companies Commiſſions for their affaires at Sea.
               
            
            
               Quarter Maſters and Boateſwaynes.
               
                  CCXII.
                  THE Quarter-Maſters and Boatſwaines ſhall diligently attend aboard the Companies Ships euery day, to ſee all the victuals, prouiſions, ſtores, and Merchandize, orderly ſtowed in places fit and conuenient, and they ſhall not ſuffer any thing to be laden into the Shippes hold, before the Purſer or his Mate haue taken a true note thereof.
               
            
            
               Purſers and their Mates.
               
                  CCXIII.
                  THey ſhall (as they are choſen) take their Oathes openly in a Court of Committees, and after giue their daily attendance aboard Ships, to take a true accompt of all the Harborough victuals, and victuals for the Voyage, Prouiſions, Stores, and Merchandize, of whatſoeuer kinde: and they ſhall appoint the Quarter-Maſters, Boatſwaines, and other Officers, that they neither lade nor vnlade any thing without their knowledge, to keepe a true accompt thereof.
               
               
                  CCXIIII.
                  The ſaid Purſers or their Mates ſhall be preſent in the Companies Storehouſe, to take the length, ſize, and waight of all the Cordage, which ſhall be ſerued to the Rigging of the Ships, or for Stores ſeuerally. Alſo one of them ſhal be preſent, to take the waight of the Bisket, Flower and Meale, from the Baker for the voyage; All which, they ſhal after ſee carefelly laden into the Companies, Ships, And they ſhall giue their Receipts vnto the ſeuerall Officers, or any other, who ſhal lade, or deliuer them any manner of prouiſions, Stores, victuals, or Merchandize, for the vſe of this Company.
               
               
                  
                  CCXV.
                  They ſhall haue a Beame and Scales, to receiue, and note downe the waight of Cheeſe, Butter, Bread, Braſſe, Copper and Pewter veſſels, or any other things which are charged to the Company by waight.
               
               
                  CCXVI.
                  They ſhall at the appointed times euery day call the Saylors to their worke, keeping a true note of euery mans dayes and rates of payment, whereby they may receiue their due pay weekely by the hands of the Purſer generall, vnto whom they ſhall alſo giue a note, certifying the Totals of euery weekes disburſements vnto the Treaſurers of this Company.
               
               
                  CCXVII.
                  They ſhall take Receipts (in a booke for that purpoſe) of the Boatſwaine, Gunner, Cooke, Steward, Carpenter, Cooper, and Armourer, for all their ſeuerall Stores and Tooles which they ſhall receiue for the voyage, that they may be accomptable for the ſame, and the ſaid Receipts ſhall be orderly teſtified by the Maſter of the Ship, or ſome other knowne men, And they ſhall keepe a true accompt, with all the ſaid Officers, of the daily expending of all the ſaid ſtores and victuals, to the end that at all times it may be knowne what prouiſions remaine in the Ships.
               
               
                  CCXVIII.
                  They ſhall vſe their beſt endeuour to learne out, and accordingly to aduiſe the Gouernour, Deputy, and Committees, concerning all priuate trade in the Companies Ships, to and from the Indies, and in thoſe parts from port to port.
               
               
                  CCXIX.
                  They ſhall haue perticular charge carefully to obſerue, and truly to aduiſe the Gouernour, Deputy, and Committees by their Letters, from the Cape of Good Hope, or from any other place, where they ſhall haue oportunitie to write, concerning the goodneſſe or defects, of the beefe, porke, bisket, Wine, beere, Sider, Cordage, powder, or any other prouiſions whatſoeuer; and alſo concerning any want, which ſhall be found in the number of peeces of beefe and porke, in any of the Caske differing from their packing here, or any want of waight in the ſaid peeces of beefe and porke, or powder, or the like, which aduices they ſhall ſend, teſtified and vnder-written by the Maſter, or ſome other principall Officers of the ſhip.
               
               
                  
                  CCXX.
                  They ſhall keepe faire Bookes of accompts of all the afore-ſaid things whatſoeuer they ſhall receiue into the Ships from ſeuerall men, to the vſe of the Company, noting downe euery thing with as much plaineneſſe as poſſible they can, concerning number, waight, and meaſure, and ſo the ſaid bookes (together with the booke of Receipts from the Officers aforewritten, at the departure of the Ships from Graueſend) they ſhall deliuer vp to the Gouernour and Committees, or to any other who ſhall haue authority from them. The reſt of the duties which concerne the ſaid Purſers and their Mates, in the whole courſe of their voyage, are to be ſeene in the Companies Commiſſions for the Seas.
               
            
            
               Chirurgions in the Companies Ships.
               
                  CCXXI.
                  THE ſaid Chirurgions, after they are entertained into the Companies Ships, ſhall attend the Chirurgion generall, to the furniſhing of their Cheſts, which they ought to carrie to Sea with them, and they ſhall giue their beſt aduice and counſell, that all needfull Medicines and other things, may be prouided, whereof they ſhall take a carefull view, when the Cheſt ſhall be deliuered to their charge, that nothing be wanting, which conueniently may be had for the preſeruation of mens liues, and curing of their diſeaſes.
               
               
                  CCXXII.
                  They ſhall vſe their beſt endeuour and skill (through the whole courſe of their Voyage) in thoſe thinges which concerne their places, and at their returne home, they ſhall deliuer vp their ſaid Cheſts with all things, which ought to remaine in them, vnto the ſaid Chirurgion generall, for the vſe of this Company.
               
            
            
               
               Boateſwaine, Gunner, Cooke, Steward, Cooper, Carpenter & Armorer.
               
                  CCXXIII.
                  ALL the ſaid Officers ſhall giue their diligent Attendance aboard Ship from time to time, to receiue and take charge of all the Prouiſions, Victuals and Stores for the Voyage, which ſhalbe aſſigned vnto them ſeuerally to vſe, and to giue Accompt of the ſame to the Purcers or their Mates, at all times when it ſhall be required.
               
               
                  CCXXIIII.
                  They ſhall alſo giue their Receipts ſeuerally, of all the perticular thinges which they ſhall haue receiued, plainely and orderly ſet downe in the ſaid Receipt, which they ſhall after deliuer vp vnto the Purcer or his Mate, for the vſe of this Company.
               
            
            
               Committees for Commiſsions, and Letters.
               
                  CCXXV.
                  THE ſaid Committees ſhalbe Eight in number, beſides the Gouernour, Deputy & Treaſurers, and they ſhall diligently meete together whenſoeuer occaſion of buſines ſhall require, being Summoned by order from the Gouernour or his Deputy.
               
               
                  CCXXVI.
                  They ſhall with their beſt aduice and Counſell, ſet downe good Lawes and Orders for gouernment at Sea in the Companies Ships, and they ſhall giue ample and plaine directions by Letters vnto the Engliſh Factors in the Jndies, for the generall Affaires of this Company in thoſe parts: And laſtly they ſhall bring the ſaid Commiſſions and Letters to be openly read in a full Court of Committees, to paſſe the Iudgement of the ſaid Court, and then be ſubſcribed by the Gouernour or his Deputy, and thirteene Committees at the leaſt.
               
            
            
               
               Factories in the Indies.
               
                  CCXXVII.
                  THE Election, continuance, and change of the Preſidents, Generals, Captaines, Counſels, Factors, and all other Officers imployed in the affaires of this Company in the partes of the Eaſt Jndies, ſhall bee at the Diſcretion of the Gouernour, or his Deputy and Committees, to be performed by the order of the Ballotting Box, or by Erection of handes, as vnto the greater number of them being aſſembled together ſhall ſeeme moſt conuenient.
               
               
                  CCXXVIII.
                  All the ſaid Commaunders and Factors (as they are choſen) ſhall preſently take their Oathes openly in a Court of Committees, and ſhall giue Bonds with ſufficient Suerties, for their true performance, as the ſaid Court ſhall require.
               
               
                  CCXXIX.
                  The Affaires of this Company in all the partes of the Eaſt Indies, ſhall haue Dependance vpon two principall Factories (viz.) Bantam in the Iland of Jaua Maior, and Suratt in the Gulph of Cambaia, vnder the Great Mogoll, or any other places where the Preſidents ſhall reſide: and vnto them, all the other Factories ſhall be ſubordinate, in manner following.
               
               
                  CCXXX.
                  And firſt vnto Bantam ſhall be Accomptable, all the Factories in the ſeuerall Ilands of the Moluccoes, Banda, Amboyna, China, Japan, the Celebes, Borneo, Iaua, Sumatra, and in the Prouinces of Chochinchina, Siam, Patania, Camboia, and all the Factories vpon the Coaſt of Coromandell, as Petipoli, Meſulipatan Pelicato, and all the reſt in the Gulph of Bengala, together with all the Factories vpon the Coaſt of Jndia or Malabar, from Goa Southwards.
               
               
                  
                  CCXXXI.
                  And vnto Suratt ſhall be Accomptable, Amadauar, Agemir, Agra, Baroche, the Court of the great Mogoll, and all the Factories within the Gulph of Cambaia, and vpon the Coaſt of Malabar, Southwards as farre as Goa, together with Mocha, and all other places in or neere the Red Sea, and the Coaſt of Melinda, and all the Factories in Perſia, or within the Perſian Gulph.
               
               
                  CCXXXII.
                  The ſaid two principall Factories, ſhall keepe Bookes of all the Letters which they write vnto the ſeuerall Factories, and receiue from them, fairely coppyed into other Bookes, which they ſhall yearely ſend into England vnto the Gouernour, Deputy, and Committees: and the like they ſhall performe of all the notable occurrences in thoſe parts, briefly ſet downe day by day in forme of a Iournall.
               
               
                  CCXXXIII.
                  They ſhall haue Engliſh Beames and Scales, both great and ſmall, to vſe in all needfull occaſions, and eſpecially by them to receiue all the Wares and Marchandize which ſhall be ſent from hence, and Inuoiced vnto them by waight, which ſhall be diligently compared in the preſence of the Purcers of euery Ship, and if any want bee found, they ſhall preſently by the firſt Ship ſend ample Teſtimony thereof to the Gouernour, Deputy and Committees.
               
               
                  CCXXXIIII.
                  They ſhall likewiſe receiue all the Companies Spaniſh Ryals, both by Waight and tale, in the preſence of the Purcers and their Mates, of thoſe Ships by whom they ſhall receiue ſuch Ryals, and if any want bee found, they ſhall ſend ample teſtimony thereof, as in the laſt Article.
               
               
                  CCXXXV.
                  And foraſmuch as the Affaires of this Company, will require the imployment of diuers Ships to bee kept continually in the Jndies, for whoſe Reparations and victualing, it is conceiued very needfull to ſend great ſtore of Prouiſions from hence yearely▪ The Factorie of Bantam ſhall therefore prouide conuenient Store-Houſes, and places for the receipt of Cordage, Tarre, Ordnance, Powder, Shot, Victuals, and diuers other Munitions▪ that ſo all thinges may remaine in ſafe and carefull Cuſtody.
               
               
                  
                  CCXXXVI.
                  They ſhall appoint a ſufficient Boateſwaine, and other skilfull Officers, to the ordering of the ſaid Storehouſes, that the Companies Shipping may be furniſhed from thence in ſuch meaſure, as by their approbation ſhall be found needfull, ſo that nothing may be waſted.
               
               
                  CCXXXVII.
                  They ſhall appoint certaine Factors, to the ouerſeeing and charge of the ſaid Storehouſes, with order to keepe faire Bookes of Accompts of all the ſaid Prouiſions, which ſhall be receiued or deliuered vnto the Companies Ships, or otherwiſe to their vſes, And the ſaid Accompts being firſt examined, allowed and ſubſcribed by the Preſident and his Counſell, ſhall once euery yeare be ſent into England, vnto the Gouernour, Deputy and Committees.
               
               
                  CCXXXVIII.
                  The ſaid two principall Factories ſhall ſolicite all the Factories which haue dependance on them, to ſend the Accompts of their proceedings in the Affaires of this Company at due times, ſo that they may bee examined and digeſted into their generall Bookes, the which (together with the originals of the ſaid Accompts) they ſhall once euery yeare ſend into England, vnto the Gouernour, Deputy and Committees, ſubſcribed by the Preſident, his Counſell, and the Accomptants.
               
               
                  CCXXXIX.
                  All the Factories in the Jndies, ſhall keepe their Bookes of Accompts for the Company diligently, and in an open place fit for that purpoſe, that ſo euery Factor in each Factorie may daily view the ſame, to ſee and know the true paſſages of the Companies Affaires, and thereby the better to auoide the dangerous negligence of ſome principall Factors, who aſſuming the priuate keeping of the Accompts to themſelues, it hath bin found or at the leaſt pretended after their Death, that they haue kept no Accompts at all, or ſuch as were very imperfect, whereby the Companie may haue bin much wronged.
               
               
                  
                  CCXL.
                  They ſhall ſend bils of lading vnder written by the Maſter and the Purſer, And perfect Inuoyces of all the Wares which they doe lade for the Companie. And this not onely to be performed by the Shippes or other veſſels, wherein ſuch Wares ſhall be tranſported; but alſo by the very next conuenient paſſage vnto thoſe places whereunto the goods are directed, reſeruing likewiſe bils of lading to themſelues for their owne diſcharge, in any occaſion which may happen.
               
               
                  CCXLI.
                  They ſhall not admit any man into this Companies Seruice, as a Factor, without the order of the Gouernour, Deputy, and Committees; But in caſes where they ſhall finde it very needfull to make vſe of ſome men for their good experience and worth. The wages of ſuch perſons, and the approbation of their Seruice ſhall be reſerued to the ſaid Gouernour, Deputy, and Committees.
               
               
                  CCXLII.
                  They ſhall take ſtrict accompts of all the Officers of euery Ship at their Arriuall in the Jndies, concerning the ſeuerall Stores committed to their charge: and at their returne for England, they ſhall ſend the ſeuerall Receipts of all the ſaid Officers for the Stores, which ſhall then remaine in their charge to the vſe of the Ships, that ſo they may render a true accompt thereof vnto this Company.
               
               
                  CCXLIII.
                  They ſhall vpon the Arriuall of the Companies Shipping, take accompt of all the Purſers, concerning the debts and death of all men (whoſoeuer) in the voyage, ſetting downe the time, the place, and the perſons. And the like, they ſhall require from all the Factories in the Jndies, whereof by euery Ship which commeth for England, they ſhall ſend a plaine and perfect information to the Gouernour, Deputy, and Committees, for their direction in the accompts, and Wages of the ſaid dead men.
               
               
                  
                  CCXLIIII.
                  After the death of any of the Companies Factors, or other Seruants in the Jndies, the Preſident and his Counſell, ſhall by the firſt paſſage ſend home to the Gouernour, Deputy, and Committees, the laſt wils of the deceaſed, together with all their bookes of accompts, letters, papers, and other writings, which doe either concerne the Company, or any other priuate affaires whatſoeuer: Reſeruing onely ſuch writings, as may ſerue to recouer in debts, or otherwiſe to determine any buſineſſe in the Indies▪
                      of which likewiſe they ſhal ſend a perfect note, and alſo a true Inuentary of the Eſtates which ſhall be found to belong vnto ſuch deceaſed Factors, or other Seruants.
               
               
                  CCXLV.
                  From henceforth all the Commanders and Factors imployed for the Company in the Jndies, ſhall conuay all their priuate Letters to whomſoeuer, vnder a couert, directed to the Gouernour, Deputy, and Committees: for whoſoeuer ſhall be found to ſend Letters by any other wayes or means, the Company will proceede againſt them as obſtinate offenders, and breakers of their orders; neither ſhall it be lawfull to write the ſaid priuate Letters, otherwiſe then in plaine Engliſh, and without any Character.
               
               
                  CCXLVI.
                  It ſhall be lawfull for all the ſaid Factors, to write their perticular Letters vnto the Company▪ But for the Prizes and vent of Merchandize, or any other matter which may concerne the Trade, it ſhall be wholely referred vnto the generall Letters, for the auoyding of confuſion and doubts, which might ariſe by the diuerſity of aduiſes.
               
               
                  CCXLVII.
                  The chiefe Factors in all the ſeuerall Factories of the Jndies, ſhall diligently enquire, and carefully ſeaze vpon all ſuch priuate Trade, as ſhall be hereafter performed by any perſon or perſons whoſoeuer, contrary to the orders of this Company, as in the Articles. 205 & 206 And of their proceedings herein from time to time, they ſhall ſend aduice and true Inuentaries, by the firſt paſſages for England, vnto the Gouernour, Deputy, and Committees. And alſo vnto the Preſident and his Counſell in the Jndies, who by the firſt ſhipping for England, ſhall lade the goods ſeized as aforeſaid, and direct the ſame vnto the Gouernour and Company vnder their marke.
               
               
                  
                  CCXLVIII.
                  A diligent enquirie ſhall be made from time to time, concerning the life and conuerſation of all the Factors in the ſeuerall Factories of the Jndies▪
                      and if any of them be found to breake the orders of the Company, to deale iniuſtly, or to be of an euill diſpoſition▪ as a common Drunkard, a notorious Gameſter or Whoremaſter, or wronger of the Company by priuate Trade, or otherwiſe inſufficient, The Preſident (with approbation of his Counſell) ſhall by the firſt paſſage, ſhip home ſuch vnworthy Factors, together with the proofes and teſtimonies of their defaults: that ſo the Company may proceed againſt them, according to the quality of their offence.
               
               
                  CCXLIX.
                  For diuers reaſons (which haue beene duly conſidered) it is ordered, that all the gifts, preſents, or other profits, giuen or beſtowed, by any forraigne Prince, Ruler, or Commander, vpon any whom the Company ſhall imploy in their affaires, ſhall be from henceforth reſerued to the vſe, and brought to the generall accompt of this Company.
               
               
                  CCL.
                  And for all other matters occurring from time to time in the affaires of this Company, in the ſaid parts of the Eaſt Jndies, they ſhall be wholly referred to the diſcretion and ordering of the Gouernour, Deputy, and Committees, by their Letters, Commiſſions, directions, or inſtructions: All which writings (for waighty reaſons it is thought conuenient) ſhall be vnder-written by the Gouernour or his Deputy, and thirteene Committees at the leaſt: for otherwiſe they ſhall not be of ſtrength and power, to direct and order the ſaid Factories. Except onely thoſe Commiſſions, whereby the Preſidents (together with their Counſell) ſhall haue authority to direct, and gouerne the Generall affaires of this Company, both by Sea and land in the Jndies: Vnto which Commiſſions ſhall be fixed, onely the great Scale, which by his Maieſties Letters Patents, is graunted vnto the ſaid Company.
               
            
            
               
               Committees for diſcharge of the Companies Ships.
               
                  CCLI.
                  THE Committees who ſhall be appointed to ſee the Companies Ships diſcharged (after they returne home laden from the Jndies) ſhall be preſent to ſee the Hold opened, and diligently obſerue, whether it be full with Wares, or how much it wanteth, that they may report the true eſtate of all as they ſhall finde it, vnto the Court of Committees.
               
               
                  CCLII.
                  They ſhall prepare ſtrong and good Padlocks (of their owne chooſing) with which they ſhall locke the Hold carefully, when they retire to Dinner, and when they giue ouer the worke at night, alwayes commaunding the Porters and others to be ſearched, when they come out of the Hold, to preuent ſuch deceipt, as they might vſe by ſecret conueyance of Wares, in their Breeches, or otherwiſe.
               
               
                  CCLIII.
                  They ſhall appoint ſome of the Companies Seruants to aſſiſt and attend with them vigilantly at the Hold, that nothing may be conuayed from thence without their knowledge, and a true note taken of the perticulars, in as plaine and perfect manner as poſſible they may: and the ſaid notes of euery ſeuerall dayes diſcharge, they ſhall deliuer vp vnder their owne hands vnto the Gouernour, to be by him deliuered to the Accomptants, who ſhall enter the ſame orderly into a Booke for that purpoſe.
               
               
                  CCLIIII.
                  They ſhall ſend in euery Lighter laden with Wares from the Ships, one of the Companies truſty Seruants, with a note of the perticulars, and alſo to watch continually (vntill all be diſcharged at the Cuſtome-houſe) that nothing be imbeſelled: and for more ſafety they ſhall locke vp the Holds of the ſaid cloſe Lighters, and deliuer the keyes vnto them, who ſhall haue charge to vnlade the ſaid goods.
               
               
                  
                  CCLV.
                  They ſhall at the full diſcharge of euery Ship, goe downe into the Hold, diligently to ſearch, that nothing doe remaine betweene the Seelings, or in any other place of ſecret conuayance, whereby the Company might be wronged.
               
               
                  CCLVI.
                  They ſhall cauſe ſome of the Companies Seruants, to keep a board continually (day and night) during the time of the Ships diſcharge, with carefull Watch that nothing be conuayed away by the Captaine, Maſter, Factors, Officers, Marriners, or any others, without their knowledge: and notes taken of the perticulars, to be ſent, and ſafely kept in the Cuſtomehouſe, vntill order taken at a Court of Committees, how the ſaid Goods ſhall be diſpoſed.
               
               
                  CCLVII.
                  They ſhall appoint ſome of the Companies truſty Seruants to aſſiſt them, in the receiuing vp of all the ſaid goods at the Cuſtome-houſe, keeping a true note of all things by waight, meaſure, or tale, according as the Merchandize ſhall require, and the ſaid note to be by them ſubſcribed, that they may after be entered by the Accomptants in to the Book afore written, whereby the iuſt quantity of Wares may appeare, which ſhall be deliuered into the cuſtody of them, who ſhall haue charge of the Companies Warehouſes.
               
            
            
               Clarkes of the Ware-houſes.
               
                  CCLVIII.
                  THE ſaid Clarkes ſhall receiue into the Companies Warehouſes, all the Spices, Indico, rawe Silke, wrought Silke, Callicoes, Drugs, Carpets, or any other Wares which ſhall be deliuered them in charge by the Committees of the ſaid Warehouſes, for the vſe and accompt of this Company.
               
               
                  CCLIX.
                  They ſhall receiue all the ſaid Wares carefully and iuſtly, by number, waight, or meaſure, as the Merchandize it ſelfe ſhall require, and thereof make true entry in a Booke of purpoſe, ſetting downe the Wares of each Ship ſeuerally, and the commodities of ſundry kindes by themſelues, that the charge of euery Warehouſe may appeare, when any enquirie ſhall be made thereof.
               
               
                  
                  CCLX.
                  They ſhall giue their attendance with all carefulnes, eſpecially when the Wares are Garboled and repacked, locking vp the dores in time of worke, and ſuffering no man who ſhall be imployed in thoſe labours, to depart before he be ſearched: againſt which order, if any of them reſiſt, hee ſhall be preſently diſmiſſed out of the Companies ſeruice.
               
               
                  CCLXI.
                  They ſhal deliuer of the ſaid Goods from day to day vnto thoſe perſons, and in ſuch manner as they ſhall receiue Warrant to performe from the Gouernour or his Deputy, and the Committees of the Warehouſes: and the ſaid Warrants they ſhall reſerue for their diſcharge; noting downe in a faire Booke euery perticular thing deliuered, the time, the parties name, his ſuerties, tares, trets, price, and euery other circumſtance, to make the parcell plaine and perfect, and in the Margent to note downe the number of each Warrant.
               
               
                  CCLXII.
                  They ſhall keepe a true accompt of all manner of charges which they ſhall disburſe to Porters, Carmen, or the like, in the Warehouſes, and of the Caske, or Canuas, which they ſhall receiue to packe or imbale the Companies Goods: and they ſhall likewiſe render a true accompt, of all the Skinnes, Wrappers, Cotten Wools, or other things, which ſhall be ſold to the moſt aduantage of this Company.
               
            
            
               Committees of Ware-houſes.
               
                  CCLXIII.
                  THE ſaid Committees ſhall be ſixe in number, and they ſhall ſee all the Merchandize whatſoeuer for this Company, ſafely and orderly lodged in the VVarehouſes, taking a true accompt of euery Ships lading, concerning the quality and quantity of the VVares ſeuerally, and ſo ſhall they compare all things by the Accompts from the Jndies, to ſee that the Company be not wronged in their waight, number, meaſure, falſe packing, or other defects, whereof they ſhall preſently acquaint the Court of Committees, that ſuch courſe may be taken for remedy, as vnto them shall ſeeme needfull.
               
               
                  
                  CCLXIIII.
                  They ſhall ouerſee the ſaid Warehouſes, and commaund, that all things there be well and orderly placed, ſo that no part of the Wares may receiue any hurt, or be waſted; and they ſhall cauſe three Locks of ſeuerall openings to be made to the outward dores of euery Warehouſe, that ſo the keyes of two of them may be in the power of two ſeuerall Committees, and the third ſhall be reſerued in the charge of the ſaid Clarke.
               
               
                  CCLXV.
                  They ſhall vnder-write the Warrants to the ſaid Clarkes, together with the Gouernour or his Deputy, for the deliuery of Wares vpon Stocke vnto the Aduenturers, or vpon Bils, according to the bargaines, which ſhall be made by the Candels, or otherwiſe; in which they ſhall haue a ſpeciall care▪ that nothing be truſted, but vpon good ſecurity
               
               
                  CCLXVI.
                  They ſhall Audit vp the Warehouſe bookes, concerning the particular charges diſburſed by the Clarkes, and take accompt of the Wrappers, Skins, Cotton Wools, and the like, to be ſold for the vſe of the Company.
               
            
            
               Sales of Merchandize.
               
                  CCLXVII.
                  THE Cuſtome which hath beene vſed heretofore in ſelling the Wares of this Company at a generall Court, and the Remnants of ſmall value in the Warehouſes by the light of a Candle, ſhall be continued; onely in ſome caſes excepted, where the Gouernour, Deputy, and Committees, ſhall conceiue it needfull to take ſome other courſe for the good of the Company.
               
               
                  CCLXVIII.
                  All aduentures of Stocks which ſhall hereafter be ſold by the light of a Candle in open Court, ſhall be publiſhed and put to ſale in the names of the Aduenturers of ſuch Stock; And it ſhall not be lawfull for any man▪ either by himſelfe or by any others for him, to offer price for the ſaid Aduentures; onely they haue power in the beginning of euery ſale to ſet downe their loweſt rates, and then to take their fortune of that which ſhall follow by the offers of other men.
               
            
            
               
               Solicitor for Payment of Debts.
               
                  CCLXIX.
                  THE ſaid Solicitor ſhall attend the Warehouſes, to take notice of all the Wares which ſhall be intruſted to any man by this Company, and ſhall make the Bils of Debt, and procure them to be ſigned and ſealed by the principall Debtors and their Suerties; which Bils ſo ſigned and ſealed, he ſhall deliuer vp to the cuſtody of the Treaſurers for this Company.
               
               
                  CCLXX.
                  Hee ſhall likewiſe ſolicite all the Companies Debtors, to bring in their money to the Treaſurers at the due time: and if hee finde any man negligent or careleſſe to diſcharge his debt, hee ſhall acquaint the Court of Committees thereof, that they may take ſome ſpeedy courſe for ſatisfaction.
               
            
            
               Solicitor in the Law.
               
                  CCLXXI.
                  IN all occaſions of controuerſies, actions, and ſuites of Law, the ſaid Solicitor ſhall follow the cauſe by his owne experience, and according to directions of his learned Counſell aſſigned him by the Court; concerning which, and all other his proceedings in the affaires of this Company, Hee ſhall from time to time acquaint the Court of Committees, and attend their reſolutions.
               
               
                  CCLXXII▪
                  
                  He ſhall aſſiſt to make contracts, couenants, and other Writings, wherein the Company ſhall haue any occaſion to make vſe of his knowledge and endeuours in matters of that kinde.
               
            
            
               
               Wages.
               
                  CCLXXIII.
                  THE Wages or Allowance vnto the Preſidents, Generals, Captaines, Commanders, Factors, and all other Officers in this Companies Seruice (whereſoeuer) ſhall be agreed and eſtabliſhed by the Gouernour or his Deputy, with the greater number of the Committees.
               
               
                  CCLXXIIII.
                  There ſhall be allowance of two Moneths wages impreſted aforehand, vnto all ſuch perſons as ſhall ſerue this Company in their Shipping to the Eaſt Jndies, and for ſome ſpeciall reaſons, there ſhall be allowance of three Months wages impreſted aforehand, vnto all the Ship Carpenters imployed in the ſaid Voyages.
               
               
                  CCLXXV.
                  There ſhall be allowance alſo of two Months wages (vpon Accompt of euery yeares Seruice) vnto the Wiues of all ſuch perſons, as ſhall be imployed in the Companies Shipping to the Eaſt Jndies.
                  
               
               
                  CCLXXVI.
                  All the Factors for the Company in the Eaſt Indies, ſhall haue one third part of their wages allowed them there yearely (if they require it) for maintenance of Apparell and the like, after the rate of Fiue ſhillings ſterling for euery Ryall of Eight. But the other two third partes ſhall be paide heere in England vnto their Aſſignes. And the ſaid Factors ſhall not be entertained into the Companies ſeruice for leſſe then Seauen yeares, except onely in ſome ſpeciall occaſions of principall men it is left vnto the diſcretion of the Gouernour, Deputy and Committees, to agree with them as they ſhall ſee cauſe.
               
               
                  
                  CCLXXVII.
                  The wages which herafter ſhall be paide vnto any of the Commanders, Factors or Marryners, that returne home in the Companies Ships from the Jndies, or to the Executors and Aſſignes of them who happen to dye in the Voyage, ſhall be made vp iuſtly by the chiefe Accomptant, aſſiſted by any one of the Auditors, in the preſence and with the approbation of one or more of the Committees appointed for entertaining of Maryners: and thus by warrant from them all ſigned, the Clarke of the wages ſhall pay euery perticular man his due, reſeruing the ſaid Warrants for his diſcharge in the Audit of his Accompts.
               
               
                  CCLXXVIII.
                  The Companies Officers heere in England vpon yearely Sallary, ſhall haue their wages paide them Quarterly by iuſt proportions.
               
               
                  CCLXXIX.
                  The ſaid Officers from henceforth, ſhall not take directly nor indirectly, any Fee, payment or Guift of the Brethren of this Company, concerning Warrants, Bonds, Billes, Tranſportations of Aduentures, or any other ſeruice which ought to be by them performed in their ſeuerall places, but their labours of this kinde ſhall wholly depend vpon the yearely Sallarie or other rewards, which ſhall be agreed or allowed them by the Court of Committees: onely the Secretaries Fees, which are vſually paide by them who are made free Brethren of the Companie ſhall be continued.
               
               
                  CCLXXX.
                  There ſhalbe no increaſe of wages giuen to any man, who (in the courſe of the Voyage whereunto hee is hyred) ſhall happen to ſucceed or to be preferred to a higher Office then that place wherein hee was firſt Shipped. But if any ſuch perſons ſo aduanced ſhall bee found to haue well deſerued for the benefit of the Company, the Court of Committees may gratifie and reward them, as they ſhall thinke fit.
               
            
            
               
               Gratifications.
               
                  CCLXXXI.
                  THE Guifts and Liberality of this Company vnto worthy and well deſeruing Perſons, ſhall bee at the diſcretions and diſpoſing of the Gouernour or his Deputy, with the greater number of Committees; Prouided alwayes that no Guift or Gratification to one man ſhall amount to a greater value then the ſumme of One hundreth pounds. For if there ſhall bee occaſion to giue a larger Reward to any perticular man, Then in that caſe they ſhall acquaint the generall Court therewith, and from thence receiue reſolution and direction.
               
               
                  CCLXXXII.
                  All Gratifications which either haue been giuen heretofore or ſhalbe giuen hereafter, to any of the Companies Officers in the Realme of England, ouer and aboue their yearely Sallarie, ſhall not remaine conſtant vnto them in the nature of wages, but ſuch gratifications ſhall paſſe the Iudgement of the Court of Committees once euery yeare, at the time of their Election.
               
               
                  CCLXXXIII.
                  The ſaid Gouernour, Deputy, and Committees, ſhall not allow or take vnto themſelues, any ſumme or ſummes of money for and in conſideration of their cares and labours in the Affaires of this Company, but the Rewards of their Deſerts ſhall be referred once euery yeare to the pleaſure of the generall Court, wherein new Directors ſhall be choſen, or to the next generall Court following.
               
               
                  CCLXXXIIII.
                  All Guifts of whatſeuer kinde, or to whomſoeuer giuen, either openly in Court, or priuately by the Order of Court, ſhall be deliuered in the name of the Company, by ſome Committees appointed thereunto by the Court, who ſhall render a perticular Accompt of ſuch priuate diſtributions at all times when the ſaid Court ſhall require the ſame.
               
            
            
               
               Trade.
               
                  CCLXXXV.
                  THE Trade for the Eaſt Jndies ſhall be vnlawfull to all men, otherwiſe then in the generall or Ioynt Stocke, which ſhall be mannaged by the Gouernour, Deputy and Committees, for and in the behalfe of all the Aduenturers. And whoſoeuer ſhall bee found directly or indirectly, to performe any other priuate Trade, to or from the ſaid Jndies, or within any of the ſeuerall Factories, or from Port to Port there, hee ſhall Forfeit all the monyes, Wares, Intereſts, and other profits whatſoeuer (or the value) which ſhalbe found to belong, proceed, or ariſe by any ſuch priuate Trade. And the ſaid Forfeitures ſhall bee recouered according to the Tenor of his Maieſties Letters Pattents granted vnto the Companie.
               
               
                  CCLXXXVI.
                  There ſhall bee a Tolleration, onely for the incouragement of all the Commaunders, Factors and Marryners, who ſhall returne home in the Companies Ships and ſeruice: to bring with them for their owne proper Accompts, ſo much Raw Silk, Beniamin, Gumlacke, Muske, Sugar Candy, Drugges, Carpets, Quilts, Hard-wax, Preſerues, Wormeſeeds, Silke Stuffes, Beazar-ſtones, or any other Wares whatſoeuer (Jndico, Callicoes, Dyamonds, and all ſortes of Spices onely excepted) as they can beſtow or packe into one Cheſt for each man, of Foure foot long, 1. Foot & a halfe broad, and 1. foot and a halfe deepe, for which they ſhall not pay Fraight or any other duty vnto this Company.
               
            
            
               Beadle.
               
                  CCLXXXVII.
                  THE ſaid Beadle ſhall dayly giue his Attendance at the Companies Houſe, to know the pleaſure of the Gouernour or his Deputy, for the Summoning of Courts ordinary and extraordinary, and other meetings of the Committees, and ſhall diligently attend the Courts, to performe ſuch other Duties as concerne his place.
               
               
                  
                  CCLXXXVIII.
                  He ſhall vſe all poſſible Diligence in the warning of the Generall Courts, and eſpecially the Court for Election of the Gouernour, Deputy, Treaſurers, and Committees, leauing Tickets at each mans Houſe, and ſetting vp Billes in the Exchange three dayes at the leaſt before the ſaid Courts.
               
            
            
               Porter of the Companies Houſe in London.
               
               
                  CCLXXXIX.
                  THE ſaid Porter ſhall haue a Roome in the Companies Houſe neare the ſtreet Doore, for his aboad in the day time, and a Chamber for his Lodging in the Night.
               
               
                  CCXC.
                  He ſhall attend dayly to open and ſhut the Street Doore, and the backe Gate vpon all occaſions needfull, and hee ſhall diligently obſerue ſuch perſons who enter and depart the Companies Houſe, eſpecially thoſe who may ſeeme to be ſuſpitious, or are found to bee troubleſome by outragious ſpeaking, Swearing, Gaming, Quarrelling, Fighting, or other diſorders, and ſhall cauſe them forthwith to auoyde the Houſe. Alſo to apprehend ſuch as ſhall haue ſtollen or doe attempt to pilfer, or performe any other thing in the ſaid Houſe, contrary to his Maieſties Lawes.
               
               
                  CCXCI.
                  He ſhall euery Night before Supper, call John Blount one of the Companies Officers, who is Lodged in their ſaid Houſe, to walke the Round with him into all the open Roomes and places, where they ſhall carefully view, and after locke vp the doores, and deliuer the Keyes vnto the Companies Secretary.
               
               
                  CCXCII.
                  The ſtreet Doore ſhalbe ſhut and chayned euery Euening preſently after departure of the Officers: and if any chance to knocke later within Night, anſwer ſhalbe made them without vnchayning the Doore, vntill the party and his Arrand be knowne vnto the reſt of the Officers lodged in the Companies houſe.
               
               
                  
                  CCXCIII.
                  The Street doore and backe Gates, ſhall ſhut each of them with Two lockes of ſeuerall openings, to the intent that euery Euening one Key of each doore may remaine with the Porter, and the other Keyes to be deliuered to John Blount aforeſaid, who ſhalbe preſent to ſee the ſaid Doore ſhut and opened daily, and ſhal alſo haue care and, aſſiſt the Porter to preuent all diſorders in the Companies houſe.
               
               
                  CCXCIIII.
                  The Porter ſhall haue the cuſtody and care of the Companies Fewell and Candles, that they be not waſted by others, and ſhall make the Fires in the ſeuerall Offices at the times appointed, and ſhall daily ſweepe the great Hall and Parlour, the Street doore, and all the Yardes, light Candles to the Offices and in the Lanthornes about the Houſe, and to doe all other thinges fitting his place.
               
               
                  CCXCV.
                  All the Officers and their Seruants (who doe lodge in the ſaid Houſe) ſhall haue egreſſe and regreſſe into the ſame, Viz from Sixe a clocke in the Morning vntill Ten a clocke at Night, and not before, or after thoſe times, except onely vpon ſome ſpeciall occaſion by Licence, or by the generall conſent of the ſaid Officers.
               
               
                  CCXCVI.
                  The ſaid Porter, ſhall once euery weeke ſweepe the Treaſury, and all the other Offices in the Companies ſaid Houſe.
               
            
            
               Accomptants generall.
               
                  CCXCVII.
                  THE Booke-keepers ſhall obſerue ſuch Order and Method, in the Mannaging of the Accompts for the Affaires of the Company, as is at large ſet downe and deliuered them in an Inſtruction. Page. 75.
               
               
                  
                  CCXCVIII.
                  They ſhall not digeſt or enter into the great Bookes, the Accompts of the Yards, Factors, Huſband, Warehouſes, Wages, Impreſt, Storehouſes, or any other Accompts whatſoeuer, before they be Audited, and ſigned by the ſeuerall Auditors appointed thereunto by the Court.
               
               
                  CCXCIX.
                  They ſhall carefully review the workes of the ſaid Auditors, and if they finde any ouerſight or errour, they ſhall preſently cauſe the ſame to bee reformed.
               
               
                  CCC.
                  They ſhall not frame or make a Warrant in full payment of any Prouiſions whatſoeuer, bought by the Committees or others, without a Bill of parcels ſubſcribed by them, and alſo by the parties who ſolde the goods, that ſo the ſaid Billes may be faſtened to the Warrant for the Diſcharge of the Debts.
               
               
                  CCCI.
                  They ſhall by the direction of the Court, write all the Companies Letters, Inuoices, Billes, of lading, Commiſſions, or inſtructions for the Jndies, or to any other place beyond the Seas, and the Coppies they ſhall ſee fairely written into the ſeuerall Bookes appointed for that purpoſe.
               
               
                  CCCII.
                  They ſhall note downe in a Booke from time to time, all the Bargaines for Timber, Plancke, Maſtes, Treenailes, Deales, Sheathing-boards, and the Coppies of all, they ſhall deliuer vnto the Clarke of the Yard for his direction, in the receiuing of the ſaid Bargaines for the Company.
               
               
                  CCCIII.
                  They ſhall carefully paſſe the Brokes vpon all mens Accompts, whoſoeuer ſhall not pay in their monyes at the times appointed.
               
               
                  CCCIIII.
                  They ſhall declare where any Defect is at any time, either in the Officers in not deliuering vp their Accompts, or in the Auditors in not Auditing the ſame.
               
               
                  
                  CCCV.
                  They ſhall not deliuer out of the Companies houſe any the originals, or Coppies of Letters, Iournals, Conſultations, Commiſſions, Accompts, or other writings which doe concerne Nauigation, Trade, or other ſecrets of the ſaid Company, neither yet ſhall they ſuffer any of them to be peruſed or read in the ſaid Houſe by any perſon or perſons, but onely by ſuch who ſhall be authorized thereunto by the Court.
               
               
                  CCCVI.
                  They ſhall yearely deliuer vp vnto the Court at the Fine of Iune, a perfect Ballance of all Accompts in their charge.
               
            
            
               Auditors in the Court of Committees.
               
                  CCCVII.
                  THE ſaid Auditors ſhall be Sixe in number, and in all occaſions of difference for matter of Accompts which concerne the Company, they are to examine and ſearch out the Truth, and to deliuer their opinions vnto the Court, or elſe to determine and end thoſe cauſes which ſhall be referred vnto them.
               
               
                  CCCVIII.
                  They ſhall acquaint the Court when any Diuident in money is due vnto the Aduenturers, which take not out their Stockes in goods.
               
               
                  CCCIX.
                  They ſhall vnderwrite all the Warrants, which are directed vnto the Treaſurers, for payment of the Diuidents in money vnto the Aduenturers, And they ſhall ſubſcribe to all the perticular Accompts Audited by the generall Auditors, before they be entred into the Companies great Bookes.
               
               
                  CCCX.
                  They ſhall haue Authority to make Inquirie and ouerſee the Affaires of this Company, concerning the performance of all their Lawes and ſtanding Orders.
               
               
                  
                  CCCXI.
                  They ſhall carefully take notice of the errors, negligence, obſtinacy, or inſufficiencie of any man whoſoeuer in the Companies buſineſſe.
               
               
                  CCCXII.
                  They ſhall be prepared at the generall Court, on the laſt Tueſday in the moneth of May, yearely appointed for reformations, faithfully to deliuer vp their Collections or complaints to the Company, if they be required thereunto.
               
            
            
               Auditors generall.
               
                  CCCXIII.
                  THE ſaid Auditors ſhal be two in number, and they ſhal haue a roome or place to themſelues, for their meetings in the Companies houſe.
               
               
                  CCCXIIII.
                  They ſhall once euery quarter (at the leaſt) Audit vp the Caſhes of the two Treaſurers, and the accompts of the Huſband, together with the accompts of the Clarkes of the Store-houſes in London: The accompts of the Clarkes of the Impreſt money and wages, the accompt of the Clarke of the Cordage, of the Clarke of the Yard, of the Clarke of Beefe and Porke, of the Clarkes of the Warehouſes, &c. And alſo all the accompts from the Companies Factors in the Jndies, or any other accompts of Factors, who make prouiſion of Wares for the Company beyond the Seas: And after they haue exactly Audited all the ſaid accompts, they ſhall bring them to the view of the Auditors Committees, to be by them approued and ſubſcribed, before they be deliuered vp vnto the Accomptant generall, to be entered in the Companies great Bookes.
               
               
                  CCCXV.
                  They ſhall vſe ſpeciall care and diligence in the Audit of the accompts of money taken vp at intreſt, to ſee from time to time, that the Company be not charged with more then their occaſions require; whereof they ſhall giue a reaſon in the firſt Court of Committees after euery quarter day.
               
               
                  
                  CCCXVI.
                  They ſhall haue care of the generall accompts, to ſee that all the other accompts and parcels be fairely and truly entered into them by the Bookekeepers, and that they be prepared to deliuer vp a perfect Ballance of all the ſaid accompts vnto the Company, by the laſt day of Iune yearely.
               
            
            
               Audit of Accompts.
               
                  CCCXVII.
                  IN the Audit of all the Companies Accompts, it is required that the ſeuerall Auditors thereunto appointed, doe carefully caſt vp euery parcell, and ſo to follow the Accomptants in all other their performance, that no miſcaſting or other errors may be paſſed for want of ſearch.
               
               
                  CCCXVIII.
                  It is neceſſary not onely to draw vp accompts by forme vnto a perfect Ballance, but alſo the very matter it ſelfe is diligently to be regarded concerning the iſſuing of the Companies materials to their buildings, the prices of prouiſions bought, the disburſements of charges and the like; in any of which, if there be found exorbitance, or exceſſe, it ſhall be brought to the conſideration of the Gouernour, Deputy, and Committees, before the accompts be allowed.
               
               
                  CCCXIX.
                  And foraſmuch as the affaires of the Company are ſo contriued, that there is now little or no truſt impoſed in any perticular mans accompts: But that he hath alſo ſome checke by Warrants, Bils of parcels, or the accompts of other men: It is therefore carefully to be obſerued by the Auditors, that each Accomptant produce ſuch Vouchers, as are at large ſet downe in an inſtruction for that purpoſe. Page 79.
               
            
            
               
               Freedomes.
               
                  CCCXX.
                  IT is Ordered and agreed: That if by any meanes the names of any of the Company are not mentioned in the Charter granted by his Maieſty vnto this Society, That (notwithſtanding) aſwell they as any other, that are or ſhall be admitted of the Company, by vertue of an Order of Court, heretofore or hereafter to be made, are in all reſpects as free of the Company, as if they were expreſly mentioned in the ſaid Charter.
               
               
                  CCCXXI.
                  It ſhall be lawfull for each Brother of the Company, already Free, or hereafter to be admitted, to make all his Sonnes Free of this Society at their ſeuerall Ages of XXI. yeares or vpwards, and all their Apprentizes, who ſhall haue ſerued them VII. yeares at leaſt by Indenture, after they themſelues were made Free of this Company. But ſuch as are or hereafter ſhall be admitted a free Brother of this Society Gratis, that is to bee vnderſtood onely in their owne perſons, and no otherwiſe.
               
               
                  CCCXXII.
                  And it is further Ordered, that any perſon or perſons (his Maieſties Subiects) may from henceforth be admitted a free Brother of this Company by redemption. That is to ſay a meere Marchant ſhall pay Fifty pounds, and all others of whatſoeuer Profeſſion, vocation, or Trade, ſhall pay one Hundred Markes for their ſeuerall Fines, at their admiſſions by the Gouernour, Deputy and Committees.
               
               
                  CCCXXIII.
                  All the Apprentizes of this Company, and alſo ſuch Factors who ſhall haue ſerued them faithfully Seauen yeares in the Eaſt Jndies, ſhall bee made Free Brethren of this Company.
               
               
                  
                  CCCXXIIII.
                  It ſhall be lawfull for the Gouernour, or his Deputy, with the greater number of the Committees, to admit into this Society Gratis, any Noble or well deſeruing perſons who haue merited, or may by them bee thought worthy to receiue ſuch fauour from the Company, paying onely the Officers Fees, and XX. s. to the Poores Box, at the time of their ſeuerall admiſſions.
               
               
                  CCCXXV.
                  All ſuch as ſhalbe made free Brethren (hereafter) of this Company, ſhall take an Oath in the preſence of the Gouernour, or his Deputy, and Sixe Committes at the leaſt, before they be admitted into this Society.
               
               
                  CCCXXVI.
                  From henceforth all ſuch as are to be made Free of this Company by Patrimony or by Seruice, ſhall require the ſaid Freedome within Twelue Monthes after they are capeable of the ſame, Pena Fiue pounds, except by motion made in a Court of Committees, they ſhall haue further time granted them.
               
            
            
               Penalties or Fines.
               
                  CCCXXVII.
                  GENERALLY whoſoeuer (in Office for this Company) ſhall bee found to breake any of the Companies Lawes or Orders, through wilfull neglect or inſufficiency to the performance of his charge, hee ſhall be forth with Diſplaced, and alſo bee further proceeded againſt according to the quality of his Offence.
               
               
                  CCCXXVIII.
                  It is Ordered and agreed, that all ſuch as hereafter be choſen Gouernour, Deputy, Treaſurer, or Committees of this Company, and doe refuſe or will not take the ſaid Offices vpon them: ſhall Forfeit and pay to be freed thereof for One whole yeare, ſuch reaſonable Fines as the generall Court ſhall thinke good.
               
               
                  
                  CCCXXIX.
                  The Forfeitures which hereafter are to be payde by the Committees for abſence, or late appearance, in their Courtes, and other meetings, without lawfull excuſe; or for vnſeemely ſpeaking, or wilfull and vnciuill interrupting of each others ſpeach, or priuate conferences, to the diſturbance of their ſaid Courts and the like: Shall be impoſed from time to time, at ſuch rates as the Gouernour, or his Deputy, with the greater number of the Committees ſhall ſee cauſe, for the better effecting of the Companies Affaires, and preſeruation of Order among themſelues.
               
               
                  CCCXXX.
                  It is ordered for pacification of controuerſie in Arguments in the Generall Courts and meetings of Committees, and of lowde or confuſed ſpeaches, That when the Gouernour or his Deputy, commaundeth ſilence by the ſtroke of the Hammer, that then euery perſon bee quiet and ſtill, Pena XII. d. for euery ſuch Offence.
               
               
                  CCCXXXI.
                  For better and more ſpeedy payment of all Debts due vnto the Company by Bond, Bill, or for Aduentures, or otherwiſe by any Brethren of the ſame, who ſhall not make payment to the Treaſurer or to ſuch other as ſhall be appointed for that purpoſe, at the time and place limitted and ſet downe, ſhall forfeit and pay to the vſe of the Generall Company (beſides their principall Debts) the ſumme of XL s. vpon euery C. l. for each Month they ſhall omit to bring in the ſame, and ſo after the ſaid rate for a ſhorter or longer time, whether it bee vpon a greater or a leſſer Summe of money to be proportioned.
               
               
                  CCCXXXII.
                  All Fines now or hereafter to be Forfeited by the Brethren of this Company, for breach of any the Ordinances of the ſame, ſhalbe by him or them preſently paide to the vſe of the generall Company, or charged vpon his or their ſtocks or Aduentures with this Society, to the vſe aforeſaid: or hauing no Stocke or Aduenture with them, to ſuffer Impriſonment during the pleaſure of the Company, according to the power which is graunted them by his Maieſties Letters Patents.
               
            
            
               
               Lawes or Orders.
               
                  CCCXXXIII.
                  THE Lawes or Orders now made, together with his Maieſties Letters Patents to the Company, ſhall be brought by the Secretary vnto euery Court, that they may be peruſed in all occaſions which ſhall happen.
               
               
                  CCCXXXIIII.
                  The Lawes or ſtanding Orders of the Company, ſhall be publickly read in the beginning of a generall Court, to bee holden on the laſt Tueſday of the moneth of May yearely if it be required, And then the making of any new Orders, or the Abrogating of any of theſe which are already made, ſhalbe offered to the conſideration and reſolution of the Generality.
               
               
                  CCCXXXV.
                  All Lawes or Orders heretofore made, being repugnant or ſwaruing from theſe, ſhall henceforth be voyde.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE ORDER AND METHOD THAT THE ACCOMPTANTS GENERALL SHALL OBSERVE AND PERFORME IN THE Mannaging and digeſting the Accompts of the Company: As followeth.
            
               FOR the more conueniencie in the Mannaging of the ſaid Accompts, conſiſting of ſo many perticular eſtates and Aduentures, and diſpoſed into ſuch diuerſity of imployments and returnes; you ſhall deuide the ſaid Accompts into two Bookes, namely, two Iournals, with their two Lidgers: The one whereof ſhall be the Accompt proper, and the other the Accompt currant, in each of which, you ſhall handle theſe perticulars following.
            IN the Booke intituled Accompt proper, you ſhall enter euery perticular mans Aduenture (according to the proportion he hath) mentioning his name and quality ſo neere as you may, making him Creditor for his ſaid Aduenture in perticular, according to the Payments he bringeth and payeth in, that the Acquittances giuen per the Treaſurers, and your Bookes may agree vpon all occaſions.
            IN this Booke you ſhall enter perticularly the payments and ſatisfaction that is made to euery Aduenturer (for his Aduenture) as it is taken out by him, be it in money or goods; plainely ſhewing wherein, and when euery man is ſatisfied his Aduenture: and you ſhall in theſe Bookes charge no man for any thing, ſaue what is deliuered on his Stocke.
            
               
IN this Booke likewiſe you ſhall enter euery yeares totall imployment ſent to Sea, be it Merchandize, Ships, Victuals or Charges incident, after the ſame ſhall be firſt at large, and after perticularly contracted and digeſted in the Bookes of the Accompt currant, which you ſhall yearely by a parcell of Ballance bring ouer to this Accompt, and here in one accompt enter plainely and diſtinctly the Merchandize firſt, then the Ships with their victualling, and that yeares charge ſucceſſiuely; that it may readily appeare what euery yeares imployment and charge amounteth vnto, and wherein it conſiſteth.
            IN this Booke you ſhall alſo enter all Factors Accompts both for Sales and imployments made in and receiued from Jndia, and although euery Ships returne may conſiſt of diuers ſorts of Merchandize, you ſhall notwithſtanding in this Booke arme but one Accompt for any one Ship, but ſhall in that Accompt both in Iournall and Lidger, ſucceſſiuely enter euery commodity, expreſſing his quantity and coſt.
            IN this Booke you ſhall alſo onely keepe the Accompt of profit and loſſe, and ſhall cleare no Accompt or Voyage, till the ſame be fully accompted for, and ſhall alſo in this Accompt paſſe vnto euery man his profit or loſſe, as the Stocke generall ſhall produce.
            
               
                  In the other Bookes called the Accompt Currant, you ſhall enter and digeſt all manner imployments and returnes, amply and perticularly; in the mannaging whereof you ſhall obſerue this order following.
               FOR the outward imployment or iſſue of the Stocke afore mentioned in the other Booke, you ſhall deuide the ſame into foure Branches, that is to ſay;
               1 THE State of Merchandize, and of them you ſhall keepe diſtinct and ſeuerall Accompts in their proper kindes and denominations, not confounding many together: and the ſaid Commodities as they are diſpoſed into voyages, you ſhall cleare by the voyage wherevnto they are diſſigned, and ſo euery yeare cleare this branch, vnleſſe any be left which may remaine on their Accompts till the future yeare.
               
                  
2 THE State of Shipping, which you ſhall likewiſe ſeuerally keepe euery Ship by it ſelfe, charging the ſame perticularly with euery Materiall that is expended thereon, aſwell to the Building, as furniſhing, and for ſtore, together with the Charge of wages of Workmen imployed therin, till the ſuch Ship be fully furniſhed to Sea. And for plainer and ready performance hereof, you ſhall keepe all the Materials, that are required to the building and furniſhing of Ships in their ſeuerall denominations and kindes, (and not heape them confuſedly in the names of Officers and Storehouſes) that ſo it may readily appeare how much of euery Prouiſion is ſpent Yearely, and how it is ſpent, to the end neceſſary and competent proportions may alwaies bee prouided, without ſuperfluety and vnneceſſary Charge.
               3 THE State of Victualling, you ſhall likewiſe keepe in their ſeuerall Denominations and kindes, and the expence of them, Charge on euery Ship according to his proportions, that of theſe kindes may appeare what is yearely expended, and needfull to be prouided.
               4 EXPENCES Generall, ſuch as are Gratueties, Salary of Officers, Rents, Charges, ordinary and extraordinary, and ſuch like: which you ſhall likewiſe keepe diſtinctly, euery one in his proper Name and tytle, that of this quality alſo may appeare what is expended yearely.
               AND for Concluſion of this Accompt of Imployment, for that euery Yeare breedeth his Voyage, and charge of Ships, Victuals, &c. as aboue; you ſhall drawe out of theſe Branches euery yeares Imployment, to one head or Voyage, and thereon charge, firſt, the Marchandize agreeing with the Inuoice; next the Ships, and the Victuals; and laſtly that yeares generall Charge, and this in perticular, and ſucceſſiuely: which thus contracted, you ſhall in one parcell ballance and beare ouer to the Booke called Accompt Proper, and there reenter as is ordered in the third Article, for the ordering of that Booke.
               SVCH neceſſary Accompts as ariſe in the currant of this buſines with Factors beyond the Seas for Prouiſion of Forraine Commodities, Officers at home for the defraying of Charges, and monyes deliuered for Prouiſions before hand, bee carefull to keepe diſtinctly and plainely that one Accompt be not confounded with another.
               
                  
FOR all commodities returned from Jndia, which in the other booke you haue entered according to the Inuoyce in one Accompt, you ſhall in theſe Bookes handle perticularly each commodity in an Accompt by it ſelfe, and the Sales thereof, on which commodities you ſhall charge his proper charges, and duties paid here in England, and the ſame being fully ſold, you ſhall paſſe the nett Proceede thereof into the other bookes, and there make the ſame good to the Inuoyce or Accompt it belongeth.
               FOR ſuch Ships as ſhall returne from Jndia, being firſt praiſed, according to the Companies order, you ſhall enter perticularly in this Book, and the ſame being fully perfected, you ſhall in one parcell paſſe the ſame ouer to the other Booke, and there allow the ſame in one totall (referred to this Booke) to the Voyage it belongeth.
               FOR wages and charges that ſhall ariſe vpon any Ships diſcharge or returne, you ſhall likewiſe handle in this booke, and the ſame being perfected, paſſe the ſame in one entire parcell to the other Booke, and there charge the ſame vpon the Accompt or Inuoyce it belongeth▪ that by this meanes it may plainely appeare, what is got by each perticular commodity, and euery Ships whole lading.
               BOTH in the one and the other Accompt, you ſhall not paſſe any thing without a ſufficient Voucher to iuſtifie your Iournals parcels vnder ſome Committy or Officers hand.
               AND for concluſion of all, you ſhall digeſt and enter all Accompts into the Iournall your ſelfe with your owne hand, For we will admit of no diuerſity of hands: And being therein digeſted, wee haue appointed Jeremy Sambrooke to aſſiſt you for the paſſing of the ſaid Iournals into their Lidgers, and alſo in any buſineſſe belonging to theſe Accompts; whom we would haue to be acquainted with all other matters, to the end (That if God ſhall otherwiſe diſpoſe you) he may be able to goe forwards with the buſineſſe, and giue vs a reaſon of the premiſſes.
            
            
               
               
                  Orders to bee obſerued For the better Ʋouching of ſundry Accompts, and haue reference to certaine other Articles, ſet downe for the perfect Auditing of the Companies Accompts, as in Page. 70
               
                  Treaſurers.
                  FIRST Let the Treaſurers vouch all their Payments in generall, by the Receipts of the Parties who ſhall receiue any money of them, and alſo by the Warrant of the Gouernour, or his Deputy, with Foure Committees at the leaſt; onely the payments to the Aduenturers vpon Stocke, ſhall paſſe by the Warrant of the Auditors.
                  Let the Monyes receiued for Freedomes bee compared with the Secretaries Booke, wherein hee noteth downe the times, Conditions and Names▪ of all thoſe who are made Free Brethren of the Company.
               
               
                  Clarkes of the Yard and Storehouſe.
                  LET the Payment of euery Weekes wages to all the Workemen in the Yardes, be vouched by the Notes of the Committees, who goe weekly to the Yardes to ſee the ſaid wages paide.
                  Let the Accompts be carefully examined for all thinges whatſoeuer deliuered into the Yardes vpon Bargaines made, and the like concerning the Clarkes Receipts for all the Materials prouided and ſent into the Yard by the Huſband, or by any other for the Company.
                  Let the Bookes of all the ſubordinate Officers in the Yard, which are digeſted into the Clarkes great Bookes, bee diligently compared together, and the like by the Receipts for Materials deliuered ouer from one Officer to another.
                  
                     
Let the Bookes and Receipts of the Purcers in the Companies Ships bee duely examined for all Prouiſions, Stores, Victuals, or Marchandize deliuered out of the Storehouſes, Yardes, or by any of the Companies Officers, and charged vpon the ſaid Ships.
               
               
                  Clarke of the Slaughterhouſe.
                  LET the charge of the Clarke of the Slaughterhouſe, be compared with the Accompts of Beefe and Porke, and let his Diſcharge vpon Shipping be examined with the Purcers Bookes.
                  Let no Accompt paſſe (without the knowledge and Order of the Court) wherein the Offals of the Beefe and Porke, doe exceed thoſe ſeuerall rates in the tryall made for the Company, which is Regiſtred in the Booke of Remembrances, in Page. 13.
               
               
                  Clarke of the Impreſt money and wages.
                  LET the Accompts of the Clarkes concerning Impreſt money, bee examined by the Booke of the Committees, who entertaine the Marriners; and by the Bonds of the parties to whome the money is Impreſted.
                  Let the Wages which is paide to Marriners Wiues vpon Accompt for their Huſbands, be vouched by the Order and Warrant vnder the handes of the Committees, who entertaine the ſaid Marriners.
                  Let the Wages which is paide to the Marriners after they returne home, be vouched by Order and Warrant vnder the handes of the Committees, the Accomptant generall, and one of the Auditors.
               
               
                  Accompts of wages.
                  LET the Accompts of wages for Commaunders, Factors or Marriners, be compared with the Acts of Court, and with the Booke of entertainment kept by the Clarke of the Impreſt; and let the time of any of their Deaths, and their Debts be examined, by the Aduiſes or Letters out of the Jndies, and by the Purcers bookes.
               
               
                  
                  Warehouſes.
                  LET the Warehouſes for Marchandize bee charged with a Booke for that purpoſe, wherein euery perticular Commodity is ſet downe by number, waight or meaſure, as it is receiued out of each Ship ſeuerally.
                  Let the ſaid Warehouſes bee Diſcharged according as all the ſaid Commodities ſhalbe deliuered out, by lawfull Warrant ſubſcribed by the Gouernour or his Deputy, and the Committees of the Warehouſes.
               
               
                  Purcer generall.
                  LET the Purcer generals Accompts for Wages paide aboard Ships, be vouched by the Purcers Bookes of each Ships.
               
               
                  Petty Charges.
                  LET all petty Charges which is diſburſed by the Huſband or any Officer to the Committees, or to any others, for their occaſions in the Companies buſines, bee vouched with a Note vnder the Parties hand writing, to whome the money is payed and warranted, as is ordered.
               
               
                  Factors Accompts.
                  LET the Factors Accompts concerning Number, Waight and Meaſure of euery Cargazon ſent out or receiued home, bee examined, the one by the Inuoyces, and the other by the Booke for Diſcharge of each Ship, into the Companies Warehouſes.
                  
                     
Let the Bookes of Accompts from Bantam and Suratt, concerning the Affaires of the ſubordinate Factories, which are digeſted into the ſaid Bookes, be compared with the Originall Accompts.
               
               
                  Olde Stores.
                  LET it bee diligently obſerued that euery Officer, who ſhall receiue any olde Stores from the Companies Ships which returne home, bee accomptable for the ſame by the Booke of Inuentaries, wherein all ſuch thinges are noted downe perticularly.
               
               
                  Brokes.
                  LET there be care taken, that the Brokes bee iuſtly charged vpon all mens Accompts whoſoeuer, that ſhall not pay in their Monyes at the times appointed, and if any mans Accompt bee found to receiue fauour in this kinde by Order of Court, then let the Court Bookes bee ſearched, to vouch the parcell.
               
               
                  Gratifications.
                  CONCERNING all the Gratifications giuen by Order of Court, let euery parcell be examined by the Court Bookes.
               
               
                  Billes of Parcels for all Goods bought.
                  AND generally let all the Marchandize, Prouiſions, Victuals, and Stores bought, either by the Committees, the Huſband, or any other for the Company, bee vouched by a Bill of parcels ſubſcribed by them, and by the Parties who ſolde the goods.
               
            
         
         FINIS.
      
   