
      
         
            
            
            
               
                  EDVARDVS SEXTVS DEI GRACIA, ANGLIE, FRANCIE, ET HIBERNIE REX, ETC, AETATIS SVAE. XV.
                  portrait of Edward VI
               
               ❧ The Prayer of kynge Ed warde the ſyxte, whiche he made the .vi. of Iuly, Anno. M. D, Liii. and the vii. of his reygne, thre houres afore his death, to hym ſelf, his eyes beynge cloſed, and thynkyng none had heard him. The ſyxtenth yeare of his age.
            
               LOrde God deliuer me oute of this miſerable & wretched lyfe, & take me among thy choſen: howebeit not my wyll, but thy wyll be done. Lorde I commit my ſpirit to thee. Oh lorde thou knoweſt howe happy it weare for me to be with thee: yet for thy choſens ſake ſend me life and helth, that I may truely ſerue thee. Oh my Lorde God bleſſe thy people, and ſaue thyne enheritaunce. Oh Lorde God, ſaue thy choſen people of Englande. Oh my Lorde God defende this Realme from papiſtrye, and mayntayne thy true religion, that I and my people may prayſe thy holy name.
            
               THen tourned he his face, and ſeyng who was by him, ſayd vnto them: Are ye ſo nigh? I thoughte ye had bene further of. Then doctor Owen ſayd: we hearde you ſpeake to your ſelfe, but what ye ſayde, we knowe not. He then (after his faſſhion ſmylinglye) ſayde: I was prayinge to God.
            The laſt wordes of his panges were theſe. I am faynte, Lorde haue mercy vpon me, and take my ſprite. And ſo he yelded vp his ghoſt.
            ¶ Witneſſe hereof preſente were: Syr Thomas wroth. Syr Henry Sidney, two of the chief gentilmen of the priuie chambre. Doctor Owen. Doctor wendye. Chriſtofer Salmon groome.
            God ſaue the Quene.
         
      
      
         
            IPrynted at London in Powls Churcheyarde by Rycharde Iugge, dwellynge at the North dore of Powles Churche, at the ſygne of the Byble.
            
               Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum ſolum.
            
         
      
   