
      
         
            
            THE BORING OF THE EARE, Contayning a plaine and profitable Diſcourſe by way of Dialogue, concerning 
                  
                     1. Our preparation before Hearing.
                  
                     2. Our demeanour in Hearing.
                  
                     3. Our exerciſe after we haue heard the Word of God.
                Written by that faithfull and diligent Miniſter of Gods Word, Maſter Stephen Egerton, ſometimes Preacher of the Black-Friars in London.
            
            ECCLES. 4. 17.
            Looke to thy feet when thou commeſt into the Houſe of God, and be readier to heare, then to offer the Sacrifice of Fooles.
            LONDON Printed by William Stansby. 1623.
         
         
            
            
            To the Chriſtian and beneuolent READER.
            
            
               CHriſtian READER, though mine owne Meditations haue hither-to euer ſhunned the common view of the World, contenting my ſelfe with the priuate Approbation of mine owne Charge: yet conſidering the generall good that may accrue vnto the whole Church of Chriſt, by theſe labours of my Reuerend Kinſman, Maſter Stephen Egerton, I haue ventured to commend them vnto Gods Church,

being thereunto alſo intreated. I know, without my commendation, they will be worth your ſmall coſt in procuring, your little labour in peruſing. For it is admirable to conſider, that in theſe preaching and hearing 
                  Mat. 9. 32.dayes, ſuch faithfull preaching, ſuch frequent hearing, ſo many ſhould yet bee poſſeſt as it were with a dumb 1. Cor. 13. 1.Deuill, and all our Sermons to the moſt of men but as ſounding Braſſe or a tinkling 
                  Mat. 11. 17Cimball. So wee pipe, and no man danceth, we mourne and no man weepeth, wee preach peace, but no man ſorroweth for his ſinne. May 
                  Pſal. 115. 6, 7.we not ſay of theſe, as Dauid of the Idolls, They haue eares and heare not? or as our Sauiour tranſlateth that fearefull

commination againſt the deſpiſers of his Word; Hearing they ſhall heare, and ſhall not vnderſtand, leaſt they heare 
               
                  Eſa. 6. 9, 10 Mat. 13. 14
               with their eares, and vnderſtand with their hearts, and bee conuerted and healed. So to heare then, is to attend with the eare, to receiue with the heart, to conuert in the life and conuerſation, elſe our ſinfull ſoules can neuer bee healed.
            And therefore this is the voyce of the Spirit vnto the ſeuen Churches of Aſia, Hee 
               
                  Reue. 2. 17.
               that hath eares to heare, let him heare what the Spirit ſaith vnto the Churches.
            
            There are fiue ſorts of eares that are not hearing eares. The firſt, is a dull Eare, when a man is either

drouſie, or careleſſe, or ignorant.
            The ſecond, is a ſtopped Eare, as the Serpent ſtoppeth his eare againſt the voyce of the Charmer. Such are our Recuſants, and ſecure Perſons, that will not heare, leſt they ſhould bee thawed from their dregs, and ſo conuerted and ſaued.
            The third, is a preiudiciall or ſiniſter Eare: this man like 
                  Luke 10.
               Malchus hath loſt his right Eare, and hee comes as the Phariſee to Chriſt, to tempt the Miniſter, to catch him in his talke, turning all his ſpeech to the worſt, becauſe hee hates or deſpiſeth the perſon of the Preacher. This man is like the Spider that ſucketh poyſon out of the ſweeteſt flowers.
            
               
               2. Tim. 4. 3. 2. Theſ. 2. 10 2. Cor. 11. 3. The fourth, is the nice or itching Eare that muſt bee clawed, that will heare nothing but nouelties, and dainties, that lookes not ſo much to the goodneſſe of the meat, as to the ſweetneſſe of the ſawce. Surely this man muſt needes haue a thinne and pined ſoule, and he often meets with that hee vnderſtandeth not, meate that hee cannot digeſt, and ſo ſeldom or neuer profiteth by the Word of God.
            The fift, is an adulterous Eare, that will heare any but the voice of their owne Shepherds. You ſhall know them as the Harlot is knowne, they are euer gadding to ſeeke their new Louers: but God ſhall one day diſcouer their adultery to the ſhame of their

Perſons, to the diſgrace of their Profeſſion, to the confuſion of their faces. To ſuch let mee ſay, as Chriſt to the woman taken in adulterie, 
                  Ioh. 8. 10.
               Goe and ſinne no more. Now all theſe haue Eares and heare not, and therefore haue 
                  Mark. 7. 34.neede to haue the word Ephphata pronounced vnto them as vnto the deafe man. And for their better direction in this dutie, this preſent Tract is of excellent vſe, being plain and familiar for the manner, and ſound for the matter, being grounded vpon many excellent exhortations, and rules in the Holy Scripture: whereby men may know how to heare with glorie vnto God, honour vnto his Ordinance, and profit vnto their owne ſoules.
            
               
The neceſſitie of this dutie the Apoſtle proues where hee thus argueth, Faith commeth 
               
                  Rom. 10. 17
               by hearing, &c. Now without faith it is impoſſible to pleaſe God.
            The neglect or contempt, or ignorance of this dutie, is the cauſe of all prophaneſſe▪ whereas if men would heare as they ought, this hearing would beget faith, and faith would bring forth all excellent graces, accompanying ſaluation. The ſeruant which bound himſelfe to the perpetuall ſeruice of his maſter becauſe he loued him was to be broght vnto the doore of his 
                  Exod. 21. 6.houſe, and his Maſter, was to boare his eare with an Awle. Whoſoeuer he is that enters into Gods ſeruice, hee muſt haue this marke, euen an open

eare, and it muſt be boared at the Doore of Gods 
                  Eccleſ. 4. 17houſe, that he may be readier to heare, then to offer the Sacrifice of fooles. The Hebrewes ſay, it is the right eare that muſt bee boared: and ſurely if men heare with a ſiniſter eare, they doe not expreſſe themſelues true ſeruants of God. Whoſoeuer therfore hath dedicated himſelfe to the ſeruice of the Lord, let him expreſſe his Obligation or Indenture, by his open eare to the Word of God: for his ſheepe heare his voyce, and his Familie doe his command. God giues vnto euery one that hee receiueth into his ſeruice, this Iewell to hang in his eare, namely, to heare with attention and reuerence.
            
               
1. Whatſoeuer God ſpeaketh.
            2. When ſoeuer hee ſpeaketh.
            3. By whom ſoeuer hee ſpeaketh.
            The next puniſhment vnto death by our Nationall law, is loſing the eares. And certainly whoſe eares or hearing God hath ſuffered to be taken away, they are in a dangerous or deſperate caſe, becauſe the Word is the ſauour 2. Cor. 
                  
                     •
                  . 16.of life vnto the right hearer, and the ſauour of death vnto him that heareth not as hee ought. Now that you may heare with your eares, and vnderſtand with your hearts, and be conuerted from your euill wayes, and bee healed of all your ſins; vſe this ſhort and eaſie

receipt; and as you find the effect of it, returne the glory to God, eſteeme of him who hath preſented it to your view, and vſe as one that hath good will vnto Sion, and moaneth for the deafeneſſe of the Daughter of his People, and ſhall euer pray 
                  Ephphatha be open. Mark. 734.that this word Ephphatha may bee by the Spirit of the Lord effectually pronounced vnto all thoſe who deſire to heare the glad tidings of the Goſpell of Ieſus Chriſt. To whom, with the Father and the Holy Ghoſt, bee all honour and praiſe, and obedience yeelded, now and for euer,
            AMEN.
            
               Yours in the Lord Ieſus to be commanded. Richard Crooke.
            
         
         
            
            To the Reader.
            
               OF all the Senſes, none is more needfull, or vſe-full, then Hearing. Of all the Obiects of Hearing, none to be compared to the Word of God. To bee taught then how to heare the Word of God, muſt needs bee a leſſon worth the learning. In this Treatiſe is * Maſter Stephen Egerton of Black-fryers▪
                  London
               that doctrine taught. The Author who firſt indited it (being a man by long

Practiſe and much Experience, acquainted with Boaring of the Eare) the Matter contained in it (being a meanes ſanctified to bring vs vnto Life and 
                  Ha. 55. 3. Luk. 11. 28.Happineſſe) and the Manner of vnfolding that matter (being diſtinct and perſpicuous) doe in eſpeciall manner commend it vnto thee. Come and reade. Reade and Iudge.
            
               William Gouge.
            
         
      
      
         
            THE BOARING OF THE EARE.
         
            CHAP. I.
            
               LVKE 8. 18.
               Take heed how you heare, &c.
            
            
               Quest.
            
            
               IS it a hard matter to heare the Word of God preached heedfully, and with fruit?
            
               
               Anſ. Yes verily: elſe our Sauiour Chriſt would neuer haue exhorted and perſwaded his hearers to the performance of this dutie by ſo many Arguments.
            
               Qu. What Arguments doth hee vſe?
            
               An. In this Parable hee vſeth diuers reaſons: one, becauſe it is a very rare and daintie thing to heare the Word profitably, ſeeing among ſo many thouſands that flocke together, ſcarce the fourth part reapeth any profit; becauſe though men cal you not to accoūt: though Parents, Paſtors, Maſters, &c. neglect vs, yet God will call vs to account, and it will one day appeare, who haue heard of conſcience, and who not.
            
               
               Qu. What other reaſons may be gathered out of the words of Chriſt, to proue the profit, neceſſitie, and difficultie of hearing?
            
               An. Diuers: as firſt, to be a good and fruitfull hearer is a ſpeciall gift of God, and peculiar to the Elect, My ſheepe 
               
                  Ioh. 10. 27.
               heare my voyce. And againe, 
                  Iohn 8. 47.
               hee that is of God, heareth Gods Word. And Chriſt ſhewing the reaſon why his Diſciples profited rather then others, ſaith, To you it is giuen, &c. 
                  Luke 8. 10.with many other places to the like purpoſe: as when true Faith is called the Faith Of 
               
                  Titus 1. 1. &c.
               the Elect.
            
            Secondly, In reſpect of the excellencie of the Word, which is called the Word of the Kingdome, both in reſpect of the ſubiect, and alſo of the

               
                  Rom. 1. 16. Acts 26. 32 Titus 2. 11. effect. To the ſame purpoſe it is called, The Power of God to ſaluation to euery one that beleeueth. The Word of Grace, and Faith. Seeing then, it is the word of the Kingdome, yea, of ſuch a Kingdome; with what attention, reſolution, and heedfulneſſe ought wee to heare it? Iehu and his Companions counted the Prophet a mad fellow: yet when hee brought him tydings of a Kingdome, he was 2. Kings 9. 6, 7, 8.glad to heare it, and willing to embrace it.
            Thirdly, To the ſame purpoſe (which may be another reaſon) it is called Seed, yea, 1. Pet. 1. 23.
               Immortall Seed, whereupon the Apoſtle maketh the ſame 
                  Iam. 1. 17, 18 Ibid. 1. 19, 20.concluſion in effect, that Chriſt doth here in this place ſaying, Wherefore, my deare
               
               Brethren, let euery man bee ſwift to heare, and ſlow to wrath: for the wrath of man worketh not the righteouſneſſe of God So the Miniſter is 
                  Mat. 13.called the Lords Sower, or Huſbandman, and the people his huſbandry, and the time of preaching, the time of ſowing or the Seed time: ſhall we then caſt away our ſelues, and cauſe the Lord to loſe both his labour and coſt vpon vs?
            Fourthly, Wherein (which may be a fourth reaſon) wee are to bee the more vigilant, becauſe Satan like a rauening Fowle followeth vs ſore at the heeles, &c. Therefore as at all times, and in all holy duties: ſo eſpecially in this, let vs remember that we haue not (as the Apoſtle ſaith) to
               
               
                  Eph. 6. 12. 
               wreſtle againſt fleſh and bloud, but againſt Principalities, and Powers, &c.
            Fiftly, A fift reaſon (likewiſe ariſing from hence) may be this. It is a rare and ſingular grace, which few attayne vnto: ſcarce one of foure; yea, rather ſcarce one of fortie 
                  Deut. 25. 4 Acts 16. 14.that heareth heedfully with fruit, reuerent attention, &c. Plaine experience prooueth as much, Let Miniſters examine their people, Parents their Children, Maſters their Seruants, &c. and it will plainly appeare how ſlenderly they haue heard: yea, let euery man examine his owne heart, and call himſelfe to account cōcerning thoſe things which haue beene deliuered in the publike Congregation, and his conſcience will tell

him, what a heedleſſe and 
                  Zach. 3. 1. 1. Pet. 5. 8.vnprofitable hearer hee hath beene.
            Sixtly and laſtly, The great gaine and increaſe promiſed to carefull hearers, ought to encourage vs, To him that 
               
                  Luke 8. 18.
               hath (ſaith Chriſt) ſhall be giuen. Wherefore ſeeing it is a thing ſo rare, and excellent, ſo profitable, ſo difficult (for the fat heart, dull eares, heauie head, drowſie eyes, get no good:) Let no man thinke with himſelfe, I will now ſit downe and take my place, and ſit downe at eaſe, and heare at pleaſure, but rather let him thus thinke, I will go now to an exerciſe indeed (although ſome ſcorne, and others fooliſhly impropriate the word) I muſt now buckle with Satan and mine owne 1. Tim. 4. 8.corruption, &c.
            
               
               Qu. Seeing then it is a dutie ſo neceſſary, ſo profitable, rare, excellent, and difficult to heare well; what things are chiefly to bee reſpected to the end wee may heare as wee ought?
            
               An. To the end we may heare as wee ought, we are to conſider, Firſt, what is to be done before the Sermon: Secondly, what is to bee done in the very Sermon time: And laſtly, what is to be done after the Sermon.
         
         
            CHAP. II.
            
               Qu. VVHat is the generall dutie of hearers before the Sermon time?
            
               
               An. Their dutie is, with great care and conſcience to prepare and ſanctifie themſelues.
            
               Qu. How is that proued?
            
               An. Firſt, by plaine and euident Precepts and Teſtimonies of Scripture, both in the Old and New Teſtament. Salomon ſaith, Looke well to thy 
               
                  Eccles. 4. 17
               feet when thou goeſt to the Houſe of GOD, ſo as thou mayſt bee prepared to heare, that is, to obey and beleeue, the word of God preached in his Temple: as if hee ſhould ſay, looke thou be more carefull to offer vp thy ſelfe vnto God, by giuing him an obedient heart and eare, then to bring Calues, Goates, &c. without a beleeuing and obedient heart, as the manner of Hypocrites and Worldlings

               
                  Iam. 1. 21. 22. is. Iames ſaith, Lay apart all filthineſſe, and ſuperfluitie of maliciouſneſſe, and receiue with meekneſſe the word that is grafted in you, which is able to ſaue your ſoules.
            
            Secondly, The practiſe of GODS faithfull people, 
                  Gen. 35. 2.both before the Law, Gen. 35. 
                  
                     Iob 1. 5. Exo. 19. 10. 1. Sam. 16. 5 2. Chro. 15. 12.
                  2. Chro. 29. 5 Ioel 2. 15. 16 Pſal. 18. 7. Iob 15. 15.
                2. Iob 1. 5. And at the giuing of the Law. Exod. 19. 10. and likewiſe after the Law, 1. Sam. 16. 5. 2. Chronicles 15. 12. and 2. Chron. 29. 5. Ioel 2. 15, 16.
            Thirdly, The glorious Maieſtie of God before whom we come.
            
               1. Cor. 2. 9. 1. Tim. 3. 16 1. Pet. 1. Fourthly, the excellencie of theſe heauenly things which in this holy meeting are propounded vnto vs.
            Fiftly, Our owne inſufficiencie. 2. Cor. 3. 5.2. Corinthians 3. 5.
            Sixtly, The pollution and

vncleaneneſſe both of our hearts and liues: in reſpect whereof wee ought to hearken to the ſaying of the holy Apoſtle, Clenſe your hands yee ſinners, and purge your hearts 
               
                  Iames 4. 8.
               yee double minded men, and ſo draw neare to God, and hee will draw neare to you.
            
            Seuenthly, (This may bee referred to the fift Reaſon) if the Heathen did ſo highly eſteeme of their Deuilliſh Myſteries, that they vſed to ſay, Be gone, be gone farre from hence all yee prophane ones; And againe, Touch no vncleane thing with vnwaſhen hands: how much more ought we to think thus of the great and holy Myſterie of Godlineſſe, and accordingly to prepare our ſelues to bee partakers thereof?
            
               
               Qu. You haue ſhewed me generally what is to be done of all men before the Sermon, now tell what is to bee done more particularly.
            
               An. Firſt, they muſt carefully auoyde ſu
                  •
               fetting and drunkenneſſe, and diſorder in Dyet: and vſe great moderation, and ſobrietie, eſpecially ouer night, and in the morning before they reſort to the publike Aſſemblies▪ 
               
                  Luke 21. 32Chriſt ſaith, Take heed lest at any time your hearts bee ouercome with ſurfetting and drunkenneſſe. If at all times wee muſt take heed, how much more at this time? For Wine is a mocker, ſaith Salomon▪
                
               
                  Pro. 20. 1.
               and ſtrong drinke is raging▪
                And as the Prophet ſaith, Wine and ſtrong drinke take away the heart. And Eſay ſaith▪
               
               Wo be to them that riſe early to follow drunkenneſſe, &c. then hee giueth the reaſon, ſaying, 
                  Eſay 11. 24.
               They regard not the Lords worke, but deſpiſe the Law of the Lord of Hoſts. Where the Apoſtle ſaith, Bee not filled with Wine, wherein is exceſſe, 
               
                  Eph. 4. 17. 18.
               but be yee filled with the ſpirit; He ſheweth that fulneſſe is an Enemie to ſpirituall Graces: whereof heedfull and profitable hearing of the word is one.
            
               Qu. What is the next particular hinderance to bee auoyded, when we are to goe to the Houſe of God?
            
               An. Exceſſiue care and minding of Earthly things, which are reckoned vp as thoſe ſpeciall thornes that choke vp the Seed of the Word of God, that it cannot
               
               
                  Luke 8. 14▪
                
               bring forth fruit in due ſeaſon. Wherefore when we goe to heare a Sermon, we muſt endeuour by all meanes to emptie and diſburden our ſelues of all ſuch thoughts, caſting them from vs as Thales did his goods, chooſing rather to drowne them, then let them drowne vs by trouble and diſtraction.
            
               Qu. What is the third particular hinderance?
            
               An. A conceit and ouerweening of ſome ſingular knowledge, and furniture of Bookes and reading, whereby they come with ſuch a preiudice as will not ſuffer them to reape any profit by the Word preached.
            
               Qu. What are the moſt conuenient remedies for the remouing of this euill?
            
               
               An. To this purpoſe wee are firſt to call to minde, that the preaching of the Goſpell is the power of God to ſaluation, not to the ſimple and vnlearned only, but euen to 
                  Rom. 1. 16.
               euery one that beleeueth.
            
            Secondly, That theſe Myſteries are of that nature and ſo diſpoſed by the prouidence of GOD, that they are often reuealed to babes in knowledge & learning, when they are hid from the wiſe and prudent, and therefore the 
                  Mat. 11. 25more wittie, learned, & quicke of conceit that men are, the more need they haue to reſort to the Houſe of God with feare and trembling.
            Thirdly, The examples of Gods faithfull Seruants. Dauid was not only a wiſe, and wittie Prince, but a holy Prophet

likewiſe, and a man for his pietie and other ſpirituall graces moſt deare and acceptable to God: yet who more deſirous and forward to heare 
                  
                     Pſal. 42. & 84. & 122. &c.
                  
                     Acts 18. 36.
                the Word of God then hee? Aquila and Priſcilla had better knowledge then Apollos himſelfe an eloquent Preacher, yet they diſdayned not to heare him: Nor hee them, though hee were more learned in other things.
            Laſtly, the publike Aſſemblies of the Church haue more ſingular promiſes of 
                  
                     Pſal. 29. 9. Ioel 2, 22. Rom▪
                      10. 13, 14, 15.
                  
                     Mat. 15. 19, 20.
                GODS preſent Grace and bleſſings, as may appeare by ſundry places of Scripture.
            
               Qu. What is the fourth hinderance?
            
               An. A partiall, or rather ſchiſmaticall reſpect of perſons,

ſuch as was in the Church of Corinth, where 1. Cor. 3. 3, 4ſom extolled one, & ſome another, ſome Paul, ſome Apollos?
            
            
               Qu. Whence proceedeth this reſpect of perſons?
            
               An. It proceedeth originally from the hearers, either from the ignorance of their mindes; or from the corruption of their hearts; and occaſionally from the Teachers, in reſpect of the diuerſitie of their gifts, and manner of handling of the Scriptures.
            
               Qu. How are men hindered by their owne ignorance, and corruption?
            
               An. When for want of Iudgement and Sanctimonie, they preferre ſuch as ſpeake pleaſing things, and tickle their eares with Eloquent tearmes, pleaſant ſtories, and

wittie Ieſts, and cannot away with thoſe that ſpeake the words of truth and ſoberneſſe, 
                  Acts 26. Titus 2. 1.and the things as the ſame Apoſtle ſaith, that become wholſome doctrine. Eſpecially, if they doe plainly, and roundly lay their ſins 1. Kings. 22 7, 8.before them. Hence it was that Ahab could not endure 
                  Acts 24. 25.
               Michajah. This made Felix cut off Paul in the midſt of his ſpeech, and put him off till 
                  Mat. 14.another time. Hence ſprang the Impriſonment of Iohn Baptiſt by Herod.
            
            
               Qu. What are the remedies againſt this hinderance?
            
               An. For a remedy againſt this euil we are to conſider, Firſt, that ſuch partiall reſpect of Gods Miniſters 1. Cor. 3. 4.argueth a carnall, and a fleſhly minde, and ſheweth

that wee are Babes and Children in Chriſtianitie.
            Secondly, That by this partialitie wee giue to man more then his due, and take from Chriſt that which of 1. Cor. 11, 12, 13. & 3. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5right belongeth to him as appeareth.
            Thirdly, That this diuerſitie and vnequalitie of gifts is not giuen for the renting and deſtroying, but for the building, and the beautifying of the Church of Chriſt, euen as the diuerſitie, and varietie of flowres in the ſame Garden differing in colour, ſmell, taſte and vertue, bring no confuſion nor deformitie: but doe decke the ground, and ſerue for the vſe and comfort of man: And the manifold varietie of ſtrings and Inſtruments doe make the

ſweeteſt harmonie.
            Fourthly, Remember that no Miniſter excelleth in all gifts: and yet no true Miniſter but hath ſome ſpeciall gifts and graces of edification. One is more profound in knowledge to informe the iudgement: another more powerfull in vtterance, for the inflaming of the affection: one is more fit to humble, and beate downe the proud, careleſſe and conceited perſons; another to comfort and raiſe vp penitent ſinners: one hath a ſpeciall grace to worke godly ſorrow, another to procure 
                  
                     Mat. 11. 16 17, &c.
                  
                     Luke 10. 16
                ſupernaturall comfort and ioy.
            Fiftly, Remember that the contempt of any true Miniſter is the contempt of God himſelfe.
            
               
Sixtly, Let it bee kept in mind that Chriſtian Hearers looke rather to the pith, and ſubſtance of the matter, then to the enticements and paintings of the ſpeech.
            
               Quest. What is the fift hinderance to bee remooued before the Sermon?
            
               Anſ. The fift (which may be referred to the former) is a certayne hatred of the Miniſters and loathing of the Miniſterie, ſuch as was in the Iewes, which made them to 
                  Acts 7. 55, 57.fret at Chriſt, and ſtop their eares againſt him.
            
               Queſt. Whence ariſeth this hatred of the Miniſters, and Miniſterie?
            
               Anſ. Sometime from the perſonall behauiour of the Miniſter himſelfe, but commonly from the matter

which he deliuereth, whereby the Errors of their Iudgement, and corruptions of their hearts and liues, are laid open, and reprooued. This 1. Kings 18. 1. Kings 22.made Ahab to count Elias his Enemie, And to hate Michaiah. 
               
                  Mat. 14.And Herod for the like 
                  Marke 6.cauſe committed Iohn Baptiſt, as before you heard.
            
               Qu. What bee the remedies againſt this hinderance?
            
               An. Let ſuch haters and deſpiſers of the Miniſterie conſider that,
            Firſt, They deſpiſe not 1. Sam. 8. 7. Luke 10▪ 16 Iohn 13. 22. 1. Theſ. 4. 8. 2. Cor. 5. 
                     •
                  0.man but God, for all true Miniſters are the Lords Ambaſdours.
            Secondly, They doe greatly preiudice themſelues, in 
                  Rom. 1. 16.neglecting, much more in lothing the meanes of their

comfort and ſaluation. Men willingly bow to the tree that yeeldeth them ſhadow: How much more then ought they to ſubmit themſelues to the grace of God, that bringeth 
               
                  Titus 1. 11.
               Saluation, &c.
            Thirdly, It is a point of godly wiſdome to diſtinguiſh betweene the perſons and the Offices, and not to depriue our ſelues of the fruit of the Word for the fault of the Teacher. In outward things men are wiſe: No man will refuſe a good Workman for ſome perſonall ſinnes. Hee that mindeth to build a houſe will not thinke the worſe of the Worke becauſe the Carpenter is wicked, Hee that is hungry will not refuſe his meate, becauſe the Cooke that dreſſed it is a Drunkard:

why then ſhould we diſtaſte the food of our ſoules by reaſon of the ſinnes of him that doth diſtribute it vnto vs? would any man refuſe the Princes gift, becauſe the Meſſenger that bringeth it is a Machiauillian, &c.
            
               Qu. What elſe maketh men lothe the Miniſterie?
            
               An. Beſides that naturall corruption which is common to all, there is in many a ſatietie, and fulneſſe, now (as Salomon ſaith) Hee that is full 
               
                  Pro. 27. 7.
               deſpiſeth a Hony-combe; but to him that is hungry, far bitterer things are ſweet.
            
            Secondly, That rebukes and threatnings though they bee tedious to the fleſh, yet they are wholſome Medicines to the ſoule, and ſtrong defences againſt Satan, &c.

And therefore they ſhould pray with Dauid, Let the 
               
                  Pſal. 141.
               righteous ſmite me, &c. and prayſe God becauſe the righteous hath ſmitten them, as men doe for the Chirurgian when hee hath healed them, euen by painfull ſearching and inciſion.
            
               Qu. What is the ſixt impediment to bee ſtriuen againſt?
            
               An. The length of the way, fouleneſſe of the weather, weakneſſe in the parties, want of meanes to carrie them, &c.
            
               Qu. What incouragements haue wee to ouercome theſe impediments?
            
               An. Wee haue, Firſt, the Law that God laid vpon the 
                  Exod. 23. 17 Deut. 12. 11, 12.
               Iſraelites, to appeare before the Lord three times euery

yeare, and that with their whole Family, and not emptie handed, vnto the place appointed by God, which muſt needs be far off from a number of their dwellings.
            Secondly, The promiſe of 
                  Exo. 34. 24.ſauing them from their Enemies while they were ſo imployed. Now conſidering that God is the God of the Gentiles, as well as of the Iewes, it cannot bee but that the Gentiles are proportionably bound both to obey the Commandements, and beleeue the promiſes giuen to the Iewes: though there bee ſome particular differences 1. Kings 2. Kin. 4. 23 Luke 2. 42. Acts 2. 5. & 8. 27. Mat. 5. 32.betwixt them.
            Thirdly, The practice and examples of the godly in former times both of the Old and New Teſtament.
            
               
Fourthly, By compariſon; if men take ſuch Iournies, and make ſuch ventures, for their bodily prouiſion, How much more ought they to do for the good of their ſoules?
            
               Qu. What ſay you to the aged, ſicke, and ſuch as haue young Children?
            
               An. Touching all theſe in generall, care muſt be had.
            Firſt, that they make not a neceſſitie where none is.
            Secondly, They muſt endeuour though they cannot goe all at once, nor euerie Lords Day, yet that they goe as oft as they can by turnes euery one in his courſe.
            Thirdly, they muſt be more carefull to aske queſtions, and to deſire repetition of the Sermon, of them that were there.
            
               
Fourthly, They muſt keepe no more at home with them, then of Neceſſitie they need, and ſuch they may lawfully keepe to attend vpon themſelues being aged, ſickly, impotent, hauing children, &c. for herein the ſaying of the Holy Ghoſt may be remembred, 1. 
                     ••
                   15. 22.
               Obedience is better then 
               
                  Hoſe 6. 6.
               Sacrifice. And againe, I will haue Mercie and not Sacrifice.
            
            
               Qu. What is the ſeuenth impediment?
            
               An. The laſt and greateſt let (which comprehendeth in effect all the former,) is carnall Securitie, Impenitencie, Worldlineſſe, vncleanneſſe of life, &c, which things either withdraw men altogether from hearing, or elſe make them heare with a deafe eare, and a dead heart, &c.
            
               
               Qu. What is the remedie hereof?
            
               An. True and vnfayned Repentance, and eſpecially that one fruit and companion thereof, which may be called care and deſire both to know, beleeue and obey the Lord, ſpeaking vnto vs in his holy Word: for it cannot bee but by the bleſſing of God, they muſt needs profit that goe to the publike Aſſemblies, as the Souldiers, Publicanes and people came to Iohn Baptist, 
               
                  Luke 3. 10, 11, 12.ſaying, What ſhall wee doe? Eſpecially when they be touched to the quicke with the feeling of their ſinne, and terrour of GODS Iudgement hanging ouer their heads for the ſame, as the people were, Acts 2. 37. And the Iayler. 
                  Acts 2. 37. & 16. 30.
            
            
               Qu. You haue ſhewed mee

what impediments are to bee auoyded: now let mee know what duties are to bee performed concerning this point?
            
               An. Firſt, let ſuch as bee Gouernors of Families bring as neere as may bee their whole Family with them, excepting only ſuch as are apparantly like to take hurt, by reaſon of their ſickneſſe, or to diſturbe the Congregation by reaſon of their vnrulines, that they may ſhew the zeale 
                  
                     Ioſhua 24. 15.
                  
                     Heſter 4. 16.
                of faithfull Ioſua, ſaying, I, and my houſhold will ſerue the Lord, and with holy Heſter, I and my Maides will doe likewiſe, that is, faſt and pray.
            
               Qu. What is the ſecond dutie?
            
               An. Such as haue Neighbours muſt endeauour to encourage

and quicken them to ioyne in company, and to goe together to the Houſe of God, ſaying, as it is in Eſay, O houſe of Iacob come, and let 
               
                  Eſay 2. 5. Hoſe 6. 1.
               vs walke in the light of the Lord, and with the woman of Samaria, Come and ſee a man, 
               
                  Iohn 4.&c. ſo let vs ſay, Come and heare a man, &c. The performance of this holy dutie made Dauid glad at the very 
                  Pſal. 12
                     •
                  .heart. Thus Philip, and Andrew did inuite Nathaneel 
               
                  Iohn 1. 45.and Simon to come vnto Chriſt whom they had found before.
            
               Qu. What is the third dutie?
            
               An. As we goe to the place of publike Aſſemblies, wee muſt bee occupyed and exerciſe our minds with religious and holy Meditations, not

ſuffering our owne luſts and cares of the World, and Satan with them to creepe in and enter with vs into the Houſe of God.
            
               Qu. What be thoſe holy Meditations which we ought to haue?
            
               An. Diuers, as hath been partly ſhewed before, as namely, Firſt, before whom we come, namely, before him who is King of Kings, &c.
            Secondly, What thing we 1. Tim. 6. 15 Pro. 9. 1. &c.come to, namely, a ſupernaturall Banquet and heauenly Table for the refreſhing and ſatisfying of our faint and hungry ſoules, which will worke alacritie, as the former will humilitie. We ſee how it taketh vp mens hearts if it goe to ſpeake with an earthly King, and to heare him ſpeak

with them and bid them to to his Table. How much 
                  Pro. 23. 1.more, when wee goe before the King of Heauen and Earth to ſpeake to him by Prayer, and to heare him by Preaching, and by both theſe as alſo by the Sacraments to feaſt and feed with him?
            Thirdly, We muſt remember more particularly, the fruit of Gods Word, and the efficacie thereof, in that it is called, The Kingdome of Heauen, 
               
                  Mat▪
                   3. 2.The meanes to keepe vs 
                  Luke 16. 29 Iohn 5. 39. 1. Pet. 1. 19.from Hell, The treaſurie of eternall life, A ſure word of Propheſie, compared to a light that ſhineth in a darke place, and is not only food to nouriſh vs: but alſo Seed to 
                  Iames 1. 18 1. Pet. 1. 23. Iames 1. 21. Pſal. 119. 53 92.beget vs, Beeing able to ſaue our ſoules, That which will ſupport vs, and quicken vs in

               
                  Ier. 15. 15, 18. our greateſt troubles, beeing the very ioy of our hearts.
            
               Qu. What is the fourth dutie?
            
               An. Fourthly, wee are to reade and meditate in priuate with others if wee may fitly, and by our ſelues vpon that place of Scripture that is to bee handled in the publike Aſſembly, for if a godly man 
                  Pſal. 1. 2.ought to meditate day and night in the Law of the Lord; How can he be negligent vpon the Day of the Lord in thinking of that Scripture, which is to bee handled in the Houſe of the Lord? And if the whole doctrine of the Goſpell ought 
                  Col. 3. 16.to dwell plentifully in vs alwayes; How can we but poſſeſſe our ſelues of that part of the Goſpell or Word of

God, which wee goe now to feede our ſoules withall? Moreouer, a Chriſtian ſhall better remember the matter which is deliuered, when hee hath thought of the ground of it before: and alſo diſcerne more cleerely the grace, and power of the publike Miniſterie ſo farre exceeding his priuate Meditations, or otherwiſe the weakneſſe of the Miniſter if hee want either that gift that he ſhould haue, or be negligent in that ſtudie 
                  Col. 4. 3.and preparation which hee ought to vſe.
            
               Qu. What is the fift duty to be vſed of the Hearers before the Sermon?
            
               An. Hee muſt powre forth faithfull and heartie Prayer, firſt for himſelfe, that God will enlighten his mind,

confirm
                  •
                his Memorie, reforme his Will, ſoften his Heart, purifie his Conſcience, that hee may grow in the knowledge of his heauenly Doctrine, lay hold of it by a true Faith, and turne the ſame into the daily, and wholſome exerciſes of Praier and Repentance, herein imitating 
                  
                     Pſal. 25. 4, 5. & 119. 18. 33.
                  
                     Luke 17. 5.
                the Prophet Dauid, and the Apoſtles.
            Secondly, For the people that ſhall ioyne with him, eſpecially thoſe of his owne Family. For if ſuch be worſe then Infidels, as make not bodily prouiſion for their Families; they cannot bee Chriſtians that neglect this part of prouiſion for their ſoules.
            Thirdly, For their Miniſters: for if Paul beeing ſo excellent an Apoſtle, needed

the Prayers of the Epheſians, 
               
                  Eph. 6. 19.much more doe the ordinarie Paſtors, and Teachers of the Church need the ſame.
            
               Qu. Wherefore elſe is Prayer neceſſarie?
            An. Becauſe, Firſt, God only giueth wiſdome, and out 
                  Pro. 2. 6.of his mouth commeth knowledge and vnderstanding.
            Secondly, Fleſh and bloud reuealeth not thoſe things to vs, but God our heauenly 
                  Mat. 16. 17Father.
            
               Thirdly, The naturall man perceiueth not the things 1. Cor. 2. 16.which belong to the Spirit of God.
         
         
            CHAP. III.
            
               Qu. YOu haue ſhewed mee what is to bee

done before the Sermon, now tell mee what is the hearers dutie in the Sermon while.
            
               An. Firſt, let ſuch as bee able to reade, bring with them to the publike Aſſemblies the holy Bible, to the end that they may not only ioyne with the Church in ſinging of Pſalmes, but alſo readily turne to the principal places of Scriptures that are read, expounded, and repeated by the Miniſter: by which meanes they ſhall greatly further both their attention and memorie, hauing the helpe, not only of their Eare in hearing, but alſo of their Eye in peruſing thoſe ſcriptures, that are alleaged, to ſee whether they be truly alleaged or no: by which meanes alſo the Miniſter ſhall bee made more

carefull to take heed, that he doe not but vpon very good ground, ſwarue from the words of the common Tranſlation. If this had beene obſerued, the Nouatian Heretike 
                  Lib. 7. cap. 5of whom Socrates ſpeaketh in the Eccleſiaſticall Storie, durſt not haue added thoſe words to the Text▪ which he did, ſaying, Curſed is euery one 
               
                  Luke 22. 1.
               that keepeth the Paſſeouer without vnleauened Bread. Neither would that bee of whom Auſtine ſpeaketh Epiſtola nona ad Hicon, haue ſo vnaduiſedly made that hurrie among the people, by reading a word in the Propheſie of Ionas, otherwiſe then it was in their Bibles.
            
               Qu. Which is the ſecond dutie?
            
               An. Euery hearer muſt endeauour

earneſtly to bee preſent at the whole Sermon, from the beginning to the end, both comming before the firſt Prayer begin, and not departing till the bleſſing bee 
                  Mark. 14. 12.pronounced. Iudas leauing the Aſſembly of Chriſt and the other Apoſtles before the action was ended, and the Pſalme ſung, had heauie ſucceſſe. This was counted ſo great a fault in former times, that the Councell of Carthage appointed him that went out of the Congregation, while the Miniſter was in ſpeaking, to bee excommunicated.
            
               Qu. What is the third?
            
               An. Sleepe, talke, and ſpeech with other men, curioſitie in looking about, and reading of other Bookes, &c.

in the Sermon time muſt bee auoyded.
            
               Qu. Why ſhould not men ſleepe at Sermons?
            
               An. For diuers Reaſons. Firſt, it is a breach of the third Commandement, or a taking of GODS Name in vaine by neglect, and abuſe of Gods holy Ordinance.
            Secondly, It is an enemie to that attention, and heedfulneſſe in hearing which is required of vs.
            Thirdly, If ſuch a iudgement befell him that ſlept in the night, & that at an exceeding 
                  Acts 20. 9, 10.long Sermon; What are we to ſay of thoſe that ſleepe in the day at a Sermon of an houre long?
            Fourthly, It is a thing of euill report and example.
            
               Qu. How ſhall they preuent

it, that by reaſon of watching, early riſing, age, or other infirmities can hardly auoid it?
            
               An. They muſt ſeeke by all meanes to reſiſt it, praying and groaning in ſpirit, ſtanding vp, vſing the Pen if they can write, crauing the helpe of ſuch as ſit neere them, &c.
            
               Qu. What ſay you to talking, curious gazing, and gaping about, &c?
            
               An. They are condemned by all the ſame Reaſons that ſleeping is, and that ſo much the more, becauſe ſleepe is ſuch a naturall Infirmitie, that it may ſuddenly and vnawares ſteale vpon a good and godly man, who hath often reſolued with his owne heart neuer to giue place vnto it: whereas any man that hath

but a ſparke of grace, and modeſtie, may with a little ſtriuing, refraine talking, and looking about, and therefore it doth argue a farre greater prophaneneſſe and impudencie then the other.
            
               Qu. But may not a man reade ſome good Booke of Diuinitie in the Sermon time?
            
               An. No, not the very Bible it ſelfe, except it be the places that are pointed to by the Miniſter, for wee are to giue attendance to the things that 
                  Acts 8. 6.are ſpoken. Beſides, it carrieth with it a kind of contempt both of the Miniſter, and Miniſterie, and a ſecret condemning of thoſe that doe attend.
            
               Qu. What is the fourth dutie of hearers?
            
               
               An. Hee muſt marke the whole Sermon from the beginning to the end thereof, and ponder as well one part of the ſentence, as another, & not take things to halues, or by ſnatches, as the manner of ſome is, which breedeth great inconuenience: for hence it commeth that things ſpoken comparatiuely are wreſted, as if they were ſpoken ſimply. Hence it is that the propoſition of a ſimilitude is marked, and the application neglected, with diuers other inconueniences from whence ariſe Errours, Scoffings, Cauellings, &c.
            
               Qu. What is the fift dutie?
            
               An. The fift dutie which may bee referred to the impediments, is to come with a

free minde not poſſeſt with any preiudice or fore-ſtalled opinion, but in trying the ſpirits of the Miniſters of God 1. Iohn 4. 5.to hold faſt that which is good. For as a coloured glaſſe maketh all things of the ſame colour: ſo a preiudicate opinion maketh all things ſound that way that it ſelfe imagineth. This made euen the beſt hearers of our Sauiour Chriſt, ſometimes not to vnderſtand him when hee ſpake moſt plainly to them of his ſufferings, becauſe they were poſſeſt with a fore-conceiued opinion of a worldly 
                  Luke 18. 31 32.Kingdome. Let vs therefore when we goe to the houſe of God, looke to our feet, that is, not to our corrupt affections 
                  Eccleſ. 4. 17alone, but alſo to our preiudicate opinions & conceits.
            
               
               Qu. What is the ſixt dutie?
            
               An. Sixtly, wee muſt not be preſent with a mind peremptorily to determine, according to our owne fancie, or to toſſe, and ſift things to and fro, as wee liſt, as if wee were Maſters rather then Schollers, Teachers, rather then Hearers, Iudges and Cenſurors of others rather then Learners. For there is nothing can bee ſo truly and 
                  Luke 14. 1.plainly ſpoken, but Pride and Malice may peruert it: wherfore let vs lay aſide all ſiniſter conceits of our owne knowledge, wit, and learning, all contempt and hatred of the Miniſters perſons, vaine glorie, ſelfe-loue, &c. which maketh men thinke nothing right and good but that

which commeth from themſelues. Neither let vs with Phocion, count it a goodly thing to diſſent from other.
            
               Qu. Doth not the Apoſtle will vs to try the ſpirits, and 1. Co. 14. 19iudge of thoſe things which the Prophets ſpeake?
            
               An. Yes, but it is not his meaning that men ſhould of enuie, vain-glorie, &c. ſubiect the Sermons they heare to their own proud and wanton wits: but only with Wiſdome, Charitie and Sobrietie to conſider whether the things deliuered by the Prophets and Miniſters doe agree with the rule of Gods Word, and the ſoundneſſe of Chriſtian Faith. Further that will come to paſſe if men giue place to their owne conceits, which is ſaid in the common

Prouerbe, So many men, ſo many mindes: Quot homines, tot ſententiae.
            
            
               Qu. What is the ſeuenth dutie of Hearers in the Sermon time?
            
               An. Not to bee raſhly diſcouraged or diſtaſted with thoſe things which at the firſt may ſeeme difficult and hard: but rather to vſe the more diligence, and attention to find them out.
            
               Qu. Why ſo?
            
               An. Becauſe, Firſt, we muſt remember that the naturall 1. Cor. 2. 14.man doth not eaſily conceiue heauenly things.
            Secondly, It is the will of God by this meanes to humble vs, and to abate the ambitious conceits of our owne will, and to ſtirre vp our dulneſſe in Prayer, Meditation,

and ſtudie, that the LORD would enlighten the eyes of our vnderſtanding, and to repaire to the Miniſters of Gods Word.
            Thirdly, Men doe readily deſpiſe theſe things which are ouer eaſie and familiar at the firſt, and through lothſomeneſſe grow faint, lazie, and vnluſtie.
            
               Qu. What is the eighth dutie?
            
               An. To vnderſtand, and marke the method and order of the Preacher.
            
               Qu. Why ſo?
            
               An. Becauſe it is a great helpe to the memorie, and ſerueth as the Star of the Mariner, and as a threed or line without which hee ſhall bee entangled as in a Maze.
            
               Qu. How ſhall the hearer

attayne to this?
            
               An. This ſtandeth partly in the Preacher himſelf, who muſt keepe a good order, elſe it will bee hard to follow him ſtep by ſtep. Secondly, In the hearers themſelues three things are required for the helpe of their memorie in the time of the hearer.
            Firſt, diligent marking, not ſuffering their minds to ſtray abroad about other matters.
            Secondly, Looking thorowly to the Text, to ſee how the Doctrines, Exhortations, &c. are raiſed.
            Thirdly, To obſerue to what point of the Catechiſme, or head of Religion, euery thing is to be referred.
            
               Qu. What is the ninth dutie of the hearer in the Sermon time?
            
               
               An. To apply that which is preached, to himſelfe, and ſo to turne it to the wholſome vſe, and ſpirituall nouriſhment of his ſoule.
            
               Qu. Why ſo?
            
               
                  Mat. 7. 21. Luke 11. 28 & 12. 47. Iohn 13 7. Rom. 2. 13. Iames 2. 
                     •
                  5 
               An. Becauſe the end of hearing is not chiefly to know and vnderſtand, but rather to beleeue, practiſe, and obey that which is taught.
            
               Qu. How ſhall the hearer apply that which is taught, to himſelfe?
            
               An. If it be a promiſe, by beleeuing, and embracing. If a threatning, by beleeuing, and fearing it. If a precept or dutie laid forth, by beleeuing, and endeauouring to practiſe it. If a prohibition from a ſinne layd out and reproued, by beleeuing, repenting,

and ſhunning of it. Finally, if in euery point that is deliuered, they put vpon themſelues the like affection, and feeling that is in their godly Teacher.
            
               Qu. What is the tenth dutie?
            
               An. Not to fret and wax wearie and impatient, though the Miniſter bee ſomewhat longer then the ordinarie time.
            
               Qu. Ought not the Miniſter to keepe himſelfe within the compaſſe of his houre?
            
               An. Yes, hee ought to endeauour it as neere as hee can.
            
               Qu. Hath not the hearer iuſt cauſe to be offended?
            
               An. No, for there may bee diuers Reaſons which may iuſtly mooue a godly

Miniſter to goe beyond his houre, and therefore the hearer ought quietly and patiently to continue to the end of the Sermon.
            
               Qu. What are thoſe?
            
               An. Diuers: as firſt, the fruitfulnes of the Text which he handleth.
            Secondly, the neceſſitie and profit of it for the time and perſons that be preſent.
            Thirdly, Want of opportunitie to handle the ſame Text another time. Theſe, and the like conſiderations may giue the Miniſter iuſt occaſion to bee longer then ordinary, and therefore the hearer ought not to chafe, and fume, though hee doe a little exceed his time.
            
               Qu. What other Reaſons haue you to perſwade to this dutie?
            
               
               An. Further, let hearers conſider how eaſily without irkeſomneſſe they can be preſent at a play, or at ſome other prophane and idle exerciſe and diſcourſe of greater length then thoſe Sermons which they doe ſo much diſtaſte in reſpect of the tediouſneſſe (as they eſteeme it) of them, and therefore they ought much more patiently to beare the protracting of time at the performance of ſuch a holy dutie.
            
               Qu. Wherefore elſe?
            
               An. Becauſe this chafing at, & lothing of good things in regard of the length of them, doth argue a diſordered, and ill affected minde: for as lothing, and diſtaſte of bodily food is a ſigne of a ſicke ſtomacke: ſo the like

lothing, and diſtaſting of ſpirituall food is a ſigne of a ſinfull ſoule. On the other ſide, As a hungry appetite, and wel relliſhing of our meate and drinke, is a ſigne of bodily health: ſo the hungring after the wholſome word, and 
                  Pſal. 1. 2. Mat. 5. 6.delighting in it, is a ſigne of a good heart.
            
               Qu. What is the laſt Reaſon?
            
               An. The practice, and example of the godly Miniſters 
                  Ioſh. 8. 34, 35. 2. C. Ezra. 8. 3.and people in former Ages, who haue willingly continued a long time together at holy exerciſes as may appeare. How large was the Sermon of Chriſt, the ſumme and chiefe points whereof are ſet downe in the whole 5. 
                  
                     Mat chap. 5. 6, 7.
                  
                     Acts 20. 11. &c.
                6, 7. Chapters? And that of Paul, Therefore it is not a

ſtrange, or new thing for Miniſters to prolong their ſpeech, and people their preſence with patience and attention.
            
               Qu. What is the eleuenth dutie?
            
               An. That euery one bring their owne with them, and looke to them in Sermon time, that they neither gad 1. Co. 14. 40out of the Church, ſleepe, talke, or commit any vnſeemly thing.
            
               Qu. Is there not ſome ſpeciall care of Schollers to bee had, and ſuch as can write?
            
               An. Yes, they are to bee accuſtomed to take Sermons in Writing.
            
               Qu. Why ſo?
            
               An. Becauſe, Firſt, it will cauſe them to marke, and giue eare to the words of the

Preacher, and keepe them both from ſleeping, and all vnſeemely behauiour.
            Secondly, It will helpe both their memory & iudgement, and enable them to giue a better account of that they haue heard, both for the good of themſelues and others.
         
         
            CHAP. IIII.
            
               Qu. HAth not the hearer diſcharged his dutie when hee hath heard the whole Sermon attentiuely?
            
               An. No, although there be ſcarce one of a hundred who doth not thinke ſo.
            
               Qu. What then is to bee done?
            
               
               An. Firſt, Men are not to go out of the Church ſo ſoone as the Sermon is ended, but ſtay the Prayer, Bleſſing, and Sacraments when they are adminiſtred.
            
               Qu. Why ſo?
            
               An. Touching Prayer, it is one principall part of the worſhip of God in the publike Aſſemblies, and therefore cannot bee ſo deſpiſed without ſinne. Beſides, it is the exerciſe wherby al things are bleſſed and ſanctified vnto vs. Finally, how can wee receiue ſo great a bleſſing at Gods hands, and depart from his preſence without giuing of thankes?
            
               Qu. What other reaſon is there?
            
               An. If it would bee counted a thing vncomely, and

vndutifull, to ſtand before an earthly King as a dead Image, and ſo ſoone as euer his ſpeech were ended, to turne thy backe vpon him without any Requeſt or Thankeſgiuing: How much more to deale thus with him that is, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords?
            
               Qu. Why muſt wee ſtay the Sacraments?
            
               An. Becauſe they are the publike Seales of the mutuall Couenant betweene GOD and vs, whereby hee bindeth himſelfe to bee our God, and wee our ſelues to bee his people, and therefore wee are to bee preſent, not only at the Lords Supper, which belongeth to all Beleeuers that are of diſcretion to examine themſelues: but alſo at the

adminiſtration of Baptiſme, whereby the ſame Couenant of Grace and forgiueneſſe of ſinnes is ſealed vnto vs.
            
               Qu. Is it requiſite for mee of yeares to be preſent at the catechizing?
            
               An. Yes, For firſt, many are men in yeares, which are Babes in knowledge.
            Secondly, It is a thing of good example, both for the encouragement of youth, and alſo of the Miniſter himſelfe when hee ſhall ſee them preſent that can iudge of his paines.
            Thirdly, By this meanes the elder ſort ſhall bee better able to examine and conferre with the yonger at home.
            
               Qu. Why muſt people ſtay the bleſſing?
            
               An. Becauſe the LORD

commanding his Miniſter to bleſſe the people, doth neceſſarily imply their ſtaying till the bleſſing bee pronounced: elſe hee ſhould not bleſſe the people, but the bare Walles, which were to take the 
                  Num. 6. 23, 24.Name of God in vaine.
            
               Qu. What is the ſecond dutie to bee done after the Sermon?
            
               An. Such things as haue beene deliuered at Church muſt be, (as it were) chewed by Meditation, and turned ouer againe at home▪ after the example of the men of Berea, 
               
                  Acts 17. 10 11.for the quickning of our memorie, increaſing of our Knowlege, ſtrengthening of our Faith, &c.
            
               Qu. What is the third dutie?
            
               An. Parents and Maſters

               
                  Exo. 12. 26. Deu 6. 2. 21 Ioſhua 4. 6. muſt demand, and take account of their people, of the things they haue heard.
            
               Qu. Why ſo?
            
               An. Becauſe, Firſt, they are to haue a care of their ſoules as well as of their bodies.
            Secondly, They that will winne others to Godlineſſe, muſt beginne with them betime, Salomon ſaith.
            Thirdly, By this meanes they ſhal frame them to more conſcience of their dutie in ciuill matters, and in the ordinary workes, and labours of their calling.
            
               Qu. What is the fourth dutie?
            
               An. To conferre godly of that which hath beene taught by the way, and at our Tables; and not according to

the wicked cuſtome of a great number, to fall preſently into idle and vnſauourie ſpeeches, or Diſcourſes of Worldly matters, yea, to ſcoffing, and carping at the doctrine, or at the Teacher thereof.
            
               Qu. What profit commeth hereby?
            
               An. By ſuch godly ſpeeches Chriſt is after a ſort inuited, and drawne into our company by the preſence of 
                  
                     Luke 24▪ 15 32.
                  
                     Phil. 4▪ 9. Epheſ. 4. 29, 30.
                his Spirit, as hee was to thoſe two Diſciples in perſon that went to Emaus.
            
            
               Qu. What ſay you then to ſuch as doe not vſe this conference?
            
               An. They are like that member of the naturall bodie, which keeping all the food to it ſelfe, and not imparting the ſame to the members

adioyning, doth in ſhort time corrupt both himſelfe and them.
            
               Qu. What is the fiſt dutie?
            
               An. To keepe in minde that the Sabbath is not ended as ſoone as the Sermon is done: and therefore not to meddle with Worldly matters: but to ſpend the reſt of the time in Prayer, Reading, Repetition, ſinging of Pſalms, &c. according to the ſcope of the fourth Commandement. Therefore they are greatly deceiued who thinke they haue ſufficiently ſanctified the Sabbath, when they haue heard a Sermon ſuperficially in the fore-noone: And they likewiſe who vainly perſwade themſelues that the Sanctification of the Lords

Day conſiſteth chiefly in abſtayning from the works and labours of their callings, and yet will paſſe the ſame away in diuers vanities, laſciuious Dancings, Drinkings, and bodily pleaſures.
            
               Qu. May no bodily labours bee performed on the Lords Day?
            
               An. Yes, ſuch as are neceſſarily required for the health, welfare, and defence of our ſelues or our Neighbour, and could not well bee diſpatched the day before, nor deferred till the day following. For in ſuch caſes the 
                  Mat. 12. 8. Mark. 2. 27.Sonne of man is Lord of the Sabbath Day. Wherefore the Macchabees did fooliſhly in ſuffering themſelues to bee ſlaine without reſiſtance becauſe it was the Sabbath

               1. Mac. 2. 36. Day, which error afterwards they decreed to reforme.
            
               Qu. What is the ſixt dutie?
            
               An. If we haue heard any thing that ſeemed darke, and doubtfull to vs, not to be diſcouraged, but to confer with 
                  Phil. 1. 9, 10our godly Paſtor that wee may know the things that differ.
            
               Qu. Why muſt wee doe this?
            
               An. Firſt, We vſe it in the things of this World, much more then ought wee to doe it in the things that concerne eternall life.
            
               
                  Mal. 2 7. M t. 13. 36 Iohn 16. 19. Acts 8. 34. Secondly, The Prieſts lips preſerue knowledge, &c.
            Thirdly, Examples teach the ſame thing.
            
               Qu. What is the ſeuenth dutie?
            
               
               An. Euery godly hearer muſt ſound and ſearch his owne heart, and accordingly ſentence and cenſure himſelfe touching that which he hath heard, how farre forth hee hath beene rebellious againſt the ſame, or yeelded obedience thereunto.
            
               Qu. What will this ſifting of the heart bring forth?
            
               An. If we find a ſweet harmonie and conſent betweene Gods Word and our wills, it wil worke in vs ioy and peace of conſcience, with Thankeſgiuing to God, whoſe meere grace, and free gift it is: otherwiſe it ought to humble vs, and worke that godly ſorrow in vs which Paul ſpeaketh of, 2. Cor. 7. 10.and cauſe vs to purge out that old leauen ſpoken of, 1. Cor. 
               1 Cor. 5. 7.5. 7.
            
               
               Qu. What is the eighth dutie?
            
               An. It is, that all Chriſtians, eſpecially Superiours, doe endeauour to redreſſe and reforme ſuch as belong to their care and charge, by a more ſpeciall applying of ſuch things as are deliuered in Sermons, to their ſpeciall ſinnes and tranſgreſſions, doubts or feares, whereby they ſhall diſcharge a brotherly dutie, and inure the other to thinke more deeply and fruitfully of the things that are taught.
            
               Qu. What followeth of all this?
            
               An. Hence it appeareth, Firſt, how hard and excellent a thing it is not only to preach, but alſo to heare Sermons profitably.
            Secondly, It ſheweth how

farre they be out of the way of diſcharging their dutie, who haue ſuperficially ſpent an houre or two either in preaching or hearing.
            
               Qu. What then ſhould faithfull Miniſters doe?
            
               An. They ought with all care to apply themſelues to performe this dutie of preaching holily and fruitfully.
            Firſt, by diligent ſtudie and meditation at home.
            Secondly, By a zealous deliuering of the ſame in the Church.
            Thirdly, By Prayer, and watching for the profit of their Doctrine both in themſelues and others.
            
               Qu. What may prouoke them hereunto?
            
               An. The promiſes of GODS Word ſet downe,

               
                  Dan. 12. 3. 2. Tim. 4. 7, 8. 
               Eſay 49. 4. and in other places.
            
               Qu. What muſt good people doe?
            
               An. Firſt, prepare themſelues with great Religion to heare the Word, and to vſe all reuerence and attention in the hearing.
            Secondly, to endeauour with like Religion to expreſſe and practiſe it in the whole courſe of their life.
            
               Qu. What ſhould mooue them hereunto?
            
               
                  Luke 11. 28 
               An. Becauſe (as Chriſt ſaith) Bleſſed are they that heare the Word of God, and keepe the ſame. And the Apoſtle ſaith, 
                  Iames 1. 21.The Word thus receiued is able to ſaue their ſoules.
            FINIS.
            
            
            
         
      
   