
      
         
            
            
            ¶ A Prayer ſayd in the kinges Chappell in the tyme of hys graces Sicknes, for the reſtauracion of his helth, commaunded to be ſayd there, by the right Honorable Erle of Bedford, and niete to be vſed of all the Kinges trew Subiectes. Set forthe the .xix. day of Iune. M. D. LIII.
            
               
                  royal blazon or coat of arms
               
            
            Allmighty, and moſte merciful Lorde, the onely lyfe and helth, of all theym that truſte in thee, which workeſt ſaluaciō in thy elect, aſwell by ſicknes as other wiſe, and therfore bringeſt theim very lowe, and yet reſtoreſt to helth againe: looke downe wyth thy pytyfull Eies vpon thy ſeruaunt Edward our Kyng, and vpon this Realme of England, profeſſing thi worde & holy name, and as thou dideſt moſte fauorably deliuer King Ezechias frō extreame ſicknes, and prolongedſt his lyfe for the ſaluegarde of thy people the Iſraelites, & defendedſt theim and the Citie from the Tyranny of the Aſſyryās: ſo we moſte entierlye appeale to thy great mercies, graciouſly to reſtore the helth and ſtrēgth agayne of thy ſeru
                  •••
               t Edward our Soueraine Lorde, that as tho
                  •
                haſte begonne by him the rooting out of Errour, Idolatry & Superſticion, and the planting of trew Religion, trew worſhippyng & veritie: ſo it may pleaſe thy mercyful goodnes, lōge to preſerue hym for the confyrmacyō & eſtabliſhmēt of the ſame, and alſo for the ſaulfgarde and defence of this Realme, from al outward & inward Enemies, for the glorye of thy holye name. Looke not herin (O Lorde) vpon our deſertes, whyche for abuſinge thy worde, and ſinfulnes, deſerue great puniſhmentes, but vpon thy plentyful mercyes, whyche reioyceſt to heale the greateſt myſeries. Be no leſſe fauorable (O Lorde) at this preſent, to Edward our kyng, reſtorynge thy trew religion: then in times paſt to Ezechias refourmyng thy Religiō. Be no leſſe mercyfull to England thy Churche now: then in thoſe dayes to Iury thy Churche than. But as thy heauēly grace hath ben more reueled in theſe dayes by the cōmyng of thy deare Sōne our Sauiour and mayſter Chryſte, and preachyng of the Goſpell: ſo it may pleaſe thy fatherlye loue and goodnes, to beſtow vpon vs more abundaunce of the ſame fauourable grace and mercy, according to thy wyl in this our hūble requeſt. Do thys O moſt mercyful Father for thy owne names ſake, and for the merytes and death of thy Sonne our only medyator and redemer Ieſus Chriſte.
            Amen.
         
      
      
         
            Imprynted at London in Fleteſtrete at the Sygne of the Roſe Garland, by wyllyam Copland.
         
      
   