
      
         
            
            
            
               ❧A BOKE OF
very Godly Pſalmes
and prayers, dedicated to
the Lady Letice Vicounteſſe
of Hereforde.
            
               GEVE GOD THE GLORYE NOWE AND EVER MORE
            
            ¶IMPRINTED AT
London, in Fleteſtreate at
the ſigne of the Faucon, by
Wylliam Griffith.
1570.
         
         
            
            
            
               ❧TO THE RIGHT
Honorable and verteous Ladye:
My Ladye Letice Vicounteſſe
of Hereforde. &c.
            
               MAdame: amonges many
my gratious Lorde your huſbandes,
bounden and faythfull
vaſſales: whome his L. bountie
and Noble vertues doe dayly
purchaſe abrode (vnknowne
to your Honour) I am one: who in my late
ſickely ſolitarineſſe, for the recreation of my
weake ſoule, compacted and deuiſed theſe fewe
Pſalmes and prayers, which by the commendation
of the godly and learned, I haue published:
not to ſupplye the ſcarcitie, but to increaſe
the plentie of heauenly comfortes, wherof
England floweth: God graunt vs to vſe
theim to his glory, that we maye continually
poſſeſſe the light of his louinge countenaunce
Amen. Dedications of works both great and
ſmale, are comon, for diuerſe reſpectes. Then
let my poore little labour, haue libertie to beſtowe
it ſelfe, where it woulde gladlieſt ſhewe
the token of a thanckefull harte. Right Honorable

my good Lady, be it therfore your will,
to take this well meante ſimple trauaile, to your
vſe and tuition, that by your eſtimation of the
ſame, it maye growe common and acceptable
amongſt the verteous ſorte of Ladies and gentlewomen:
praying it may be ſo faythfully occupied,
as it was of the Authour zelouſly purpoſed,
who, your thrall: am of ready endeuour,
to honour and to ſerue my good Lorde and
you: by all the wayes I canne: humbly beſeeching
my heauenly Father to preſerue and
to bleſſe you both with longe lyfe in
happie dayes, repleate with grace
and all maner of heauenly
bleſsinges, to your permanent
aſſuraunce,
of true felicitie.
Amen.
            
               Your good La. aſſuredly
bounden.
Roger Edwardes.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶The firſt forme of prayer. 1.
            
               
                  VP O ſinfull ſoule, and looke
vpon the Lorde of light, and
lyfe: ſée thine owne ſtate:
how thou art clothed with ignorance,
ſinne and ſhame: how
thou art deformed, an abominable
filthie, and ouglye Monſtar: a caytife
and a bond ſlaue to Sathan: a fleſhly beaſt
and a foole: vnworthy to lyft thy head toward
the ſeate and maieſtie of our God: or to ſtand
in the aſſembly of the wyſe. Therfore
ſhake off thy earthly ſtuggiſhnes: and get thée
before the Lorde of grace and mercy, in lowlines
and repentaunce, hée is full of fatherly
pitie and compaſſion and will not refuſe thée:
ſubmitte thy ſelfe with teares: and he
will accept thée: he will forgeue
thée thy ſinnes, and enritche
thée with wiſedome beautie
and glory. Therfore
tarye not, and
thou ſhalt be
bleſſed.
            
            
               
               ¶O ſpare me a little, and ſuffer me to recouer
my ſtrength O Lord, before I goe from
hence and be no more ſeene.
               
                  TO thée O Lord, belongeth mercye
and forgeuenes: Bowe
downe thy fatherly eye, O
God, and pitifullye beholde
the dampnable ſtate of mée
thy wretched and ſinfull ſeruaunt,
which am vnworthy, but through thy
incomprehencible mercye, once to thinke,
much leſſe to lifte my head and voyce toward
thy heauenly ſeate and maieſtie. Therfore
in the bowelles of thy fatherly loue and pitie,
I beſeche thée O déere Father for Chriſt
Ieſus ſake thy ſwéete Sonne our Sauiour,
to mollifie my hart with thy grace, that humbly
confeſſing my manifold ſinnes and wickednes,
and from the botome of my hart throughly
repentinge the ſame. I maye by thaide
of thy holy ſpirite, frame and gouerne the
reſt of my lyfe in the wayes of thy commaundementes,
that iuſtified in thy grace, I
may with the reſt of thy choſen ſainctes, geue
continuall prayſe and thanks vnto thy eternall
maieſtie, through Chriſt our déere Lorde

and Sauiour: Who with thée and the holy
Ghoſt, reigneth in vnitie of glory and power
ſanctified for euer and euer. Amen.
            
            
               Pſalmes.
               
                  BLeſſed are they that walke
in thy lawes O Lord, for they
are, vndefiled in the waye.
               Bleſſed are they that kéepe
thy teſtimonies: ſekinge thée
in the truth of their hart.
               I make my humble petition vnto thée,
with my whole hart: O be mercifull vnto
me according to thy word.
               Inſtructe my hart in thy wiſedome, teach
me O Lord, and lead me forth in thy pathes:
open my lippes to publiſh thy prayſe, exalting
the glory of thy maieſtie with thanks geuing.
For thou art the Lord our God, thou haſte
faſhoned and made vs, and not we our ſelues.
               We are thy people, whom thou haſt prepared
in the ſecrets and power of thy wiſedome.
               We are thy ſhéepe whom thou preſerueſt,
and filleſt with the bountie of thy bleſſing.
               The heauens & earth with all the things
in them contayned, are the workes of thy

hands O God, framed, wrought, gouerned
and preſerued, by thy omnipotent wyll and
power.
               All thinges depend of thée O Lord, and
without thée is no beinge.
               Lord thou haſt bene our refuge from one
generation to another, before the mounteynes
weare brought forth: or euer the
worlde was made: thou art our God from
euerlaſting, and world without ende.
               Be mercifull vnto me therfore O my god:
let me come before thy preſence with ſonges
of thankeſgeuinge, reioycing in thée O Lord
the ſtrength of my ſaluation.
               My ſoule cleaueth faſt vnto the duſt, O
quicken thou me according to thy truth, facioninge
my harte, after thy Teſtimonies, for
therein is lyfe.
               O turne awaye myne eyes from vanitie,
and my harte from coueteouſnes, and quicken
me in the wayes of thy ſtatutes O God.
               Thou art gratious O Lord, make me obedient
vnto thy word, for thy mercy endureth
for euer.
               GRatious and righteous art thou Lorde,
thou teacheſt ſinners in the way: her eſt
them when the cal vpon thée and ſaueſt

them in thy mercye.
               Great is thy mercy O Lord, full of compaſſion
longe ſuffering and ready to forgeue,
plenteous in goodnes and truth.
               Thy mercifull kindnes is euer more and
more toward vs: thy truth O Lorde is euerlaſtinge.
               Myne eyes are lookinge towarde thée O
God, paciently waitinge for thy mercy wherin
I truſt.
               Hide not thy face from me O Lorde, for
I am in trouble: O haſt thée to ſuccour me.
               Deale with me according to thy name, O
God, ſweete is thy mercy, O deliuer me, for
I am weake and helpeleſſe, my hart is wounded
within me: my comforte is in thy worde
O Lord.
               Vnto thée O Lord doe I lifte vp my ſoule:
in thée is my truſt, let me not be confounded,
neither, let the enemie triumphe ouer me.
               Leaue me not in deſſolation and miſery
O Lord, leaſt th' enimie hath cauſe to ſaye,
that thou haſt forſaken me, and lefte me to
the will of his tirrannye.
               Here me, O Lord, in the multitude of thy
mercyes, and in the truth of thy ſaluation deliuer
me.
               I goe hence lyke the ſhadow of a clowd,

and am driuen awaye as the graſſe hopper.
               My beautie wythereth as the haye, and
my glory fadeth as the flower of the féelde.
               As the whéele ronneth her courſe, ſo paſſe
I through this vale, caryinge nothing with
me, neither haue I time to behold the things
I haue.
               My lyfe is but a ſpanne longe, I am euer
lookinge into my graue: for the place wherin
I now floriſh, is redy to refuſe me, neither
will it receaue me any more.
               O Lord teach me to conſider the ſhortnes
of my dayes, and ſapplie my hart to wiſedome.
               Thou art of my inheritaunce the onely
portion: I haue choſen thée for my parte, forſake
me not O God.
               Thou art alwayes by me, thou O Lorde
haſt holden me vp by my right hand.
               Whom haue I in heauen but thée, neither
is there any in earth that I deſire, but
onely thée O Lord.
               My fleſh and my harte are weake, and euer
fayling, but thou God art the ſtrength of my
ſoule, and my porcion for euer.
               Be thou my ſtrong holde O Lord, wherevnto
I may alway reſorte: thou haſt promiſed
to helpe me, thou art my houſe of defence
and my Caſtle.
               
                  
Rydde me O Lorde and deliuer me in thy
righteouſnes: Incline thine eare to me and
ſaue me.
               Through thée haue I bene holden vp, euer
ſithens I was borne: thou art he that
toke me out of my mothers wombe: my
prayſe ſhalbe alwayes of thée.
               Call to remembrance thy tender mercies
which haue bene euer of olde.
               Remember not the ſinnes and offences of
my youth: but according to thy mercy thinke
thou vpon me O Lorde for thy goodnes.
               Caſt me not out of thy preſence, forſake
me not in my weakenes, but comfort me in
thy mercy O God.
               Sh
                     •
                  we me thy wayes, teach me thy truth,
and lead me forth in the pathes therof O
Lorde.
               Teach me thy ſtatutes, O God & quicken
me with thy grace for thou Lord art my Sauiour,
in thée onely is my hope and truſt foreuermore.
               Go not farre from me O God: God haſt
thée to deliuer me.
               Take me out of the myre that I ſinke not,
O ſaue me from theym that hate me: Yea out
of the handes of the vnrighteous and cruell
man, Lord deliuer me.
               
                  
Let not the water flooddes of ſinne and ſorowe
drowne me, let not the depe ſwallowe
me vppe, let not the pitte ſhutte her mouth
on me, O my Sauiour.
               Drawe nighe vnto my ſoule and ſaue it,
O deliuer me becauſe of thy righteouſnes.
               Holde vp my goinges O Lord, and guide
my footeſteppes in thy pathes that I ſlippe
not.
               I call vpon thée O Lorde, for thou wilte
here me: incline thyne care vnto me, and
harken vnto my wordes.
               Shew thy maruailouſe louing kindneſſe,
thou that art of them that truſt in thée, the
gracious Lord and Sauiour.
               When my harte is in heauines, I will
from the endes of the earth, call vpon thée O
God, and thou ſhalt ſet me vpon thy rocke,
for thou art my hope and ſtronge Tower againſt
the enimie.
               I wyll dwell in thy tabernacle for euer,
and my truſt ſhalbe vnder the couering of thy
winges O God.
               Thou haſt geuen a tooken to ſuch as feare
thée, that they may triumphe becauſe of thy
truth.
               Thou O Lord hereſt the deſires of thy ſeruauntes,
and geueſt an heritage to theyme

that feare and loue thy name.
               Therefore are thy beloued deliuered, here
me O Lord and helpe me.
               O ſtabliſh me according to thy word that
I may lyue, and let me not be diſapoynted
of my hope.
               Holde thou me vp and I ſhalbe ſafe, yea
my delight ſhalbe euer in thy ſtatutes.
               Thou O Lorde art my defence and my
ſhield, my truſt is in thy worde.
               Therfore wyll I goe forth in the ſtrength
of thy grace, makinge mention of thy righteouſnes.
               Then will I ioyefully ſinge to thée, O my
God: for thou art my refuge my mercifull
Lord and Sauiour.
               THou O God ſendeſt raygne vpon thyne
inheritaunce, and refreſheſt it when it
is weary.
               Thy congregations ſhall dwell therein,
for thou. O Lord, haſt prepared for the poore.
               Thou haſt geuen thy word, O God, great
is thy beautie and power of thy meſſengers,
let righteouſnes poſſeſſe the land O lord.
               Yea Lord let thy gratious light of thy
mercifull countenaunce, ſhyne vpon thy people.
               
                  
Geue knowledge of the wayes to the ſimple:
let all nations ſee the ſaluation of thy
Sainctes.
               Let all tongues and kinreddes prayſe thy
name O God, and reioyce, for thou wilt iudge
thy folke in the righteouſnes of thy truth.
               Thy kingdome is ouer al, make thy name
knowne, from one end of the earth to the
other.
               Thou art our God O Lord, and thou onely
art to be prayſed: which helpeſt vs in our
diſtreſſe, and filleſt vs with thy benifittes.
               Thou art our God, euen the God from
whom commeth ſaluation: thou art our
Lord and God by whom we ſcape death and
diſtruction.
               O thinke vpon thy congregation whom
thou haſt redemed and purchaſed of olde.
               Thinke vppon the tribe of thine inheritaunce,
and mount Sion wherein thou haſte
dwelte.
               Suffer not thaduerſary to triumphe, that
blaſphemeth thy name, plucke thy hand out
of thy boſome and conſume theyme.
               Lifte vp thy féete, thou that maieſt diſtroy
euery enimie, which meaneth to do euill in
thy ſanctuary.
               Let thine enemies be ſcattered, O Lord

ariſe and vanquiſhe theyme for euermore.
               Make them to vaniſhe lyke the ſmoke
that they be no more ſene: yea let the glory
and power of the vngodly periſhe at thy preſence
O God, ſo, that it may haue no more
place vpon earth.
               Let their table be made a ſnare to take
theym ſelues withall: and let the thinges
that ſhould haue bene to there wealth be an
occaſion of there diſtruction.
               Let their eyes be blind and ſée not, and euer
bowe downe their backes.
               Power out thine indignation vpon them,
and let all thy wrathfull diſpleaſure take hold
of theim.
               Let them fall, from one wickednes to another,
and not come vnto thy righteouſnes.
               Let them be wyped out of the Booke of
lyfe: and not be written amonges the righteous.
               Let all theym be aſhamed and conſumed
that ſeke after the ſoules of the Innocentes:
yea let theym periſhe without redemption,
that, for hatred to thy name, immagine
myſchéefe to thy Sainctes.
               Thou art our God and Kyng of olde, the
helpe that is done vpon earth, it is thou thy
ſelfe that doeſt O Lord.
               
                  
O deliuer not the ſoule of thy turtle
Doue vnto the multitude of her enimies, forget
not the congregation of the poore for euer.
               Geue victory vnto thy people, deliuer them,
and make them to dippe their féele in the
bloud of thyne enymies.
               Looke vpon thy couenaunt O God, let not
the ſimple goe awaye aſhamed, but let the
poore reioyce & be merry in yt there Sauiour:
               Let the righteous geue thankes, in thabundaunce
of peace, and prayſe thy name, O
Lord for euer and euer. Amen.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XVII. of Iohn.
               THeſe things ſpake Ieſus, and lift vp his eyes to
heauen, & ſaid, Father the houre is come: glorifie
thy Sonne, that thy Sonne alſo may glorifie thē,
As thou haſte giuen him power ouer all fleſhe, that he
ſhulde giue eternal life, to all them that thou haſt giuen
him. And this is life eternal, that they knowe thee to be
the onely verie God, and whome thou haſt ſent. Ieſus
Chriſt. I haue glorified the on ye earth: I haue finiſhed
the worke which thou gaueſt me to do, And now glorifi
me, thou Father, with thine owne ſelfe, with the
glorie which I had with thee before the worlde was.
I haue declarede thy Name vnto the men which thou
gaueſt me out of the worlde: thine they were, and thou
gaueſt them me, and they haue kept thy worde. Nowe
they knowe that all things whatſoeuer thou haſt giuen
me, are of the. For I haue giuen vnto them the wordes
which thou gaueſt me, and they haue receiued them, and

haue known ſurely that I came out from thee, and haue
beleued that thou haſt ſent me. I pray for them: I pray
not for the world, but for them which thou haſt geuen
me: for they are thyne. And all mine are thine, and thine
are mine, and I am glorified in them. And now am I
no more in the worlde, but theſe are in the worlde, and
I come to thee. Holy Father, kepe them in thy Name,
euen them whom thou haſt geuen me, that they may be
one, as we are. Whyle I was with them in the world,
I kept them in thy name: thoſe that thou gaueſt me,
haue I kept, and none of them is loſt, but the childe of
perdition, that the Scripture might be fulfilled. And
nowe come I to thee, and theſe thinges ſpeake I in the
worlde, that they might haue my ioye fulfilled in them
ſelues. I haue geuen them thy worde, and the worlde
hath hated them, becauſe they are not of the worlde, as
I am not of the world. I pray not that thou ſhouldeſt
take them out of the worlde, but that thou kepe them
from euill. They are not of the world, as I am not of
the worlde. Sanctifie them with thy trueth: thy word
is trueth. As thou dideſt ſend me into the world, ſo haue
I ſent them into the worlde. And for their ſakes ſantifie
I my ſelfe, that they alſo may be ſanctified through the
trueth. I praye not for theſe alone, but for them alſo
which ſhall beleue in me, through their worde. That
they all may be one, as thou, O Father, art in me, and
I in thee: euen that they may be alſo one in vs, that the
world may beleue that thou haſt ſent me. And the glory
that thou gaueſt me, I haue geuen them, that they may
be one, as we are one, I in them, and thou in me, that
they may be made perfect in one, and that the world may
knowe, that thou haſt ſent me, and haſt loued them, as
thou haſt loued me. Father, I will that they which thou
haſt giuen me, be with me euen where I am, that they
may behold my glory, which thou haſt geuen me: for
thou louedſt me before the foundation of the world. O

righteous Father, the world alſo hath not knowne thee,
but I haue knowne thee, and theſe haue knowne, that
thou haſt ſent me. And I haue declared vnto them thy
Name, and wyll declare it, that the loue wherwith thou
haſt loued me, may be in them, and I in them.
               
                  WE acknowledge and prayſe thée O glorious
God almightie, maker of heauen
and earth. Creatour of all thinges viſible
and inuiſible.
                  To thée O Lord, all powers doe bowe,
heauen and earth with all that is in them,
are gouerned by thy will, as obedient to thy
commaundement.
                  Eche thinge doth teſtifie thy glorye and
power, O God.
                  The Angelles and Sainctes continually
crye vnto thée, Holy art thou, holy art thou,
holy art thou, which was, is, and euer ſhalbe.
                  The Patriarches and Prophets with thy
choſen Sainctes and witneſſes, haue teſtified
and taught thy holy truth will and maieſtie.
                  They haue witneſſed the promiſed Meſſias,
his incarnation, and natiuitie
                  His Baptiſme and annoynting, his workes,
and doctrine, his apprehenſion and examination.
His death and paſſion, his reſurrection,
and aſcention.
                  The procéedinge of the holy Ghoſt the

promiſed comforter.
                  Who purchaſing our hartes, by the operation
of thy grace, faſhioneth the ſame, to
beleue the premiſſes.
                  And that thy déere Sonne Chriſt Ieſus
through his bloud and righteouſnes: hath
deliuered vs from the curſſe of the lawe, reconcilinge
vs to thy fauour.
                  So that being called through frée grace
and adoption, we are made coheires with him
whereby we call Father.
                  He ſitteth on thy right hand, gloryfied
with maieſtie and power our all.
                  He maketh continuall interceſſion for ſinners:
tyll the number of thy choſen be filled.
                  Then ſhall the ende come, Heauen and
Earth ſhalbe diſolued, the liuinge ſhalbe
changed, the dead ſhall ariſe: and he ſhall
come with glory to iudge them bothe.
                  Him with thée O Father, we prayſe and
glorifye: by whoſe merittes and righteouſnes
thou haſt opened the kyngdome of Heauen,
to thine electe, wherfore, O Lorde helpe thy
ſeruauntes. Whom thou haſt redéemed with
the precious bloud of thy Sonne.
                  Make vs to be numbred, with thy choſen
to enioye, the glory and bliſſe euerlaſting.
                  Saue thy people O Lord, and bleſſe thine
                  
                     
inheritage.
                  Gouerne vs, and guide vs, and defend vs,
againſt the world and Sathan.
                  Communicate thy grace vnto vs, that we
beinge filled with thy giftes O Lorde, maye
euermore prayſe thy name with continuall
thankeſgeuinge.
                  Circumſiſe our harts with thy grace, that
beinge decided from this witching world: we
may wholy cleaue vnto thée, O Lord.
                  Lift vs vp out of the myre O God, that
we ſinke not in corruption. Deliuer vs O
Chriſt our Sauiour, from ſinne and death,
that we may poſſeſſe the kyngdome which
thou haſt prepared for thy Sainctes.
                  O Lord haue mercy vpon vs, haue mercy
vpon vs Lord, and let the light of thy countenaunce
ſhine vpon vs.
                  Make vs to put our truſt in thée O Lord,
ſo ſhall we neuer be confounded.
                  Arme our hartes with humilitie and pacience
O God, that cleauinge faſt vnto thée,
we maye deſpiſe and vanquiſhe, the malice,
wrath, aſſaultes, and perſecutions of Sathan
and this wicked worlde. For in thée is our
helpe comforte and ſaluation.
               
            
            
               
               ¶Prayers.
               
                  O Mercifull Lord and louinge father, that
for performance of thy mercy promiſed,
in the ſecret purpoſe of thine inſerchable will
and power: dideſt ſend thy déere Sonne to
take vpon him our fleſhly ſhape & ſubſtaunce:
in whom thou art pleaſed, and by whoſe merites
and righteouſnes thou art pacified, toward
ſuch of Adames loſſe children, as thou
haſt choſen and called to ſaluation, throughe
fayth and holy conuerſation in Chriſt Ieſus.
As it hath pleaſed thy deuine maieſtie of thy
frée grace and goodnes, to reueale thy ſelfe
vnto vs wretches by the working of thy holy
Spirite in beleuing the Goſpel of thy Sonne:
So be it thy will O louing Father, pardoninge
our frailties, to haue mercy vpon vs:
ayding our infirmities with the power of thy
grace, againſt the concupiſence of the filthy
fleſh, againſt the illuſions of the fooliſh world,
and againſt the craftle ſuggeſtions of Sathan:
that we be not ouercomed nor hurted
therby, but faſtened in thy Sonne, to growe
in all maner of godlines, to that heauenly
perfection that is requiſite in thy ſainctes,
for the glorifyinge of thy name: wherby we

may poſſeſſe the glorie, bliſſe, and eternall
lyfe which thou haſt promiſed and performeſt
to all them that thou art willing to ſaue, in
the bloud and righteouſnes of thy ſwéete
Sonne, Chriſt the Sauiour: to whom with
thée and the holy Ghoſt, reigninge in vnitie
of maieſtie power and glory be all prayſe honour
and thankes for euer more. Amen.
               
                  O Déere Father for thy ſwete Sonnes ſake
Ieſus Chriſt our mercifull Lord and Sauiour,
haue mercy vpon vs. And in the
bowelles of thy fatherly goodnes and pittie,
here vs ſinners: here vs good Lorde, and for
the glory of thy name graunt our humble petitions.
Which we offer vnto thy deuine
maieſtie, throughe Chriſt our redéemer and
aduocate.
               
                  O Mercifull Lord and louing Father that of
thine inſerchable prouidence, goodnes and
power, dydeſt prepare the glorious globe of
heauenly light, to walke and appere in the
bondes of thy commaundement, to the vniuerſall
comforte, preſeruation and bliſſe of
man in this tranſitory beinge, and the reſt of
thy creatures, comprehended within the compaſſe
of the tranſitory and viſible heauens

Geue vs thy frayle and drerie ſeruauntes the
light of thy heauenly grace, ſo to ſhyne in our
hartes, that leading our liues in pure holines
and vertue: we maye ioyefully féele the preſence
of thy diuine maieſtie in our ſoules to
the inuincible, gladnes, ſtrength, peace, and
ſaluation of the ſame: throughe thy déere
Sonne Chriſt Ieſus our Sauiour, reyguing
with thée and the holy Ghoſt, in vnitie of maieſtie,
eternall honour and glory, praiſed and
halowed for euermore. Amen.
               
               
                  O Mercifull Lord and louing Father, looke
fauorably vpon me thy frayle & wretched
creature: humble my harte to the repentant
confeſſion of my ſinnes, geue me the helpe
of thy holy ſpirite to amend my lyfe: and O
Lorde, guide and bleſſe all my thoughtes,
workes, and words, with thy heauenly grace,
that in all things obaying thy wil. I may worthely,
through Chriſt giue honor, glory & praiſe
to thée o father, in this & in ye world to com amē
                  
               
               
                  O Father of grace, mercy, and comforte,
thou knoweſt my wantes and imperfections,
reforme me, and bleſſe me,
preſerue me. In thy tuition, make me obedient,
faythfull and diligent in my vocation,

euer reioycinge in thée O Lord, through my
Sauiour Chriſt: in whoſe bloud and righteouſnes
thou haſt purchaſed thy choſen ſaincts
to beleue in thy promiſes to their ſaluation,
wherby iuſtified in thy mercy, we are bolde
notwithſtanding thodiouſe bourden of our
ſinnes, through thy déere ſonne Ieſus, to call
vpon thy moſt glorious maieſtie as he hath
taught vs ſaying with humble and ioyefull
hartes.
               ¶Our father which art in heauen halowed
be thy name, thy kyngdome come, thy wilbe
done in earth, as it is in heauen: geue vs this
daye our dayly bread: forgeue vs our treſpaſſes:
as we forgiue them that treſpaſſe againſt
vs. And lead vs not into temptation, but deliuer
vs from euill, for thou onely art Kyng,
thou onely art mightie, thou onely art glorious,
prayſed in thy workes for euer more.
Amen.
               
               
                  O Lord ſaue thy Church, and bleſſe thy congregations.
               Lord make thy name knowen and feared
throughout all the worlde, and let all nations
profeſſe Chriſt the Sauiour in the truth of thy
Goſpell.
               Lord deſtroye th'enimies of thy word, And

defend the louers of the ſame.
               Geue vs plentie of true Preachers and
Miniſters of thy worde.
               And make vs habundant in good workes.
Lorde comforte the poore.
               And make the ritche plentifull in charitie.
               Lorde bleſſe thy people with grace.
               That in all thinges they maye ſéeke the
glory of thy name.
               Bleſſe me O God, and preſerue me in
thy fatherly tuition: powre forth th'abundante
bountie of thy good gyftes vpon my
poore familye and children.
               That in the ritches of peace, ioye, and
loue, we maye prayſe and magnifie thy name,
to the which be all honour and thankes for
euer and euer. Amen.
               
            
         
         
            
               ❧The ſecond forme
of prayer.
            
               
                  
                     O
                   Lord make humble my harte
to confeſſe my ſinnes wherein
I haue miſerably offended, and
wretchedly declined, from thy
moſt holy wyll and maieſtie: ſo
that I am not worthy to preſent

my ſelfe before thée O God: but it lyketh
thée of thy endleſſe pitie to receaue ſinners
whenſoeuer the turne vnto thée, it lieth
in thy wyll to conuert vs. Turne vs therfore
O Lord, and turne thou vnto vs and haue
mercy vpon vs: ſet vs at libertie in thy grace,
loſe our hartes from worldly affections and
purge vs from thilluſions of the ſame, ſtrēgth
en vs againſt Sathan: comforte and inſtruct
our weake blindnes, with thy holy ſpirite, that
we maye open our mouthes through Chriſt
our Sauiour, to prayſe thy name O God with
thankeſgeuing, to the which be honour and
glory perpetuall. Amen.
               
               ¶Learne to knowe and ſerue the Lorde, O
my ſoule: for it is louely to prayſe and extoll
the name of our God.
            
            
               Pſalmes.
               
                  THou broughteſt a vine out of
Egipte, thou threweſt out the
Hethen, O Lorde, and dideſt
plante it in their habitations
where takinge roote it proſpered,
and filled all the Land.
               The hilles were couered with the ſhadow

therof, and the bowghes of it weare as the
Cedar trées.
               She ſtreatched out her branches into the
Sea, and her ſprayes into the Riuer.
               Plenteous was her frute, thy people
dranke of her grapes, and weare refreſhed.
               Thou thy ſelfe tookeſt charge therof O
Lorde: with thine owne handes dydeſt thou
fence it round about, and ſemeſt to take high
pleaſure there in.
               How is it then come to paſſe, that her hedges
are all broken, her frythes are troden
downe, her grapes be common to the ſpoylers?
               Yea the wilde Boore doth roote it vp, and
the wilde beaſtes of the féelde deuowre it.
               Turne thée againe, O Lord God of hoſtes,
loke downe and ſée thy vyneyarde, which thou
thy ſelfe with thy right hand haddeſt planted,
makinge the branches of it beautifull and
ſtronge for thine owne pleaſure, and for the
plentifull commoditie of thy ſeruauntes.
               It is cutte downe and brent, the diſtroyers
haue ſpoyled it, and layde it waſt in deſpite of
thée, O Lord. Behold O God where once thou
tokeſt pleaſure, and where thy people weare
refreſhed, it is now mored vp, by the ſwine
of the aduerſaries, and is become the harbroughe
of Wolfes and Foxes.
               
                  
Heare O thou Shepeheard of Iſraell, thou
that leadeſt Ioſephe lyke a ſheepe, thou that
ſitteſt on the Cherubins: ſture vp thy ſtrength
O Lord, and helpe thy ſeruauntes: diſtroys
theſe men of malice.
               O Lord how long wilt thou be angrye?
ſhall thy ieoloſie burne like fyre for euer?
               Turne againe, O God, & ſhew vs the light
of thy countenaunce, and we ſhalbe whole.
               O remember not our ſinnes, but haue
mercy vpon vs: and that ſone, leaſt we fale
into miſery.
               Helpe vs O Lord, for the glory of thy name:
O our Sauiour deliuer vs, be mercifull to our
ſinnes for thy names ſake.
               O let the ſorowfull ſighinges of thy priſoners
come before thée: according to the greatnes
of thy power and mercy, preſerue thou
thoſe, O God, that are appoynted to dye.
               O Lord howe longe wilt thou be angrye
with thy ſeruauntes: howe longe wilt thou
fede thiem with the bread of ſorowe, and giue
them plenteouſnes of teares to drinke?
               Thou haſt made them a verie ſtrife vnto
there neighbours: and there enimies laughe
them to ſcorne.
               Tunre thée againe O Lord God of hoſtes,
ſhewe vs the light of thy countenaunce and
and we ſhalbe whole.
               
                  
Poure out thine indignation vpon the
Heathen, and vpon them that feare not thy
name, for they haue deuoured thy ſeruaunts,
and layd waſt thy dwelling place.
               And for the blaſphemie wherewith they
haue refiled thy maieſtie, reward thou them
O Lord ſeuenfolde in there boſomes.
               O my God diſtroye thine enimies, make
them like vnto a whéele, lyke duſt before the
wynde, and lyke drye ſtrawe in the flame.
               Let thy wrath be kindled againſt them,
O Lorde, lyke the fyre that bourneth vp the
woodde, and as the flame that couſumeth the
mountaynes.
               Perſicute them with thy tempeſt, teare
them aſonder with thy thunder boltes, diſtroye
them with thy ſtormes, make thē to mealt in
deſperation, for feare of thy maieſtie, O God
moſt highe.
               Let them be confounded and vexed euer,
more and more, let them, be aſhamed, and
knowne, that thou whoſe name is Iehoua, are
th'onely moſt high God of power and maieſtie
ouer all.
               Then we that be thy people and the ſhepe
of thy paſture, ſhall reioyce and be gladde,
prayſing thy name, O Lord, withmelodie and
thankeſgiuing, from generation to generaton

world without end. Amen.
               
               BLeſſed are the people that reioyce in thée
O Lord, they ſhall walke in the light of
thy countenaunce and be ioyefull.
               There delight ſhalbe dayly in thy word,
and in thy righteouſnes ſhall they make their
hoaſt.
               For thou art the glory of there ſtrength,
and in thy louing kindnes, ſhalt thou O Lorde
make ſure their habitation and honour.
               Thou art there Lord and defender, there
Kyng and onely Souiour.
               Whoſoeuer dwelleth vnder thy defence O
moſt highe ſhall abyde vnder the ſhadowe of
th'almightie.
               For thou wilt ſend from Heauen, to ſaue
vs from the reprofe of them that would eate
vs vppe.
               We will ſaye vnto thée O Lord, thou art
our ſtrong holde, and our hope, our God in
whom we truſt and reioyce.
               Thou ſhalt be mercifull vnto vs, O God:
for our defence is vnder the ſhadowe of thy
winges: yea Lord thou ſhalt deliuer vs from
the ſnare of the hunter and cruell man, from
the plague, and from the noiſome peſtilence.
               Thou wilt ſend forth thy mercy O God,

our hope and comfort is in thy truth, we dwell
among the Wolues and Foxes, our ſoules
are among the Lions.
               Thou Lord wilt make vs glad throughe
thy workes: and the remembraunce of thy
benifittes ſhall make vs ioyefull in geuinge
thankes.
               When the vngodly are gréene as graſſe,
floriſhinge in their wickednes, as the Baye
trée, then ſhall they periſhe in there thoughts,
and in there workes ſhall they be diſtroyed
for euermore.
               The righteous ſhall floriſhe like a Palme
trée, and ſhall ſpread like a Cedar in Libanus.
               
               Such as be planted in thy houſe, O Lord,
ſhall continually proſper in the courtes of thy
habitation: they ſhalbe beautified with all
maner of bleſſinges: and ſtanding in the glory
of thy preſence ſhall extoll and prayſe thy
greatnes for euermore. Amen.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VIII. to the Romaines.
               NOw then their is no condemnation to them that
are in Chriſt Ieſus, which walke not after the
fleſh, but after the Spirite. For the Lawe of
the Spirite of lyfe which is in Chriſt Ieſus, hath freied
me from the Lawe of ſinne and of death: For (that that
was impoſible to the Law, in as much as it was weake

becauſe of the fleſh) God ſendinge his owne Sonne, in
the ſimilitude of ſinfull fleſh, and for ſinne, condemned
ſinne in the fleſh, That the righteouſnes of the Lawe
might be fulfilled in vs, which walke not after the fleſh,
but after the Spirite. For they that are after the fleſh,
ſauour the thinges of the fleſh: but they that are after
the Spirite, the thinges of the Spirite. For the wiſedome
of the fleſh is death: but the wiſedome of the ſpirite
is lyfe and peace, Becauſe the wiſedome of the fleſh
is enimitie againſt God: for it is not ſubiect to the Law
of God, neither indede can be. So then they that are in
the fleſh, cannot pleaſe God. Now ye are not in the fleſh,
but in the Spirite, becauſe the Spirite of God dwelleth
in you: but if any man hath not the Spirite of Chriſt,
the ſame is not his. And if Chriſt be in you, the bodie is
dead, becauſe of ſinne: but the ſpirite is lyfe for righteouſnes
ſake. But if the ſpirite of him that raiſed vp Ieſus
from the dead, dwell in you, he that raiſed vp Chriſt
frō the dead, ſhal alſo quickē your mortal bodies, becauſe
that his Spirite dwelleth in you. Therfore bretherne,
we are detters not to the fleſh, to liue after the fleſh:
For if ye liue after the fleſh, ye ſhall dye: but if ye moreffye
the dedes of the bodie by the Spirite, ye ſhall liue.
For as many as are led by the ſpirite of God, they are
the ſonnes of God. For ye haue not receiued the ſpirite
of bondage to feare againe: but ye haue receiued the ſpirite
of adoption, whereby we crye Abba Father. The
ſame ſpirite beareth witneſſe with our ſpirite, that we
are the children of God. If we be children, we are alſo
heires, euen the heires of God, and heires annexed with
Chriſt, if ſo be that we ſuffer with him, that we maye
alſo be glorified with him. For I count the afflictions
of this preſent time are not worthy of the glorie, which
ſhalbe ſhewed vnto vs. For the feruent deſire of the
creature waiteth when the ſonnes of god ſhalbe reueled.
Becauſe the creature is ſubiect to vanitie, not of it owne

will, but by reaſon of him, which hath ſubdued it vnder
hope, Becauſe the creature alſo ſhalbe deliuered from
the bondage of corruption into the glorious libertie of
the ſonnes of God. For we knowe that euery creature
groneth with vs alſo, and trauaileth in paine together
vnto this preſent. And not onely the creature, but we
alſo which haue the firſt frutes of the Spirite, euen we
do ſigh in our ſelues, waiting for the adoption, euen the
redemption of our bodie. For we are ſaued by hope: but
hope that is ſene, is not hope: for howe can a man hope
for that which he ſeeth: But if we hope for that we ſee
not, we do with patience abide for it. Likewiſe the ſpirite
alſo helpeth our infirmities: for we know not what
to praye as we ought: but the ſpirite it ſelfe maketh requeſt
for vs with ſighes, which can not be expreſſed.
But he that ſearcheth the hartes, knoweth what is the
meaning of the Spirite: for he maketh requeſt for the
Sainctes, according to the will of God. Alſo we know
that all thinges worke together for the beſt vnto them
that loue God, euen to them that are called of his purpoſe.
For thoſe which he knew before, he alſo predeſtinate
to be made like to the Image of his Sonne, that
he might be the firſt borne amonge manye bretherne.
Moreouer whom he predeſtinate, them alſo he called,
and whom he called, them alſo he iuſtified, and whome
he iuſtified, them alſo glorified. What ſhall we then ſaye
to theſe thinges? If God be of our ſide, who can be againſt
vs? who ſpared not his owne Sonne, but gaue
him for vs all to death, how ſhall he not with him giue
vs all things alſo? Who ſhal laye any thing to the charge
of Gods choſen? it is God that iuſtifieth, who ſhall condemne?
it is Chriſt, which is dead, yea or rather which
is riſen againe, who is alſo at the right hand of God, and
maketh requeſt alſo for vs. Who ſhall ſeperate vs from
the loue of Chriſt? ſhall tribulation or anguiſh, or perſecucion,
or famine, or nakednes, or perrill, or ſworde?

As it is written, For thy ſake are killed all daye longe:
we are counted as ſhepe from the ſlaughter, Neuertheleſſe,
in all theſe thinges we are more then conquerers
through him that loued vs. For I am perſwaded that
neither death, no, lyfe, nor Angels, nor principalities,
nor powers, nor thinges preſent, nor thinges to come,
Nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature ſhalbe
able to ſeperate vs from the loue of God, which is in
Chriſt Ieſus our Lorde.
            
            
               ¶Prayers.
               
                  
                     O Merciful Lord and louing father, that of
thy frée grace and mercy: by the bloud
and righteouſnes of thy déere Sonne
Chriſt Ieſus, haſt deliuered vs out of the
bandes of death and darkeneſſe, and through
the working of thy holy ſpirite to beleue thy
Goſpell, haſt called and choſen vs to th'aſſuraunce
of the heaunly inheritance euerlaſting:
Haue mercy vpon vs, haue mercy vppon vs
Lord: and for thy ſwéete Sonnes ſake our
Sauiour, comforte, guide and ſtrengthen vs
with thy holy ſpirite, holding continually thy
holy hand ouer vs: ſo to paſſe throughe this
blinde and fraudfull world, that no flattery,
illuſions, nor enchantments therof deceaue
vs: and that no troubles, malice, ſtripes, perſecutions,
feare, tyrrany, torments nor death,
may ſeperate vs from thée O God: but advaunced

in triumphant victory, deſpiſing the
world, the fleſh, and the Deuell: we may in
gladſome hope wayte and deſire the comming
of our redéemer, for the diliuery of thy bleſſed
Saincts to appeare in thy gratious preſence,
in our renued bodies, glorified and immortal,
there to dwel, with Angelles and archangels
prayſing thy maieſtie with ioyefull, thankeſgeuing:
for euermore. Amen.
                  
               
               
                  BLeſſe our harts with thy grace, O Lord,
And make vs ioyefull in thy peace.
Saue thy Church O God.
                  And preſerue thy Sainctes, in the bliſſe of
thy countenaunce.
                  Comfort the nedye and diſtreſſed, O Lord.
And gladden the ſoules of them that truſt in
thée.
                  In the multitude of thy mercies here our
prayers.
                  And for the loue of the déere Sonne our
Sauiour, performe our requeſtes to the glorye
of thy name.
               
               
                  
                     O Mercifull Lord and louinge Father, in
whoſe power and bleſſinge all the creatures
of Heauen and earth doe reſt and
are preſerued: as it is proper to thy goodnes,

to fede and to cheriſh al them with the immeaſurable
bountie of thy bleſſinges: So let it
pleaſe thée, O God, to enritche vs thy frayle
and ſinnefull ſeruauntes. Not onely wyth
the knowledge of thy heauenly will and
maieſtie, but alſo with faythfull obedience to
thy worde, in which beinge taught and guided
by the powre and grace of thy holy Spirite:
we maye walke in righteouſnes before
thée all the dayes of our lyfe: through Chriſt
thy déere Sonne our Sauiour: to whome
with thée and the holy Ghoſt be all prayſe
honour, glory, and thankes, for euermore,
Amen.
                  
               
               
                  LOrde comforte vs in the waye,
And bleſſe the workes of our handes.
Saue vs, O God.
                  And make vs euermore ioyefull in
thée.
                  ¶Prayſed be thy name, O God.
               
            
         
         
            
            The thurd forme
of Prayer.
            
               
                  
                     MErcifully, beholde, O
Heauenly Lorde and Father,
th'infirmities of vs thy fraile,
and Rebellious ſeruauntes,
(whom in thy holy will, thou
haſt called to the knowledge
of the Goſpell of thy Sonne) and reliue vs
with thy grace, that being ſtrengthened with
thy holy Spirite, we may ouercome and vanquiſhe,
all the ſuggeſtions, temptations and
conſpiracies of Sathan: withſtand the malice,
perſecutions, and troubles of this wretched
world, and ſo triumphinge in heauenly
victory, wholy to reioyce in thée, O God▪
prayſinge and halowinge thy name, through
Ieſus Chriſt thy ſwete Sonne our Sauiour,
Amen.
               
               LET all knees, bowe: all hartes humble
themſelues: and all tongues publiſhe the
prayſe of our louinge God, for he is glorious
mercifull and kynde, and embraceth repentaunte
ſinners, with Fatherly pitie, and
ſatisfieth there deſires whenſoeuer they faithfully
call vpon him, through Chriſt the Lord

of grace and redemption. Therfore let vs be
mery in him and geue thankes.
            
            
               ¶PSALMES.
               
                  THy handes haue faſhoned and
made me, O God: according
to thy mercifull kyndnes thou
haſt geuen me vnderſtanding
of thy worde.
               The ſame is my comforte
in trouble: it quickeneth me at the harte:
they that loue thy name are glad when they
ſée me: becauſe I put my truſt in thy word.
               O thinke vpon me according to thy truth:
and let mercy embrace me on euery ſide.
               O looke vpon me and be mercifull vnto
me, as thou art wont to thoſe that loue thy
name.
               O let thy mercifull kindneſſe be my comforte,
according to thy worde. Yea let thy
mercifull kyndneſſe come vpon me, that I
may liue after thy commaundementes, for
therein is my delight.
               Take not the loue of thy Lawe from me,
O Let my harte faythfully truſt in thy word,
leaſt I periſhe in my trouble.
               
                  
I am thine, O ſaue me, let me not ſhrinke
from thy worde, kepe my féete from fallinge
and my thoughtes from euill wayes, O
Lorde.
               Shew me the light of thy countenaunce,
O God: and ſtabliſhe me in thy ſtatutes: that
if trouble and heauines take holde of mée:
my féete ſlippe not from thy teſtimonies.
               O deliuer me from the wrongfull dea,
linges of men, that in the ſafetie of peace,
I may applie my ſelfe wholy to thy Lawe,
for the great comforte of thy people, O God.
               When the multitude of them that hate
me for thy cauſe, do gether themſelues together
to confound me, thou ſhalt deliuer me
with thy right hand, O Lorde.
               The righteouſnes of thy worde is euerlaſtinge:
thou art the defendour and Sauiour
of thy people: there enimies ſhalbe diſperſed:
and in there owne inuentions periſh
for euermore.
               Thou ſhalt avenge thée of them, O God,
thy gracious mercye and truth to thy ſeruauntes
is euerlaſtinge, for thou wilt not
fayle them in there troubles.
               Bleſſed are thy whom thou chaſteneſt
and teacheſt in thy Lawe, thou geueſt them
pacience in time of aduerſitie: vntill the
               
                  
pitte be didgged for the vngodly.
               Thou preſerueſt the ſoules of the ſanctes:
O Lorde make vs feruent in loue, towarde
thée: and to hate the thinge that is euill:
then wilt thou with thy right hand deliuer
vs from the handes of the vngodly and deceiptfull
men.
               Correcte vs Lorde in thy mercy, and giue
vs not ouer vnto death: remember vs according
to thy fauour, that yu waſt wont to beare
vnto thy people, viſite vs with thy ſaluation,
O God.
               Though we be ſometimes afrayde, yet
is our truſt in thée, O God, neither haue we
care what fleſh is able to worke againſt vs.
               In thy word Lord, will we reioyce: and
comforte our ſelues in thy promiſe, our truſt
is in thée alone, O God, we feare not the
power of men.
               The offeringe of a frée harte wyll we
geue thée, O God, prayſing thée with comfortable
ſonges of thankeſgeuinge.
               It is thou, Lord, that deliuereſt thy folke
out of troubles, and geueſt them there deſire
vpon there enimies.
               Open vnto vs the gate of righteouſnes,
O God, that we may ſée the felicitie of thy
Sainctes, and reioyce in the gladnes of thy

choſen, and geue thankes with thine inheritance.
               We will thanke thée, O God, thou haſt
heard vs, and art become our ſaluation: thou
onely art to be prayſed, O Lorde, thou art
gratious, and thy mercy endureth for euer.
               PRayſe the Lord, O my ſoule: and all the
ſecrettes of my harte prayſe ye his holy
name.
               Prayſe the Lord, O my ſoule, and forget
not his benifittes.
               He forgeueth thée thy ſinnes, and healeth
all thine infirmities.
               He ſaueth thy lyfe from diſtruction, and
crowneth thée with mercy and louing kindnes.
               He ſatiſfieth thée with the plentie of his
bleſſinges, and cheriſheth thée in th'aboundance
of his fatherly bountie and goodnes.
               He executeth righteouſnes and iudgement,
he deliuereth thoppreſſed, and ſaueth the poore
from the tirrany of the mightie.
               He ſheweth his wayes vnto his ſeruants,
and guideth his people in the wayes of his
commaundementes.
               He is full of mercy and compaſſion, long

ſufferinge and of infinite goodnes and truth.
               He will not alwaye be chidinge, neither
kepeth he his anger for euer.
               He dealeth not with vs after our ſinnes,
neither doth he reward vs accordinge to our
iniquities.
               For loke how high the heauen is in compariſon
of the earth: ſo great is his mercye
toward them that feare him.
               Loke how wide alſo the eaſt is from the
weaſt, ſo farre hath he ſet our ſinnes, aſonder.
               Yea like as a Father pitieth his déere
childe: euen ſo is he a mercifull Lord to them
that feare him.
               For he knoweth wherof we be made, he
remembreth, that we are but duſt.
               The dayes of man are but as graſſe and
floriſheth as the flower of the féelde: for ſo
ſone as the wind goeth ouer it, it is gone, and
the place therof knoweth it no more.
               But the mercifull goodnes of the Lorde
endureth for euer and euer vpon theym, that
feare him, and his righteouſnes vpon their
childers children.
               Euen vpon ſuch as kepe his couenaunt,
and thinke vpon his commaundements to do
theym.
               The Lordes ſeate is in heauen, and his

kyngdome ruleth ouer all.
               O prayſe the Lorde ye Angelles of his,
ye that excell in ſtrength: ye that fulfill his
commaundements, harken vnto the voyce of
his wordes.
               O prayſe the Lorde all ye hoſtes, ye ſeruauntes
that do his pleaſure:
               O ſpeake good of the Lorde all ye workes
of his: in all places of his dominion: prayſe
the Lorde O my ſoule.
            
            
               CHAP. II. to the Epheſians.
               ANd you hath he quickened, that weare dead in
treſſpaſſes and ſinnes, wherein, in time paſt ye
walked, according to the courſe of this world, and
after the prince that ruleth in the aire, euen the ſpirite,
that nowe worketh in the children of diſobedience,
Among whom we alſo had our conuerſation in tyme
paſt, in the luſtes of our fleſh, in fulfilling the wil of the
fleſh, and of the minde, and were by nature the children
of wrath, as well as others. But God which is riche
in mercy, through his great loue wherwith he loued vs.
Euen when we were dead by ſinnes, hath quickened
vs together in Chriſt, by whoſe grace ye are ſaued, And
hath rayſed vs vp together, and made vs ſitte together
in the heauenly places in Chriſt Ieſus, That he might
ſhewe in the ages to come the excedinge riches of his
grace, through his kindnes towarde vs in Chriſt Ieſus.
For by grace are ye ſaued through fayth, and that
not of your ſelues: it is the gifte of God, Not of workes,
leaſt any man ſhould boaſt himſelfe. For we are

his workemanſhip created in Chriſt Ieſus vnto good
workes, which God hath ordeined, that we ſhoulde
walke in them. Wherfore remember that ye beinge in
time paſt Gentiles in the fleſh, and called vncircumciſion
of them, which are called circumciſion in the fleſh,
made with handes, That ye were, I ſaye, at that time
without Chriſt, and were aliantes from the common
wealth of Iſraell, and were ſtraungers from the couenantes
of promeſſe, and had no hope, and weare without
God in the world. But nowe in Chriſt Ieſus, ye
which once were farre of, are made nere by the bloud of
Chriſt. For he is our peace, which hath made of both
one, and hath broken the ſtoppe of the particion wall.
In abrogatinge through his fleſh the hatred, that is, the
Lawe of commaundements which ſtandeth in ordinances,
for to make of twayne one newe man in himſelfe,
ſo making peace. And that he might reconcile both vnto
God in one bodie by his croſſe, and ſlaye hatred therby,
And came, and preached peace to you which were a
farre of, and to them that were nere. For through him
we both haue an entraunce vnto the Father by one ſpirite.
Nowe therfore ye are no more ſtaungers and foreners:
but citizens with the Sainctes, and of the houſeholde
of God, And are built vpon the foundation of the
Apoſtles and Prophets, Ieuſs Chriſt himſelfe beinge
the chiefe corner ſtone, In whom all the building coupled
together, groweth vnto an holy Temple in the Lord.
In whom ye alſo are built together to be the habitation
of God by the ſpirite.
            
            
               ¶Prayers.
               
                  
                     O Mercifull Lord and louing Father, that
of the incomprehenſible riches of thy mercie,
towarde the diſobedient and loſſe

children of Adam, (who ſeruing Sathan after
the blinde and vnbrideled luſtes of the vile
fleſh were caried away through ſinne and ignoraunce
to dampnation.) Haſt reconciled vs
to thy fauour through grace and adoption in
Chriſt Ieſus the righteous, by fayth and holy
conuerſation in whom: we are deliuered from
eternall death and deſtruction: Haue mercy
vpon vs, yea Lord haue mercy vpon vs: and
for loue of thy ſwete ſonne our Redéemer,
defend vs againſt the power of the diſtroyer,
& with thy mightie hand lyft vs vp out of
the fylthie puddle, and deathfull corruption of
this abhominable world, purifying our harts
with thy grace, that, we, beinge wholy inclined
to heauenly deſires: may growe perfecte
in all holines, and aboundinge in the
good workes, which thou haſt prepared for
thy Sainctes to walke in, for the glorifiinge
of thy name: we may growe an acceptable
Temple, for thy continuall dwelling in vs.
O Lorde: to th'inſpeakeable peace and
comforte, and to the euerlaſting bliſſe
and ſaluation of our ſoules:
Through Chriſt our Sauiour.
Amen.
                  
               
               
                  
                     
LOrde let not the darkenes of ignoraunce,
comprehend vs.
                  Leade vs by the continuall light of thy
grace to worke righteouſnes.
                  Let vs not ſlepe in ſinne, O God.
Quicken our weake ſoules againſt earthly
ſluggiſhnes.
                  Geue vs the heauenly reaſt of thy inſpeakable
peace, O Lord.
                  And nurriſhe vs with thy grace to ſaluation.
                  Pitiefully here our complaintes O déere
Father.
                  And graunt our requeſtes for thy ſwéete
Sonnes ſake our Sauiour.
               
               
                  
                     O Mercifull Lorde and louing Father, remember
th'infirmities of thy frayle ſeruauntes,
aſſiſtinge our weake ſoules with
thy grace, that in all things we may, loue,
honour, and obeye thy heauenly wyll and
maieſtie, waking and walkinge in the pathes
of righteouſnes, to the ſcope of perfecte holines,
contemning this witchinge world withall
her fooliſhe illuſions, for the true glorifyinge
of thy name, through Chriſt Ieſus our
Sauiour. Amen.
                  
                  
                     
LOrde comforte, the nedye, the ſicke, the
priſoned, the tormented, the diſtreſſed and
helpeleſſe with the preſence of thy grace, and
haue mercy vpon theym.
                  Make vs all ioyefull in thée, O God, with
thankeſgeuing through Chriſt Ieſus. Amen.
                  
                  ¶Lorde into thy handes I committe
my bodye and ſoule, receaue me to
thy tuition, O God.
               
            
         
         
            
            
               ❧The fourth forme
of prayer.
            
               
                  AWake out of thy ſwiniſh ſlomber,
O ſily ſoule: ſhake off the
deathfull ſlouth of this earthye
trunke: and watche for the
Lorde which is at hand: prepared
to iudgement: Ceaſe not
to praye, for the forgeuenes of thy ſinnes, labour
feruently in thy dutie, then ſhalt thou be
clothed with mercy and righteouſnes, to enter
in, as a beautifull geaſt, with that ioyefull
Bridegrome to the feaſt of eternall mirth and
dilicacye: there to dwell in ioyes for euer
more.
               
                  O Mercifull Lorde and louinge Father,
without whoſe ayde and moſion, I am
not able to ſturre one member toward
heauenly ſeruice, the bourden of this ſlowe,
and ſinfull fleſhe doth ſo ouer charge my
weake ſoule: according to thy Fatherly pitie
loke vpon me, O God, and quicken my dull
ſpirite with thy grace, to riſe out of this myrie
puddle, and to come before thy preſence,
in humble repentaunce, crauinge thy mercy
for my miſerable ſinnes and wickednes: and

beinge releaſed in the bloud and righteouſnes
of Ieſns Chriſt, I maye ioyefully ſerue
honour, and prayſe thy eternall maieſtie:
through the déere Sonne my mercifull Lord
and Redemer: to whom with thée and the
holy Ghoſt be all glory and thankes for euer.
Amen.
               
            
            
               Prayſe the Lorde O my ſoule.
               
                  
                     I
                   Wyll alwayes geue thankes
vnto the Lorde, his prayſe ſhall
euer be in my mouth: My ſoule
ſhall make her boaſt of him, the
humble ſhall here therof and
be glad.
               O prayſe the Lorde with me, and let vs
magnifie his name together.
               I ſought the Lord and he heard me, yea
he deliuered me out of all my feare.
               They that haue an eye to him are lightened,
and there faces ſhall not be aſhamed
               The poore crye vnto the Lord, and he heareth
theym: yea and ſaueth them out of all
there troubles.
               The Angel of the Lorde, tarieth rounde
about theym that feare him, and deliuereth

theym.
               O taſte how gratious the Lorde is: bleſſed
is the man that putteth his truſt in him.
               O feare the Lorde, ye that be his Saincts:
for they that feare him lacke nothinge.
               The Liones do lacke and ſuffer hunger:
but they that ſeke the Lorde, ſhall want no
maner of thinge that is good.
               Thou man that deſireſt to liue and ſée
good dayes: kepe thy tongue from euill and
thy lippes that they ſpeake no guile, eſchue
euill and doe good, ſeke peace and folowe it.
               The eyes of the Lord are ouer the righteous,
and his eares are open to there prayers.
               His countenance is againſt them that do
euill: to roote out the remembraunce of them
from the earth.
               The righteous crye, and the Lorde heareth
them, and deliuereth them out of all
their troubles.
               The Lord is nighe to them that are of
contrite harte: and will ſaue ſuch as be of
humble ſpirite.
               Great are the troubles of the righteous,
but the Lord deliuereth them out of all.
               Miſfortune ſhall ſlaye the vngodly: and
they that hate the righteous ſhalbe deſtitute,
               The Lorde deliuer the ſoules of his ſeruauntes,

and all they that put there truſt in
thée ſhalbe bleſſed for euermore.
               REioyce in the Lord ye that be righteous:
for it becommeth well the Iuſte to bée
thankefull.
               Prayſe the Lord with harpe: ſing Pſalmes
vnto him with Lute and Inſtruments of ten
ſtringes.
               Singe vnto the Lord a new ſonge, ſing
prayſes luſtely vnto him wt a louely courage.
               For the word of the Lord is true and all
his workes are faythfull.
               He loueth righteouſnes and iudgements,
the earth is full of the goodnes of the Lord.
               By the word of the Lord weare the heauens
made, and all the hoſtes of theym by
the breath of his mouth.
               He gathereth the water, of the Sea together,
as it weare on a heape, and layeth vp
the depe as it weare in a treaſure houſe.
               Let all the earth ſtande in feare of the
Lorde, ſtand in awe of him all ye that dwell
in the worlde.
               For he ſpake and it was made, he commaunded
and it ſtode faſt.
               The Lorde bringeth the counſayle of the
Heathen to naught, and maketh the deuiſes

of the people to be of none effecte, and caſteth
out the determinations of princes.
               The counſayles of the Lord ſhall endure
for euer, and his determinations are euerlaſtinge.
               Therfore bleſſed are the people, whoſe
God is the Lorde Iehoua: yea bleſſed are they
that haue choſen him to be their inheritance.
               The Lorde loketh downe from heauen,
and beholdeth all the children of men, from
the habitation of his dwelling he conſidereth
all them that dwell vpon the earth.
               There is nothinge that can be ſaued by
the multitude of an hoſt: neither is any mighttie
man deliuered by much ſtrength.
               An horſe is a vayne thing to ſaue a man:
for he ſhall not deliuer him by his great force,
neither helpe him with the ſwiftnes of his
foote.
               Beholde how fatherly the eye of the Lord
is vpon them that feare him, and howe louingly
he embraſeth all thoſe that put their
truſt in his goodnes.
               He deliuereth their ſoules from death,
and féedeth them in the tyme of dearth.
               Let euery ſoule patiently wayte for the
Lorde our Sauiour, who commeth to deliuer
his people, then ſhall the righteous reioyce

and be gladde.
               Quicken my ſoule, O God, let thy mercy
embrace me, let thy holy ſpirite comforte me,
So ſhall I be ſaued in thy grace, to magnifie
and prayſe thy name for euer and euer,
Amen.
               
            
            
               CHAP. IIII. to the Epheſians.
               
                  I Therfore, beinge priſoner in the Lord, praye you that
ye walke worthie of the vocation whereunto ye are
called, with all humblenes of minde, and mekenes,
with long ſuffringe, ſupportinge one another throughe
loue, Endeuoringe to kepe the vnitie of the ſpirite in
the bond of peace. There is one bodye, and one ſpirite,
euen as ye are called in one hope of your vocation. Their
is one Lorde, one fayth, one Baptiſme. One God and
Father of all, which is about all, and through all, and
in you all. But vnto euery one of vs is giuen grace,
accordinge to the meaſure of the gift of Chriſt. Wherefore
he ſayth, when he aſcended vp on hye, he lead captiuitie
captiue, and gaue giftes vnto men. Nowe, in that
he aſcended what is it but yt he had alſo deſcended firſt
into the loweſt parte of the earth? He that deſcended,
is euen the ſame that aſcended, farre aboue all heauens,
that he might fill all thinges) He therfore gaue ſome to
be Apoſtles, and ſome Prophets, and ſome Euangeliſtes,
and ſome Paſtours, and Teahcers, For the gatheringe
together of the Sainctes that for the worke of
the miniſtery, and for the edification of the bodye of
Chriſt, Till we all mete together (in the vnitie of faith
and knowledge of the Sonne of God) vnto a perfite
man, and vnto the meaſure of the age of the fulnes of
Chriſt. That we hence forth be no more children waueringe

and caried about with euerie winde of doctrine,
by the deceyte of men, and with craftines, wherby they
laye in waite to deceaue. But let vs followe the truth
in loue, and in all thinges growe vp into him which is
the head, that is Chriſt. By whom all the bodye being
coupled and knitte together by euery ioynt, for the furniture
therof (accordinge to the effectuall power, which
is in the meaſure of euery parte) receaueth increaſe of
the bodie, vnto the edifying of it ſelfe in loue. This I
ſaye therfore and teſtifie in the Lord that ye henceforth
walke not as other Gentiles walke, in vanitie of their
minde, Hauing their cogitation darkened, and beinge
ſtraungers from the life of God through the ignorance
that is in them, becauſe of the hardnes of there hearte:
Which being paſt feling, haue giuen them ſelues vnto
wantonnes, to worke all vncleanenes, euen with gredines.
But ye haue not ſo learned Chriſt. If ſo be ye
haue heard him, and haue ben taught by him, as the
truth is in Ieſus, That is, that ye caſt of, concerninge
the conuerſation in tinie paſt, the olde man, which is corrupt
through the deceiuable luſtes. And be renewed in
the ſpirite of your minde, And put on the newe man,
which after God is created in righteouſnes, and true holines.
Wherfore caſt of lyinge, and ſpeake euery man
truth vnto his neighbour for we are members one of another.
Be angry, but ſinne not: let not the Sunne go
downe vpon your wrath, Neither giue place to the Deuill.
Let him that ſtole, ſteale no more: but let him rather
labour and worke with his handes the thing which
is good, that he may haue to giue vnto him that nedeth.
Let no corrupt communication procede out of your
mouthes, but that which is good to the vſe of edifying,
that it may miniſter graco vnto the hearers. And griue
not the holy Spirite of God by whom ye are ſealed vnto
the daye of redemption. Let all bitternes, and anger,
and wrath cryinge and euell ſpeaking be put away from

you, with all maliciouſnes. Be ye courteous one to another,
and tender harted, forgiuiuing one another, euen
as God for Chriſts ſake forgaue you.
            
            
               ¶Prayers.
               
                  
                     O Mercifull Lorde and louinge Father:
that by impartinge of thy frée grace and
mercy, vnto vs: beinge earſt, through
ſinne, dampned in the fleſhe: haſt deliuered
vs from the bandes af ignorance and death,
to become the children of light and lyfe,
through fayth and obedience to thy worde, reuealed
and miniſtred vnto vs by thy déere
Sonne Chriſt Ieſus: our promiſed Sauiour:
in whom thou haſt begotten thy beloued
Sainctes enritching them with plentie of all
maner of heauenly gifres, to become holy and
acceptable in thy ſight to their ſaluation.
Haue mercy vpon vs, O Lorde, yea Lorde
haue mercy vpon vs: and forthy names ſake
loke fauourably vpon thy Sayntes diſperſed
throughout the whole world: ſtand faſte by
them, O God, aydinge their fraylties with
the comforte of thy holy ſpirite, to be conſtant
in fayth, humble and obedient to thy holy
will and correction, paciently waytinge in
ioyefull hope, thy good pleaſure and determination

in all thinges: habounding in mekenes
and loue, reioycinge in true holines and
vertue, gladdinge their hartes with, thaſſured
truth of thy promiſſes: for the more fruition
whereof extend yet thy further fauour and
mercy, O Father: augmenting the number
of faythfull miniſters and preachers of thy
worde, proſpering their labours with the effuſion
and working of thy grace, for th'enlarginge
of the kyngdome of thy ſonne amongeſt
all nations: that we and they vnited in faith,
grace, truth, ſpirite, and Baptiſme, may be
framed and knitte, one entire and firme body,
wrought in adoption, and faſhoned in loue
and obedience, to our bead and Sauiour
Chriſt Ieſus, thy ſwéete Sonne our Lorde,
for whoſe loue, O Father, we beſech thée
to here our humble petitions perfourminge
the ſame to the glory of thy name. Amen.
                  
               
               
                  LOrde helpe our weakenes.
                  And ſtrengthen vs againſt the power
of the enymie.
                  Lorde fede vs with thy heauenly giftes.
                  And make vs acceptable to thy ſelfe.
                  Increaſe thy bleſſinge in vs, O God.
                  That we maye be plentifuull in all goodnes.
                  
                  Augment the kyngdome of thy Sonne,
O Father.
                  Let all knées bowe, and geue prayſe to
thy name.
                  Make our hartes humble and penitent.
                  And euermore redye to ſerue thée wyth
thankeſgeuinge.
                  Make vs to lifte vp our voyces to thée,
O God.
                  And for the loue of thy déere Sonne,
Chriſt Ieſus our Sauiour here our requeſtes,
and graunt our iuſt deſires, O Lord.
               
               
                  Praye.
                  
                     O Father that of thy immeaſurable loue
and mercy doeſt continually knocke at
our hartes, with the motion of thy holy ſpirite,
to watch, to praye, and to geue thanks:
Fulfill now, O Lord, all the peticions of thy
ſeruaunts, tending to the prayſe of thy name:
alwayes comforting our weake ſoules with
the preſence of thy grace, to dedicate our ſelues
through faith and holy conuerſation in Chriſt:
to thy gloryous maieſtie: O God, which with
thy ſwete Sonne our Sauiour, and the holy
Ghoſt, reigneſt, in vnitie of dominion power
and glory prayſed and halowed for euer and
euer. Amen.
                  
               
               
                  
                  GEue victory to thy Sainctes.
                  And make them euermore ioyefull
in thee. O God.
                  Receaue thy ſeruauntes to thy tuition, O
Lorde.
                  And deliuer thy people from all euill.
                  Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶CHAP. IIII. of Ieremie.
               
                  
                     O
                   Iſraell, if thou returne, returne vnto
me, ſaith the Lord: and if thou
put awaye thine abhominations out
of my ſight then ſhalt thou not remoue.
And thou ſhalt ſweare, The
Lorde liueth, in truth, in iudgment,
and in righteouſnes, and the nations
ſhalbe bleſſed in him, and ſhall glory
in him. For thus ſaith the Lorde to the men of Iudah,
and to Ieruſalem, Breake vp your fallowe grounde,
and ſowe not amonge the thornes: bee circumciſed
to the Lorde, and take awaye the foreſkinnes of your
hartes, ye men of Iudah, and inhabitantes of Ieruſalem,
leaſt my wrath come forth like fyre, and burne, that
none can quenche it, becauſe of the wickednes of your
inuenſions. Declare in Iudah, and ſhew forth in Ieruſalem,
and ſay, Blowe the trumpet in the land: crye, and
gather together, and ſay, Aſſemble your ſelues, and let
vs go into ſtrong cities. Set vp the ſtandert in Zion:
prepare to flee, and ſtay not: for I will bring a plague

from the North, and a great diſtruction. The Lion is
come vp from his denne, and the diſtrdyer of the Gentiles
is departed, and gone forth of his place to laye thy
land waſte, and thy cities ſhalbe deſtroyed without an
inhabitant. Wherfore gird you with ſackecloth: lament,
and howle, for the fierce wrath of the Lorde is not turned
backe from vs. And in that daye, ſaith the Lorde,
the harte of the Kyng ſhall periſh, and the harte of the
Princes and the Prieſtes ſhalbe aſtoniſhed, and the
Prophetes ſhall wonder. Then ſayd I, Ah Lorde
God, ſurely thou haſt deceiued this people and Ieruſalem,
ſayinge, ye ſhall haue peace, and the ſword perceth
vnto the hart. At that time ſhall it be ſayd to this people
and to Ieruſalem, A drye winde in the hie places of the
wildernes commeth toward the daughter of my people,
but neither to fan nor to clenſe. A mightie winde ſhall
come vnto me from thoſe places, and now will I alſo
giue ſentence vpon them. Behold, he ſhall come vp as
the cloudes, and his charetes ſhalbe as a tempeſt: his
horſes are lighter then Egles. Woe vnto vs for we are
deſtroyed. O Ieruſalem, waſh thine hart from wickednes,
that thou maieſt be ſaued: how long ſhall thy wicked
thoughts remaine within thee? For a voyce declareth
from Dan, and publiſheth affliction from mount
Ephraim. Make ye menſion of the heathen, and publiſhe
in Ieruſalem, Beholde, the ſcoutes come from a
farre countrey, and crye out againſt the citees of Iudah,
They haue compaſſed her about as the watchmen of the
fielde, becauſe it hath prouoked me to wrath, ſaith the
Lord. Thy wayes and thine inuentions haue procured
thee theſe thinges, ſuch is thy wickednes: therfore it
ſhalbe bitter, therfore it ſhall perce vnto thine harte.
My bely, my bely, I am peined, euen at the very harte:
mine harte is troubled within me: I can not be ſtill: for
my ſoule hath harde the ſound of the trumpet, and the
alarme of the battell. Deſtruction vpon deſtruction is
cryed, for the whole land is waſted: ſoddenly are my

tentes deſtroyed, and my curteines in a moment. Howe
long ſhall I ſe the ſtandart, here the ſound of the trumpet?
For my people is fooliſh, they haue not knowne
me: they are fooliſh children, and haue none vnderſtandinge:
they are wiſe to do euill, but to do well they haue
no knowledge. I haue loked vpon the earth, and lo, it
was without forme and voyde: and to the heauens, &
they had no light. I beheld the mountaines and lo, they
trembled and all the hilles ſhoke. I beheld, and lo, there
was no man. and all the birdes of the heauen were departed.
I beheld, and lo, the fruitefull place was a wildernes,
and all the cities therof were broken downe
at the preſence of the Lord, and by his fierce wrath.
For thus hath the Lord ſayd, The whole land ſhalbe
deſolate: yet will I not make a full end. Therfore ſhall
the earth mourns, and the heauens aboue ſhalbe darkened,
becauſe I haue pronounced it: I haue thought it,
and will not repent, neither will I turne backe from it,
The whole citie ſhal flee, for the noyſe of the horſemen
and bowe men: they ſhall go into thickets, and clyme
vp vpon the rockes: euery citie ſhalbe forſaken, and not
a man dwell therein. And when thou ſhalt be deſtroyed,
what wilt thou do? Though thou clotheſt thy ſelfe
with ſkarlet, though thou deckeſt thee with ornaments
of golde, though thou painteſt thy face with coullours,
yet ſhalt thou trimme thy ſelfe in vaine: for thy louers
will abhore thee and ſeke thy life. For I haue heard
a noyſe of a woman trauailinge, or as one laboringe of
her firſt child, euen the voyce of the daughter Zion that
ſigheth and ſtretcheth out her handes: wo is me nowe
for my ſoule fainteth becauſe of the murtherers.
               
                  THe Lorde hath pleſured his people, and
helpeth the meeke harted.
                  He healeth the contrite in harte, and

byndeth vp their woundes.
                  He rayſeth theym vp that are fallen, he is
louinge to euery man: and his mercy is ouer
all his workes.
                  He fulfilleth the deſire of them that feare
him, he heareth their crye, and helpeth theim.
               
            
         
         
            
               ❧Suffrages.
            
               
                  O
                Mercifull Lorde and louinge
Father, that in the bloud of
thy déere ſonne haſt reconciled,
the choſen ſort of Adames loſſe
children: that throughe fayth
and obedience to thy worde:
wrought in our hartes by thy holy Spirite
(which in the haboundance of thy mercy thou
powreſt vpon the faythfull.) We might in
Chriſt Ieſus our Sauiour: crye for grace and
forgeuenes of our ſinnes.
            For his ſake O Lord haue mercy vpon
vs, moſte frayle and wretched offenders:
Remember not our ſinnes, nor the ſinnes
of our forefathers, neither take thou vengeance
of vs, Spare vs good Lord, ſpare vs
O Father, whom with the precious bloud of

thy Sonne, thou haſt deliuered out of the
power of death and hell: that conuerted and
ſainctified in thy grace, we may in newnes
of lyfe: worthely prayſe and magnifie thy
name, in this and in the world to come.
            
               Spare vs O Father.
               ¶Ye ſpare vs, O Father, and ſo bleſſe vs
with thy grace: that our hartes beinge facioned,
by the working of thy holy ſpirite, to
beleue and to repent our manifolde ſinnes
and wickednes: (in gladſome hope of thy mercie)
we maye faſten our ſelues vpon Chriſt
Ieſus: to honour thée, to loue thée, and to
ſerue thée, with all our hartes, and withall
our ſoules: walking before thée in holines
and righteouſnes all dayes of our lyfe: extollinge
thy name with continuall thankeſgeuinge.
            
            
               Here vs O Father.
               ¶Here vs O Lorde and deliuer vs from
all euill bodely and ghoſtly: ſaue vs from
Sathan and from all his games and falſe
ſuggeſtions: let vs not taſte of thy wrath.
In wealth, in woe, in health, inſickneſſe: in
lyfe and death, be thou our mercifull Lorde
and comfortes: from hell and dampnation,
ſaue vs O God.
            
            
               Saue vs O God.
               
                  
¶Yea ſaue vs Lord and deliuer vs. From
all blindnes of harte, from pride vayne glory
and hipocriſie. From ambition enuie and diſobedience,
from ſwearinge and blaſphemie:
from fornication, gluttonie, and dronkeneſſe,
from all the deceiptes of the world the fleſh
and the Deuill. From lightning and tempeſt
from plague peſtilence and famine, from battell,
from murther, and from ſodaine Death:
from ſedition, from conſpiracie, and treaſon:
from all falſe doctrine and hereſie: from hardneſſe
of harte, from contempt of thy holy word
and commaundementes.
            
            
               O Father deliuer vs.
               ¶By thy power and mercy, by thy word
and promiſe, by thy wiſedome and prouidence
by thy fatherly loue, and pitie, by thy truth
and compaſſion, in the fauour of thy ſwéete
Sonne our Sauiour.
            
            
               O Fathe. deliuer vs.
               ¶By the incaruation, natiuitie and circumciſion,
by the lyfe and doctrine, by the
precious death, and buriall: by the glorious
reſurrection and aſſention, by the righteouſnes
and interceſſion, by the merites, glory
and power of thy déere Sonne our Sauiour.
            
            
               O Fother deliuer vs.
               
                  
¶Deliuer vs O Father, and for loue of
thy ſwéete Sonne here vs ſinners, and for his
ſake graunt our humble requeſtes which we
demaund for the glory of thy name.
            
            
               O Lorde and Father we beſeche thee
to heare vs.
               ¶Yea Lorde be mercifull vnto vs, and
here vs, praying that it may pleaſe thy heauenly
wil and mageſtie, to ſaue and to defend
thy Church rulinge, and proſpering the ſame,
by the power of thy grace, in peace, truth
and holines: and ſtrengthening thy ſeruants,
with the continuall ayde of thy holy ſpirite,
to walke before thée, in righteouſnes and vertue,
Thy glory may ſhine amongſt all nations
vpon the earth.
            
            
               O Lorde and Father we beſeeche thee
to here vs.
               ¶O Father here vs, and let it pleaſe thée
to teach beautifie and to enritche, the preachers
and Miniſters of thy word, with true
knowledge and loue of the ſame, that in all
their wayes wordes and workes, they maye
ſincerely and diligently ſeke thy honour and
glory, to the comforte of the faythfull, and
enlarginge of the kyngdome of thy Sonne.
            
            
               O Lorde and Father, we beſeche thee
to here vs.
               
                  
¶Garniſhe and adorne our Prince, our
mageſtrates, nobilitie and rulers, the people
and miniſters, with plentie of thy heauenly
giftes, that ſhininge in the beautie of celeſtiall
vertues, and godly conuerſation, they may
worthely and ioyefully prayſe and extoll thy
name in this and in the world to come.
            
            
               O Lord we beſech thee to here vs.
               ¶Geue peace and proſperitie to thy
Church, O Lord: erecte, preſerue and defend
all faithfull Princes and mageſtrates, to loue
and to cheriſhe, thy worde truth and glory:
Rule their hartes in faith feare and obedience
to thy Goſpell: Inſtructe theym in thy wiſedome,
geue theym grace and ayde to execute
Iuſtice: and to mayntaine truth: aduauncing
the good: and punniſhinge the wicked.
            
            
               O Lord we beſeche thee to here vs.
               ¶O Lorde multiplie the number of thy
Preachers and miniſters of thy word, proſper
there labour in thée: increaſe fayth vpon
the earth: let all nations, knowe that thou
art the Lorde, of power and glory, the Lord
of truth and ſaluation, and onely Sauiour
of the world.
            
            
               O Lord we beſeche thee to here vs.
               ¶Let thy peace, loue and mercy goe ouer
all: comforte the innocentes, weakelinges,

and diſtreſſed: make them humble ioyefull
and patient puttinge there whole truſt in thy
goodnes that neuer fayleth: and according to
thy truth, deliuer thou them O God.
            
            
               O Lord we beſeche thee to here vs.
               ¶Preſerue the faythfull Trauailers of
the Earth, bleſſe their workes, and proſper,
their iuſt indeuoures: that their labours may
turne to the benifitte of thy creatures: wholy
dependinge of thy fatherly bountie and goodnes:
which thou haboundantly powreſt vpon
all thinges to the glory of thy eternall and
almightie maieſtie.
            
            
               O Lord we beſeche thee to here vs.
               ¶Preſerue thy people O Lord diſperſed
throughe out the world: increaſe their fayth
and godlines, holde alwayes the holy hande
ouer theym, fill theym with thy peace and
grace, arme theym with ſure hope and cherefull
patience: mayntayne, bleſſe and preſerue,
the frendly fauourers, helpers, & herboughrers
of theym: deſtroye Sathan and his miniſters:
poure forth thy wrathfull indignation
vpon thine enimies: daſhe their counſailes,
breake their ſtrength, teare their dominions
in péeces, conſume theym wyth the furious
and inquenchable blaſt of thyne anger, ſpoile
and diſtroye them for euer more.
            
            
               
               O Lord we beſech thee to heare vs.
               ¶O Lorde direct our wayes and leade vs
forth in the pathes of thy truth and righteouſnes:
that framinge our lyues and conuerſations
after thy will (through the continuall
ayde of thy grace and holy ſpirite) we
maye appeare, obedient and louinge thildren,
to the laude and glory of thy name, through
Ieſus Chriſt our Sauiour.
            
            
               Lord we beſech thee to heare vs.
               ¶Make our hartes humble, paciente, and
ioyefull in thée, abyding thy good will pleaſure
and determinations in all thinges: louinge
one to another: forgeuing our aduerſaries:
habounding in peace: that our ioye may
be full and irremoueable in thée, O God,
through Chriſt our Redéemer and aduocate,
for whoſe loue, O Lorde, be mercifull vnto
vs and heare vs.
               ¶Be mercifull vnto vs, O Father, and
for thy ſwete ſonnes ſake our dere Lord and
Sauiour: heare vs, and graunt our peticions
to the glory of thy name, O God: to
whom with thée and the holy Ghoſt, reigning
in vnitie of maieſtie, power and glory be all
prayſe honour and thankes, for euer and euer,
Amen.
               
            
            
               
               
                  O Mercifull Lord and louing Father, that
deſpiſiſt not the prayers of humble and
penitent ſinners, haue mercy vpon vs: yea
Lorde haue mercy vpon vs and heare vs, and
for thy déere Sonnes ſake our Sauiour, pardon
our frayle weakenes, and helpe vs with
thy grace, for thou knoweſt wherof we are
made: Turne from vs all thoſe euilles that
we moſte iuſtly haue deſerued: And in all
our troubles health, wealth, nede, ſorrowes,
ioyes, lyfe ſickenes and death, make vs to
put our whole, ſtaye, hope, and helpe, in thy
Fatherly mercy and goodnes: which neuer
fayliſt them that repoſe their full truſt and
confidence in thée: directe and gouerne vs by
the power of thy holy Spirite, euermore to
ſerue thée, in holines and purenes of liuinge
to thy honour and glory: through our onely
mediatour and aduocate Ieſus Chriſt our
Lord: to whom with thée and the holy Ghoſt
be all laude prayſe and thankes for euermore.
Amen.
               
               ¶Both now and euer, vouchſafe to heare
vs, O Lorde: gratiouſly heare vs, O God,
and in Chriſt our déere Sauiour thy Sonne,
fulfill our requeſtes, to the honour and glory
of thy bleſſed name. Amen.
               
               Prayſed by thy name O God.
            
            
               
               ¶For the preſeruation of
the Sainctes.
               
                  O Mercifull Lord and louing father, which
in the bowelles of thine infinite mercy,
haſt throughe thy déere Sonne begotten
thine ellect children: Loke fauourably vpon
thy ſeruaunts diſperſed throughout the whole
worlde, defende theym with thy heauenly
grace, holde thy holy hand ouer theym, let
thy holy ſpirite be euer more with theym, and
ſo preſerue theym and leade theym in the
continuall profeſſion knowledge and obedience
of thy worde, that their conuerſation in
this lyfe beinge holy, they maye in th'ende
optayne euerlaſting lyfe, through Chriſt Ieſu
thy ſwete Sonne our Sauiour. Amen.
               
               
                  O Mercifull Lorde and louing Father, Lord
of mercy, truth, grace and comforte,
which takeſt compaſſion, and ſpareſt ſinners:
forgeue vnto me my ſinnes, O Lorde: forgeue
me my ſinnes. O Iuſt and louing God,
that beinge couered in the multitude of thy
mercies, they be not imputed vnto me. Yea
Lord aſſiſt my frayletie with thy heauenly
grace, that throughly repentinge my ſinfull

lyfe paſt, I maye hereafter by the power of
thy holy ſpirite, reſiſt ſinne, ioyefully prayſing
thy bleſſed maieſtie with pure and gladſome
thankeſgiuinge, throughe Ieſus Chriſt thy
déere Sonne my Sauiour, to whome with
thée and the holy Ghoſt, be all honour glory
and thankes for euer and euer. Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶A generall prayer.
               ALmightie God, our mercifull Lorde and
Sauiour, fountayne of all grace wiſedome
and comforte, which knoweſt our
neceſſities before we aſke, and our blind foly
in aſkinge. I beſeche thée, O louige father,
to haue compaſſion vpon myne infirmities,
and thoſe thinges, which thy heauenly wiſedome
knoweth neceſſary, for the true felicitie
of my bodye and ſoule, (wherof I am both
ignoraunt and vnworthy to make requeſt vnto
thy diuine maieſtie) vouchſafe to geue me
for the worthenes of thy déere Sonne Ieſus
Chriſt my ſwete Lorde and Sauiour. Amen.
               
               
                  O Lorde we beſeche thée mercifully here our
prayers, and ſpare all thoſe which confeſſe
theyre ſinnes, vnto thée, that they, whoſe
conſciences by ſinne are accuſed, by thy

mercifull pardon maye be abſolued throughe
Chriſt Ieſus our déere Lorde and Sauiour.
Amen.
               
               
                  O Mercyfull Lorde and louinge Father,
which haſte compaſſion of all men, and
hateſt nothinge that thou haſte made,
which wouldeſt not the death of a finner, but
that he ſhould rather turne from ſinne and be
ſaued: mercifully forgeue vs our treſpaſſes,
receaue and comforte vs, which be greued
and weryed with the burthen of our ſinnes.
Thy propertie is to haue mercy, to thée onely
it appertayneth to forgeue ſinnes, ſpare vs
therfore good Lord, ſpare thy people whom
thou haſt redéemed. Enter not into Iudgement
with thy ſeruauntes, which bée vile
earth and miſerable ſinners, and ſo turne
thyne Ire from vs, which knowledge our
vileneſſe, and truly repent vs of our faultes.
So make haſt O Father, to ſuccour and helpe
vs with thy grace, that we may paſſe the reſt
of our lyfe in holy conuerſation to the honour
and glory of thy name: through Chriſt our
ſwete Lord and Sauiour. Amen.
               
               
                  
TVrne thou vs O good Lorde, and ſo
ſhall we be turned. Be fauourable O
Lord, be fauourable to thy people, which
turne vnto thée in wéeping faſting and prayinge,
for thou art a mercifull God, full of
compaſſion, longe ſufferinge, and of great
pitie. Thou ſpareſt when we deſerue puniſhment,
and in thy wrath thinkeſt vpon mercie.
Spare thy people good Lord, ſpare them,
and let not thine heritage be brought to confuſion,
heare vs O Lorde, for thy mercy is
great, and after the multitude of thy mercies
loke vpon vs.
            
            
               ¶For grace and ſtrength
of Spirite.
               
                  O Mercifull Lorde and louinge Father,
which haſte voutchſaued in th'aboundaunce
of thy mercies, to beget vs of
the new in the bloud and righteouſnes of
thy déere Sonne our Sauiour, by whom we
are made acceptable vnto thée, regenerated
by water and the holy Ghoſt, to the frée forgeunes
of our ſinnes, for the fruition of eternall
ſaluation. Strengthen vs we beſech thée
O Lord with the holy ſpirite the comforter:

and for the glory of thy name ſake, poure vpon
vs thy manifold giftes of thy grace, the
ſpirite of wiſedome and truth, the ſpirite of
méekenes and loue, the ſpirite, of peace and
pacience: the ſpirite of Counſayle and ghoſtly
ſtrength, that wemaye walke and continew
in all godlines, prayſinge and magnifiinge
thy glorious maieſtie with gladſome
and acceptable thankeſgeuinge:
throughe Ieſus
Chriſt our déere Lord
and Sauiour.
Amen.
               
               ⁋:¶
               ¶:⁋
            
         
         
            
            
               A Prayer for grace to repent,
and amend our lyfe.
               
                  OH Lord God, and heauenle father,
which art a iuſt Iudge
to punniſh all theym, that doe
continewe to offend thée: as
thou art a Father moſt pitiefull
to receiue to mercie all thoſe,
which geue ouer themſelues to thée: ſhewe
me thy grace and fauour ſo, that I maye be
toutched with inward hatered of my ſinnes,
and that in the place of flatteringe my ſelfe
to ſlepe in ſinne, I may be ſo caſt downe in
harte, that the rather I maye truely with
mouth confeſſe moſt humbly to geue thée, the
honour, glory, and prayſe due vnto thy holy
name: and that, as thou doeſt inſtructe vs
thereunto by thy holy word, ſo (for thy names
ſake) make that the ſame may ſo lighten and
cleare our conſcience, that in due examination
of all oure whole lyfe, we maye learne to
be angrye and diſpleaſed with all our former
and corrupt liuinge. Oh that it maye pleaſe
thée to drawe neare vnto vs, in addreſſinge
and guiding our foote ſteppes, in the true and
perfitte waye of obedience to thy holy lawes

and commaundements. Send thy holy Angell
to pitch his tent round about vs, that
Sathan and his infernall armye, neuer preuayle
againſt vs: but alwayes with ſtronge
fayth we maye throughe Ieſus Chriſt withſtand
all his craftie ſubtilties, malice, and
ſnares: knowing vndoubtedly that thou neuer
forſakeſt theym that put there truſt in
thée. Oh let vs not be lead by th'infirmitie of
our vntoward fleſh, but ſtrengthen vs by the
vertue of thy holy ſpirite. Suffer vs not to lye
vnder thy heauie wrath & vengeance through
hipocriſie, but rather toutche vs ſo inwardly,
that we maye without ceaſſinge, ſighe and
grone vnto thée, by true and vnfayned repentaunce.
And although we be not alwayes ſo
well diſpoſed, to aſke and praye, as we ought
to doe, yet (good Lorde) for thy names ſake,
ſtretche out thy mightie hande, that by the
gracious workinge of thy holy Spirite, our
mindes and hartes may be drawne, from al
earthly and corrutible thinges, ſo that our
prayers may procede of an earneſt and inward
affection, neuer preſuminge to come
before thée with a double harte, knowinge
that whoſoeuer aſketh or prayeth for any
thinge of thée, not aſkinge in fayth, ſhal not
opteyne. Increaſe our fayth therfore (Oh

mercifull Father) that we preſently maye
liuely féele the benifites of remiſſion and pardon
of all our ſinnes, throughe the merites
and death of Chriſt Ieſu our Sauiour: and
ſo worke in vs for euer hereafter to liue in
the feare of thée, and to ſtand in awe of thy
diſpleaſure: that thou maieſt continew our
mercifull Father world without end. Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶A prayer for th'aide of
God to a holy lyfe.
               
                  O Moſte mercifull Lorde God almightie,
that of thine inſerachable power and
wiſedome, dydeſt create all thinges of
nothinge, in obedience to thy rule and commaundement:
amonges the which it pleaſed
thy gracious will, not onely to make me a
reſonable creature in the celeſtiall forme of
man kinde: but alſo, (where, by my naturall
propertie ſtate and inclination I was conceiued
and borne to ignorance and ſinne, and
thereby to death and dampnation.) So to limite
the tyme and place of my byrth into this
worlde, that in vnitie of Baptiſme, comunion,
and healthfull doctrine with thy Saincts,
I am gouerned and taught, to knowe, to
profeſſe, to honour and to ſerue thine omnipotent

maieſtie, true and eternall God reigninge
in trinitie of perſons inſeperablie knitte
in vnitie of dietie, power, eternitie and glory:
and alſo inſtructed in the truth of the Goſpell
of thy ſwéete Sonne Ieſus Chriſt my Sauiour:
throughe fayth in whome I féele that
bliſſefull operation of thy heauenly grace, by
the effuſion of thy holy ſpirite, as the frée benifite
of thy mercie wherby I am called with
the reſt of thy choſen children, to th'undoubted
hope of eternall lyfe and ſaluation: ſo that
earſt being farre from thée through blindneſſe
and ſinne: I am nowe by grace and adoption
in Chriſt the redéemer, brought nere and
reconciled to thy fauour, as a Sonne. Therfore
as one yet inuironed, with many ſorowes,
pereiles, wretchednes and calamities, a
middeſt the ſwarmes of innumerable ennymies
viſible and inuiſible, that are prepared
to ſpoyle me, euen to eternall deſtruction: I
call for thy helpe, O God: which onely arte,
the ſure and inuincible fortreſſe wherin I may
be ſaued. Streatch forth thy mightie hande,
O Father, and geue me a ioyefull victory
againſt the power of the malicious enimie
that worketh to ſpill, whatſoeuer thou would
eſt haue ſaued. From the bothome of the
déepe I crye vnto thée O Lorde to ſuccour

me: and for loue of thy deere Sonne my Sauiour
to deliuer me, from the power of darkeneſſe
and ignoraunce: and by thy holy ſpirite
to guide and lead me in the light and pathes
of heauenly grace and knowledge: that
findinge this tranſitory and ſhorte lyfe to be
but a troubleſome paſſage (beſette with many
ſtormes, perels, and deceiptes to perdition)
and cleauing faſt vnto thée and deſpiſing all
earthly pompe, and vanities: I maye paſſe
throughe it to the porte of perpetuall peace
and ſaftie: there to poſſeſſe the triumphant,
and eternall ioyes which are prepared for
thyne electe: ſanctified throughe fayth in
Chriſt Ieſus our ſwéete Sauiour, to whom
with thée and the holy Ghoſt be all prayſe
honour and glory for euer and euer. Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶A prayer for well vſinge
of our vocation.
               
                  O Mercifull Lorde and God, by whoſe
power and benifite I am formed and
endued with humayne ſhape and reaſon,
and called to thaſſuraunce of eternall life,
throughe frée grace and adoption in Chriſt
Ieſu my Sauiour: who by his merites, bloud
and righteouſnes, hath purchaſed thy fatherly

fauour, mercie, and bleſſinge for me and for
all theym that are regenerated in fayth and
obedience to thy worde: haue mercie vpon
me O God: yea for loue of thy déere Sonne
my Sauiour, haue mercie vpon me, and of
thy gracious goodnes ſo directe and ſtabliſhe
th'inclination, ſteppes and hauiour of my
lyfe in this worlde: that faythfully, obediently,
humbly and frutefully walkinge in
my vocation, I maye, through loue, ſubdue
my harte and will, to thy ordinances, determination,
and pleaſure: méekely and paciently
ſuſtayning and ſeruinge the ſame, with
humble and hartie thankeſgeuing: And thou
Lord of thy plenteous goodnes and fatherly
bleſſinge, ſo amplifie, the requiſite ayde of
this my worldly lyfe, that of my ſufficient
portion, I may rather be helpefull to the poore
and nedye: then for want, to be a bourden
and chargeable to the ritche and haboundant.
But in all my wayes, thoughtes, pourpoſes
and procedinges, remember me to beholde,
and dulye to conſider: wherence I came,
and whether I muſt: wherof I conſiſt, and
why I am borne to this world: the ſhortnes
and frayltie of my lyfe: the fooliſhe vanities
of this deceiueable world, which with all her
gawdes doth paſſe away, as a ſhadowe: and

ſo to eſteme the ſame: that my harte and
minde beinge altogether inclined to the loue
of heauenly thinges: I may by the helpe of
thy holy Spirite, dedicate my ſelfe wholy a
quicke and ſpirituall ſacrifice to thy deuine
maieſtie, mortified in the fleſh, through faithfull
and holy conuerſation in Chriſt my Sauiour:
to whom with thée and the holy ghoſt
be all prayſe honour and glory for euermore.
Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶A prayer for the chriſtened
ſtate.
               
                  O Heauenly Lorde, which alone art God
omnipotent gracious and wiſe, that of
one clodde of cleye haſt thus innumerablye
multiplied, the kindredes, families,
cities, ſtates, tongnes, and nations of people,
deuidinge theym into felowſhippes, priuate
and publique, mayntayned and preſerued by
vnitie and obedience, to ſuch rule, ordinance,
gouernement and power: as thy Fatherly
wiſedome hath erected, ordayned, eſtabliſhed
and auctorized, for our behofe, lyfe and being
vpon earth. In thy gracious fauour loke vpon
vs: and in thine irrepugnable power, O
Lorde, ſo order directe and gouerne our purpoſes

and procedinges in this frayle, tormoylinge,
vnſtable and tranſitory ſtate, that all
thinges beinge done in godly loue, truth,
mekenes, vertuous induſtrye, honeſt care,
brotherly vnitie, and obedience: we maye
proue, Iuſte, faythfull, frutefull and godly
eche one in his vocation: in all our dealings
and behauiour ſeminge worthy of thy name,
to the glory and prayſe of the ſame. Of lyke
fatherly loue and care towarde vs, be it thy
gracious will, O Lorde, ſo to directe, gouerne
and ſanctifie the hartes thoughtes and
inclinations of our ſouereigne Prince and
rulers, of this Realme of England, and of
eche other ſtate profeſſinge the Goſpell of thy
Sonne: that in all their purpoſes counſailes,
determinations and procedinges: they may
with conſtant zeale, to the glory of thy name:
worke eſtabliſhe and mayntayne, thy truth
and honour, aduauncing all vertue right and
Iuſtice, embracinge and louinge pure godlines,
preferring alſo the louers and folowers
of the ſame: and dulye punniſhinge eche
vice and diſobedience: ſeking peace and folowinge
it, that thy holy Church, nuriſhed,
mayntayned, and defended by Kynges and
Princes, maye reioyce and floriſhe in th'haboundant
of bliſſefull quietnes, integritie,

and ſound doctrine: to th'education and bringinge
forth of plentie of godly faythfull and
induſtrious, miniſters and preachers of thy
worde, to labour for the eſtabliſhment and
enlarginge the kyngdome of thy Sonne amonges
men: who by the heauenly light
of true doctrine and holy conuerſation, ſhall
alſo appeare lanternes of celeſtiall comforte
and brightnes for the guidinge of thy ſtrayed
and conuerted ſeruauntes, by milions repleat
with grace and benidiction, throughe Chriſt
thy déere Sonne our Sauiour: To whoms
with thée and the holy Ghoſt, be all prayſe
honour and glory for euer and euer. Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶A prayer for the godly
profe of a childe.
               
                  O Moſt merciful Lord God almightie onely
which art gracious and good: as by thy
diuine will and power this childe was formed
and made a liuinge creature tonſiſting
of bodye and ſoule in the wombe of his mother,
from whom he is departed into this
worlde, by naturall byrth, weake and impotent,
of frayle and ſinfull ſubſtance: by his
owne propertie inclinde, to ignorance, and
ſinne: and nowe enuired with thouſands of

malicious, mightie and ſubtil, ennimies both
bodely and ghoſtly, which wayte for the ſeducinge
and leadinge of him to perell, death
and deſtruction, whereunto all man kinde is
prone and (weare it not for thy mercifull
grace and tuition) ſone ouercome. So be it
thy wyll O moſt gracious Lord, in th'aboundaunce
of thy mercies and loue, for Chriſt thy
déere Sonnes ſake, with thy fatherly eye to
loke vpon him: and to bleſſe him, pouringe
plentie of thy heauenly giftes vpon him, that
being preſerued, brought vp and nuriſhed in
deuine knowledge, fayth feare and obedience,
of thée, throughe true profeſſion of thy ſwéete
Sonne Ieſus in the ſinceritie of thy Goſpell:
He maye growe ritche and beautifull in all
godlines and vertue: in all his wayes and
procéedinges, ſekinge the kyngdome of eternall
glory, through firme and haboundaunt
fayth and holy conuerſation in Chriſt the Sauiour:
working all righteouſnes, filled with
méekenes, brotherly loue, obedience, cherefull
hope, deſire of heauenly things, contempt,
of the world: and mightely armed with thy
grace, and ſtrengthened by thine aſiſtaunce,
to vanquiſhe the power of the ſinnefull fleſhe
and Sathan: that hauinge victory in the ende
he may ioyefully triumphe in thy preſence O

God, with the reſt of thy beloued Sainctes,
to geue honour and continuall prayſe to thy
moſt holy name, in bliſſe euerlaſting: through
thy déere Sonne our mercifull Lord and Sauiour.
Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶A prayer for the wanderinge
poore.
               
                  O Moſt gracious Lord God, almightie and
eternall in whoſe hand it conſiſteth, to
purpoſe & to determine of thy creatures,
as ſemeth good to thine owne inſearchable
pleaſure: haue mercy vpon the poore afflicted
in ſpirite, nedye and naked: colde comfortleſſe
and diſtreſſed: which for want of habitation
neceſſary liuelyhode, and ſuccour, are, through
diſtreſſe and penury dryuen to wander in
much miſery, and vncertayne of relyfe and
comforte: cut off from the conuerſation and
felowſhippe of the ciuill, vertuous, wiſe and
godly people, and ſecluded from holy inſtruction
education and doctrine, do raunge in lothſome
libertie, where, by brutiſhe ignorance,
and vnbrideled diſorder, their wretched ſoules
(without thy great grace and mercy) may be
choked euen to eternall death: Turne vnto
theym O Lorde, and of thy fatherly goodnes,

for Chriſtes, ſake, haue mercy vpon theyme,
lighten their hartes with thy grace, O God,
and comforte theym, that féeling their croſſe
to be of thy ſufferaunce and layinge on, they
may patiently beare the ſame, with méeke
hartes and humble thankeſgeuing: and their
eyes beinge opened with heauenly vnderſtandinge,
in the grace and power of thy holy
ſpirite, to behold, and truely to Iudge of the
frayle vanitie, and fooliſhe value of this whirlinge
world, whoſe ritches, pleaſures, gaudes,
glory and eſtimation, do vaniſh as the ſmoke:
and flye from vs as the ſhadowe of a cloude,
and this lyfe to be of no moment nor abyding
without true ioyes or felicitie: But (weare
it not for cherefull hope of eternall lyfe) O
moſt vrkeſome and wretched tragidie, to all
men. And in this true and celeſtiall conſideration
to turne wholy vnto thée: accepting
their wanderinge pouertie, diſtreſſe and miſery:
a bleſſefull purpoſe and determination
of thy mercifull will, for their good auayle,
through hope and pacience in Chriſt Ieſus:
and feelinge the operation of thy heauenly
grace, to reioyce in their croſſe and afflictions,
embracinge thy will with cherefull humilitie,
and due obedience to the ſame, dedicatinge
theymſelues vnto thy moſt gracious

fauour and tuition: to be comforted, ſuccoured,
reliued, defended, cheriſhed and holpen,
by thy fatherly bountie and goodnes againſt
all, miſeries, wretchednes, deſperation, and
calamities, of bodye and ſoule: to the heauenly
reioycinge of their troubled ſpirites,
enritched through mercy and geace to the
eternall bliſſe and ſaluation of the ſame: in
Chriſt our déere Lord and Sauiour: for whoſe
loue O Father be mercifull, and here my
faythfull requeſt, grauntinge the ſame: to
the glory of thy moſt holy name: to the which
be all prayſe honour and glory for euermore.
            
            
               ¶A prayer for the
Sicke.
               
                  O Moſt grocious Lorde God almightie,
which haſt power ouer all: thou geueſt,
and at thine owne pleaſure takeſt awaye:
Thou O God haſt made vs, and not
we our ſelues: thou haſt limitted our ſcope,
beyonde which we cannot paſſe: man is a
vayne thinge and trauayleth in miſerye: and
of all his laboures, glory, ſtate and ritches,
(which vaniſhe as ſmoke) he hath no parte
in the end: all his pompe forſaketh him: his
ſoule will no longer dwell in him: but forſaketh

him and leaueth him to death, to be
clothed with duſt and aſhes, for therence hée
came, and thether returneth with ſpede. But
the ſoule of the faithfull liueth in peace, and
reioyceth in thaſſurance of eternall lyfe and
felicitie: for the fruition whereof he ſhalbe
againe clothed with his former tabernacle,
renued and rayſed to glory and immortalitie,
to reigne with Chriſt the redéemer of thine
electe, in the perpetuall preſence of thy moſt
glorious maieſtie, triumphing in peace and
bliſſe euerlaſtinge. O Father that, (through
fayth and holy conuerſation, in Chriſt Ieſus)
haſt ioend and knitte thy beloued Sainctes
in a louing brotherhode, to honour, to prayſe,
and to ſerue thée, in vnitie of fayth, truth,
hope, obedience, and loue: whereby we are
moued, and taught to miniſter and praye one
for thother, that our charitie may be full:
haue mercy vpon thy ſicke, féeble and payned
ſeruauntes, whom death doth aſſaile, wyth
bitter panges, by tormentinge gryfes for the
priuation of this mortall lyfe: yea Lorde
for thy ſwete Sonnes ſake, haue mercy vpon
theym, and vpon euery of theyme: Turne
vnto theym, and be mercifull vnto theym,
ſhewe them thy louing countenance, O God,
and comforte theym, ſtand by theym, hold thy

holy hand ouer them, and defend them againſt
the power of the enimie, aſwage their paines:
and ſtrengthen their weakenes with the preſence
of thy diuine grace: that féelinge the
comfortable workinge of thy holy Spirite,
they maye throughly vanquiſhe the diſtroyer,
and triumphinge in victory, in gladſome aſſuraunce
of thy mercy, to geue ouer cherefull
ſoules into thy fatherly handes, for the perpetuall
bliſſe and ſafetie of the ſame: through
Chriſt our déere Lord and Sauiour: to whom
with thée and the holy Ghoſt reigning in equalitie
of mageſtie glory and power: be all
prayſe honour and thankes for euermore.
Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶A prayer for our worldly
trauayles.
               
                  O Mercifull Lorde God bliſſefull and almightie,
that for the behofe of man dyddeſt
create the whole worlde: geuinge him
dominion and ſkill to vſe theym, to the nurriſhment
preſeruation, and mayntenaunce,
of his tranſitory lyfe vpon earth: Loke fauorably
vpon our faythfull induſtrye and trauayles,
and ſo bleſſe and (for thy déere Sonnes
ſake) ſo proſper our faythfull laboures, and

indeuoures, that through the plenteous bountie
of thy fatherly goodnes, we may reape &
gather the hoped frutes, and bleſſeful increaſe
of che ſame: that beinge fedde and bleſſed
with ſufficience, we may be haboundaunt in
almes, and charitable geuinge, to oure infirme
comfortleſſe, nedye, and diſtreſſed bretherne:
to the glory and honour of thy name:
which for loue of our ſwéete Sauiour Chriſt,
heareſt and fulfilleſt, the godly requeſtes of
thy faythfull ſeruauntes. So be it.
            
            
               ¶A prayer for the Queene
and Realme.
               
                  O Moſt gracious Lorde God, and Kynge
almightie iuſt and euerlaſtinge, vpon
whoſe wyll dependeth, the rule, ſtaye
and direction of all thinges both in Heauen
and in earth: geuinge men power and dominion
ouer the people and nations of the
worlde: to whom, beinge obedient to thy
moſt holy will and commaundementes: thou
geueſt wyſe, carefull, induſtrious, vertuous,
happie, and proſperous, Kynges, Princes,
Rulers, and mageſtrates: to rule and to gouerne,
to the peace, bleſſinge, comforte, and
wealth, of the ſame: But the vnrighteous

people, laſciuius, contempteous, Idolatrous,
ſuperſtitious, blaſphemous, and Rebellious
againſt thy worde and maieſtie, ſhalbe deliuered
ouer to the handes and tuition of fooliſhe,
Idle, diſſolute, negligent and vnfortunate
Princes, Rulers and gouernours: by
whoſe brutiſhe, diſorder, loſenes and folye,
the ſtate, beautie, ſtrength, and bondes of
peace, Iuſtice, loue and gouernement, ſhalbe
neglected, broken, diſturbed, ſpoyled, and by
inteſtine hatereds and diſcordes: or elles, by
foren vanquiſhmentes and diſcomfitures,
diſtroyed: whereby both land and people,
are lefte a praye, to th' inuaſion, ſpoyle and
rauine, of the gréedye and victorious diſtroyer:
who in his mercileſſe rage executeth the
plagues of thy iuſt wrath, O Lorde, ſo that
neither man woman, childe, beaſt, foule nor
féelde, ſcapeth the ſtripes therof. Their countryes,
Townes, Cities and dwellings, burnt
ſpoyled, rent torne and made waſte: Iuſtice,
Lawe, diſcipline, nurture, ciuill feloſhip, honeſt
artes and exerciſes, Religion, knoweledge
and feare of thée, ſcorned, baniſhed,
and perſecuted: And the land beinge fylled,
with abhomination, beaſtly tyrrany, ſlaughter,
bloud, robbery, thiuery rapyne, and murther,
the people kylled, ſtrangled, ſtarued,

ſpoyled and mocked: bound and caried away
to be ſolde (as beaſtes) in the markette: to ſeruitude
and ſlauery, there to conſume theire
dayes in miſerable thrall and ſorowes: the
kyngdome and inheritaunce tranſported to
the poſſeſſion of the diſtroyer: who rayſed in
thy wrath, and armed with the power of thy
diſpleaſure: miniſtreth due punniſhment, for
the ſinne and diſobedience, of eche reuoltinge
nation that falleth away from thée, and will
not be reconciled to grace: witneſſe of all
the ſtates, Empires, kyngdomes, tongues
nations peoples and kyndreds of the earth,
from the beginninge of the world to this day.
But in theſe later dayes: ſpecially of the
Iewes Egiptians: Armenianes, Grecians, Italiens,
Hungariens, Poloniens, and others:
whoſe ſeruile thrall and calamities, ought
neuer to be out of our remembraunce: which
ſhould moue vs continually to beholde, the
bleſſinge of thy loue, and the heauie ſorowes,
of thy diſpleaſure. Wherefore in the haboundaunce
of thy mercies and louinge kindnes,
and for loue of thy déere Sonne: whome
throughe the gifte of thy grace, we profeſſe
in the truth of his Goſpell, we beſeche thée
O mercifull Father, fauourably to loke vpon
this Realme and people, of Englande:

Turne not awaye thy face, O Lord, take not
thy grace and holy ſpirite from vs: let vs ſtill
enioye the bliſſe and coumforte of thy louing
countenaunce: kepe vs in the waye, and couer
vs vnder the ſhadowe of thy winges: ſuffer
vs not to be taken from thée: make vs to
folowe and to put our whole truſt and confidence
in thée, then ſhall we be ſafe: Thy
mightie hand O God, geueth the victory: and
in the power of thy fauour ſhall the ennimie
be vanquiſhed, and his ſtrength brought to
nothinge. Saf is the Citie where thou Lorde
art the watchman: but who ſo ſtandeth out
of thy tuition, he is a redye praye to the diſtroier:
Therfore go not farre from vs, O God.
For thine electes ſake weare the heauens and
the earth, withall their implements, fourmed
and made of nothinge: for their preſeruation
and mayntenaunce, was rule and gouernement
deuiſed and ſtabliſhed, and for theire
ſakes, are Empires, kyngdomes, countries,
and nations, preſerued, ſaued and bleſſed: and
for iniury and ignominie done to theym and
to thy truth and holy name, are they changed,
plagued, ſubuerted and diſtroyed. Great is
thy mercy and compaſſion O Lorde, longe
ſufferinge and redye to forgeue: beholde vs,
O Father and haue mercy vpon vs: remember

not our inquities, nor the iniquities of our
forefathers: take not iuſt vengeance of our
ſinnes: neither reward thou vs after our deſerts:
ſpare vs good Lord, and for thy ſwete
Sonnes ſake Chriſt Ieſus our Sauiour
haue mercy vpon vs: yea Lord haue mercy
vpon vs and vpon our poſteritie, holding continually
thy holy hand ouer vs, and bleſſe vs:
Increaſe our faith, and make our children and
childers children obedient to thy worde, and
through holy conuerſation in thy Sonne our
Redéemer, make vs and theym acceptable
vnto thy ſelfe, O God: that beinge ſanctified
in fayth and loue toward thy heauenly wyll
and maieſtie, we and they may be deliuered
from thy wrathfull diſpleaſure, for euermore.
Poure forth haboundaunce of thy grace and
bleſſinge vpon our Queene, that in the fulnes
of thy gratious fauour, ſhée maye haue
longe lyfe in health and happpye dayes: ayded
with faythfull, verteous and prudent
Counſailours, and miniſters, to do all things
to the nuriſhing and maynteynaunce of true
Religion and vertue: Increaſe the light of
thy Goſpell and the number of faythfull and
godly preachers and miniſters of thy word,
whoſe induſtrye and labour, by the peace and
tranquillitie of thy Church, maye largelye

augment the number of thy Sainctes: to the
glory of thy name, and to the ioye and bleſſinge
of the land and people. For the preſeruation
and continuaunce wherof, in the
bowelles of the fatherly care and fauour remember
vs, O louinge God: leaue neither
vs nor our poſteritie headleſſe, neither put
vs ouer to the yoke of a ſtraunge, nor Irreligious
Prince: But after the bliſſefull dayes
of this thy gracious handmayde our Queene
(whom O Father let it pleaſe thée to preſerue
in happye and ioyefull ſtate to th'end)
geue peace and concord to thy people, with a
verteous wiſe, godly, and fortunate Prince,
whoſe conſtant, zeale, care, induſtrye, and
indeuoure, toward the cheriſhinge and aduauncement
of thy truth and glory, may purchaſe
thy fatherly loue and furtheraunce, to
fill the land and people, with all maner of
bleſſinges, as thy heauenly wiſedome knoweth
neceſſary, where beautified with vertue
and godlines, it ſhall proſper and triumphe,
in continuall peace and victory, geuinge honour
and gladſome thankes to thy glorious
maieſtie, that with thy déere Sonne our Lord
and Sauiour, and with the holy Ghoſt, reigneſt
in vnitie of power, glory, and dominion:
prayſed for euer and euer. Amen.
               
            
            
               
               ¶A prayer for conſtancie
in Chriſt.
               
                  O Lorde God maker of all thinges, onely
thou that arte to be feared: onely thou
that art gloryous, righteous, and mercifull:
Thou which onely art gratious, onely
liberall, onely iuſt almightie and euerlaſting:
thou that of thine accuſtomed and ritche mercies
deliueredſt thyne electe from all troubles,
voutchſafe for thy Sonnes ſake to deliuer and
preſerue vs, from all euill, and alſo from doinge
thoſe thinges which thou in thy holy
worde haſt forbydden. Oh be gratious vnto
vs, and thinke vpon thy couenant made with
our forefathers of old, as Abraham, Iſaac, and
Iacob, they true and faythfull ſeruaunts: and
geue vs all, ſuch hartes, that we maye vnfaynedly
loue and ſerue thée, by true obedience
to thy holy Lawes and commaundementes.
Send vs inward peace in conſcience
that we maye be at one with thée, ſo that
thou neuer forſake vs in the tyme of trouble,
be vnto vs in all our nede and neceſſitie as
a ſure rocke, defence buckeler and Shielde,
that vnder the winges of thy diuine maieſtie,
we maye bée ſafely kept, and couered, that

Sathan and his wicked Impes, by any cruell
tyrrany or oppreſſion, neuer preuayle againſt
vs. But graunt (good Lorde) for thine owne
glories ſake, yea for thy Sonne Chriſt Ieſus
ſake, that we in the tyme of tryall maye
ſhewe our ſelues as valiant warriers, firmely
and conſtantly to fight vnder thy banner, and
not lyke cowardes at euery blaſte of wynd,
be ready to runne awaye, ſtartinge backe,
and ſlyding from the feloſhip of thy Saincts:
thinkinge here in this wicked worlde for a
longe tyme to enioye the ritches and pleaſures
therof: the which tyme, if wée duely
conſider, is but as one droppe of rayne compared
to th'hole Sea: yea if for this ſhorte
and momentarye tyme wée might get the
whole worlde, and loſe our owne ſoules,
what ſhoulde it profitte? or what is their
(oh Lorde) to redéeme our ſoules with all?
In euery ſouldier that in this worlde, taketh
in hand vnder his Capitayne to fight, it is
required, that he be ſtoute, valiaunt, and
manly, that when they pinche of the battayls
commeth: hée then proue mightie and
couragious in fight, in aſſured hope of triumphant
victory. Euen ſo (oh good Lorde) it
is required in euery of vs which profeſſe thy
holy Goſpell, that we ſhewe our ſelues manfull

in fight for the defence of the ſame: that
when, by thy prouidence the brunte of perſecution
is kyndled and miniſtred vnto vs, we
may then ſhew our ſelues as true and faythfull
Chriſtians, to fight that good fight for
an eternall triumphe and victory: In geuing
and offeringe vp our owne bodies, for a ſacrifice
vnto the Lorde our God, who is euer
readye to ſtrengthen theym that put theire
full truſt in him. Oh good Lorde graunt for
thy names ſake vnto vs ſuch plentie of thy
grace, that when tyme requireth, as we doe
beleue in harte to iuſtification, euen ſo by
mouth we maye make true confeſſion to ſaluation,
that the frute of the ſame may be to
vs in the latter daye, ioye comforte and eternall
conſolation, throughe Ieſus Chriſt by
whoſe death and merites, we are made inheritours
of his euerlaſtinge kyngdome. To
whom with the father and the holy Ghoſt,
be prayſe glory and dominion, world without
ende. Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶A prayer againſt the workeinge
of Sathan.
               OH Lorde deſtroye all the workes of Sathan,
comfort them that are in aduerſitie:

helpe thoſe that be in trouble for thy names
ſake, haue mercy vpon vs, and make vs thy
true faythfull obedient and thankefull ſeruauntes:
Lorde incline our hartes to thy
teſtimonies, and ſuffer vs not to ſerue th'unlawfull
luſtes of our ſinnefull fleſh. O turne
awaye our eyes that they beholde not vanitie,
but quicken thou vs in thy lawe: beſtow
vpon vs thy worde (oh Lorde) ſo that we neuer
abuſe it, neither turne it vnto wantones:
But that entring into the grace of true repentaunce,
we maye therein increaſe, and
therin continewe till our lyues ende. Amen.
               
            
            
               ¶A forme of prayer to God the
Father, the Sonne and the
holy Ghoſt.
               
                  
                     O
                   Almightie and euerliuinge
God, the eternall father of our
Lord Ieſus Chriſt, which of
thy vnmeaſurable goodnes,
haſt opened thy ſelfe vnto vs,
and with a loud voyce, haſte
ſayd of the Sonne Ieſus Chriſt our Lorde,
heare him: O maker and preſeruer of all
thinges with thy coeternall Sonne our Lord
Ieſus Chriſt, which raigneth with thée, and

was manifeſted in Ieruſalem: and with thy
holy Spirite, which was powred vppon the
Apoſtles: O wiſe God, mercifull Iudge, and
mightie Lorde, which haſt ſayde: as truly as
I liue, I wyll not the death of a ſinner, but
rather that he ſhoulde conuerte and amend:
which alſo haſt ſayde: call vpon me in the
daye of thy trouble, and I will deliuer thée:
haue mercy vppon vs, for Ieſus Chryſtes
ſake, whom thou wouldeſt, of thy marueylous
and incomprehenſible counſayle, ſhould
be made for vs a ſlaine ſacrifice, mediatour,
reconciler, and peacemaker, to the ende that
thou mighteſt ſhewe thy excedynge greate
wrath againſt ſinne, and thy eſtimable mercye
towardes mankinde. Sanctifie and illuminate
our hartes and ſoules with thy holy
ſpirite, that we maye truely beleue in thée,
call vpon thée, be thankefull vnto thée, and
obedient to thy holy wyll. Defend, gouerne
and cheriſhe thy Church, as thou haſt promiſed,
ſaying: this is my couenaunt that I haue
made with them: my ſpirite which is in thée,
and my worde which I haue put in thy
mouth, ſhall not departe from the mouth of
thy ſéede for euer. Preſerue thoſe kyngdomes
and common weales, which geue harbour
to thy people, and mayntayne the mineſterye

of thy holy word and Goſpell, that the
kingdome of thy Sonne Ieſus Chriſt may encreaſe
and ſhine throughout all the world.
            
            
               ¶A prayer to God the
Sonne
               
                  O Ieſus Chriſt, Sonne of the euerliuing
God, crucified for vs, and rayſed alſo
from the dead, and now raigning at the
right hande of thy father, that thou mayeſt
geue giftes vnto men, which haſte ſayde,
come vnto me all ye that labour and be heauie
laden, and I will refreſh you: haue mercie
vpon vs, and pray for vs vnto the eternall
father: ſanctifie and gouerne vs with thy holie
ſpirite: helpe and ſuccour vs in all our neceſſities,
as thou haſt promiſed, ſaying: I wil
not leaue you comfortles.
            
            
               ¶A prayer to the holy
Ghoſt.
               
                  O Holy ſpirite, poured vpon the Apoſtles,
which waſte promiſed vnto vs by the
ſonne of God our redemer, to kendle in
vs a true kuowledge and inuocation to God,
as it is written: I wil poure vpon you ye ſpirite

of grace and of compaſſion: make to ariſe in
our hartes, a true feare of God, and a true faith
and knowledge of the mercy which the eternall
father of our lord Ieſus Chriſt, hath promiſed
vnto vs for his Sonnes ſake. Be our
comforter in all counſayles and daungers: illuminate
our vnderſtanding, & fill our harts
with newe affectes an ſpiritual motions, and
renewe vs both in ſoule and bodye, that we
may die to ſinne, and liue to righteouſnes, and
ſo in true obedience may prayſe the father of
our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, and his ſonne our redemer,
and thée alſo our comforter euerlaſtinglye.
            
            
               ¶Another prayer to the
holy Ghoſt.
               
                  O Holy and bleſſed ſpirite, together with
the father and the Sonne, our true and
euerliuing God, full of maieſtie, & power
which with thy heauenly inſpiration quickeneſt
the mindes of thoſe that afore were dead
in ſinne, makeſt ioyfull the harts of the faithfull,
penitent, bringeſt into that way of truth
all ſuch as haue erred, & gone aſtraye, comforteſt
the ſoules of ſuch as hunger and thirſte
after righteouſnes, and plenteouſly enricheſt

thoſe with diuers giftes, which aſke them in
Ieſus Chriſtes name: purifie our hartes (we
beſeche thée) and inflame them with the fyre
of thy loue: repleniſhe them with thy heauenly
benefites & ſpiritual bleſſings, that they
may be made mete temples for thée: lead vs
into all truth, which art th'only fountaine of
truth, and mortifie in vs whatſoeuer procedeth
not of thée. Arme vs againſt the craftie
aſſaultes of ſubtill ſathan, againſt the vaine
pleaſures of the wicked worlde, and againſt
the ſinnefull luſtes of filthy fleſh, that we beinge
endued with grace from aboue, by thy
holy inſpiration, maye walke forwardes in
newnes of lyfe, in holines and righteouſnes,
all the dayes of our lyfe.
            
            
               ¶A godly prayer to be ſayd
at all tymes,
               HOnour and prayſe be geuen to thée (O
Lorde God almightie) moſt dere father
of heauen, for all thy mercies and louing
kyndnes ſhewed vnto vs, in that it hath
pleaſed thy gracious goodnes, fréely, and of
thine owne accorde, to electe, and choſe vs to
ſaluation before the begining of the world,
and euen like continuall thankes be geuen to

thée, for creating vs after thine owne Image,
for redeminge vs with the precious bloud of
thy deare Sonne, when we were vtterly
loſte, for ſanctifyinge vs with the holy ſpirite
in the reuelation and knowledge of thy
holy worde, for helpinge and ſuccouringe vs
in all our nedes and neceſſities, for ſauinge
vs from all daungers of body and ſoule, for
comfortinge vs ſo fatherly in all our tribulations
and perſecutions, for ſparinge vs ſo
longe, and geuinge vs ſo large a tyme of repentaunce.
Theſe benefites (O moſt mercifull
Father) lyke as we knowledge to haue
receiued them of thy onely goodnes, euen ſo
we beſeche thée, for thy déere Sonne Ieſus
Chriſtes ſake, to graunt vs alwayes thy holy
ſpirite wherby we may continually growe
in thankefulnes towardes thée, to be lead in
all truth, and comforted in all our aduerſitie.
O Lord ſtrengthen our fayth, kindle it more
in feruentnes and loue towardes thée, and
our neighboures for thy ſake. Suffer vs not
moſt déere Father to receaue thy worde any
more in vayne: but graunt vs alwayes the
aſſiſtaunce of thy grace and holy ſpirite, that
in harte, worde, and dede we maye ſanctifie
and do worſhippe to thy name. Helpe to amplefie
and increaſe thy kyngdome, and whatſoeuer

thou ſendeſt we maye be hartely well
content with thy good pleaſure and will. Let
vs not lacke the thinge (O Father) without
the which we cannot ſerue thée: but bleſſe
thou ſo all the works of our handes, that we
maye haue ſufficient, and not to be chargeable,
but rather helpefull vnto others: be
mercifull (O Lord) to our offences, and ſeing
our debte is great, which thou haſt forgeuen
vs in Ieſus Chriſt, make vs to loue thée, and
our neighboures ſo much the more. Be thou
our Father, our Captaine and defender in
all temptations, hold thou vs by thy mercifull
hande, that we may be deliuered from all inconueniences,
and end our lyues in the ſanctifyinge,
and honour of thy holy name through
Ieſus Chriſt our Lorde and onely Sauiour.
So be it.
               Let thy mighiie hande and out ſtretched
arms (O Lorde be ſtill our defence, thy mercie
and louing kindnes in Ieſus Chriſt thy
déere Sonne our ſaluation: thy true and holy
worde our inſtruction: thy grace and holy
ſpirite our comforte and conſolation, vnto the
ende and in the ende. So be it.
               O Lord increaſe our fayth.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XXI. of Iohn.
               AND I ſawe a newe heauen, and a newe earth:
for the firſt heauen, and the firſt earth were paſſed
awaye, and there was no more ſea. And I Iohn
ſawe the holy citie newe Ieruſalem come downe
from God out of heauen, prepared as a bride trimmed
for her houſband. And I heard a great voyce out of
heauen ſayinge, Beholde, the Tabernacle of God is
with men, and he will dwell with them: and they ſhalbe
his people, and God him ſelfe ſhalbe their God with
them. And God ſhall wipe away all teares from theyr
eyes: and there ſhalbe no more death, neither ſorrowe,
neither crying, neither ſhall there be any more paine: for
the firſt thinges are paſſed. And he that ſate vpon the
throne, ſayd, Beholde, I make all thinges newe: and
he ſayd vnto me, Write: for theſe wordes are faythfull
and true. And he ſayd vnto me, It is done, I am and
the beginning and ye end. I will giue to him that is a
thirſt, of the well of the water of lyfe freely. He that
ouercommeth, ſhall inherit all thinges, and I will be
his God, and he ſhalbe my ſonne. But the fearefull and
vnbeleuing, and the abhominable, and murderers, and
whoremongers, and ſorcerers, and idolaters, and all
liars ſhal haue the parte in the lake, which burneth with
fyre and brimſtone, which is the ſecond death. And there
came vnto me one of the ſeuen Angels, which had the
ſeuen viales full of the ſeuen laſt plagues, and talked wt
me, ſayinge, Come: I will ſhewe thee the bride, the
Lambes wife. And he caried me awaye in the ſpirite to
a great and an hie mountaine, and he ſhewed me the
great citie, holy Ieruſalem, deſcendinge out of heauen
from God, Hauing the glory of God: and her ſhining
was like vnto a ſtone moſte precious, as a Iaſper
ſtone cleare as criſtall. And had a great wall an hie, and

had twelue Gates, and at the gates twelue Angels, and
the names writtē, which are ye twelue tribes of the childrē
of Iſrael. On the Eaſt part there were thre gates,
on the Northſide thre gates, on the Southſide thre gates,
and on the Weſtſide thre gates. And the wall of the
citie had twelue foundations, and in them the names of
the Lambes twelue Apoſtles. And he that talked with
me, had a golden rede to meaſure the citie with all, and
the gates therof, and the wall therof. And the citie laye
foure ſquare, and the length is as large as the bredth of
it, and he meaſured the citie with the rede, twelue thouſande
furlonges: and the length and the bredth, and the
height of it are equall. And he meaſured the wall therof,
an hundreth, fortie and foure cubites, by the meaſure of
man, that is, of the Angell. And the building of the wal
of it was of Iaſper: and the citie was pure golde, like
vnto clere glaſſe. And ye foundaciōs of the wall of ye citie
were garniſhed with all maner of precious ſtones: the
firſt foundacion was Iaſper: the ſecond of Saphire:
the third of a Chalcedonie: the fourth of an Emeraude.
The fifte of Sardonix: the ſixt of a Sardius: the ſeuenth
of a Chriſolite: the eight of a Beryl: the ninth
of a Topaze: the tenth of a Chryſopraſus: the eleuenth
of a Iacinth: the twelueth an Amethiſt. And the twelue
pearles and enery gate is of one pearle, and the ſtrete of
the citie is pure golde, as ſhining glaſſe. And I ſawe
no Temple therin for the Lorde God almightie and the
Lambe are the Temple of it. And the citie hath no nede
of the Sunne, neither of the Moone to ſhine in it: for
the glory of God dyd light it: and the Lambe is the
light of it. And the people which are ſaued, ſhall walke
in the light of it: and the Kyngs of the earth ſhall bring
their glory and honour vnto it. And the gates of it ſhall
not be ſhut by daye: for there ſhalbe no night there.
And the glory & honour of the Gentiles ſhalbe brought
vnto it And there ſhall enter in it none vncleane thinge

neither whatſoeuer worketh abhomination or lies: but
they which are written in the Lambes Boke of lyfe.
            
            
               ¶A prayer.
               
                  O Mercifull Lorde and louing father, God
almightie, Iuſt and euerlaſtinge, that
in the inſerchable purpoſe of thy wyll
and wiſedome, dyddeſt create Heauen and
earth, withall the thinges in theym conteyned
to depend, to ſerue, and to continew in
obedience to thy irrepugnable order and direction:
tyll the number of thy beloued,
which, in thy déere Sonne our Sauiour, thou
haſt choſen to eternall lyfe: ſhalbe filled: at
whoſe deliuery from corruption: (whereunto
diſobedient man brought all thinges ſubiect
through his offence) the tranſitory, vaniſhed
and burnt creatures, ſhall generally be renued,
and ſtabliſhed in permanent ſtate of
beautie and glory euer enduringe, filled with
the gladſome brightnes of the continuall preſence
of thy maieſtie, dwellinge amongſt thy
Sainctes to theyre inſpeakeable ioyes and
bliſſe euerlaſtinge: Loke vpon vs O Father
and haue mercy vpon vs: and as it hath
pleaſed thy gracious, goodnes, O God, by
the inſpiration of the holy ſpirite, to frame

our hartes to beliue the Goſpel of thy Sonne,
by whom we receaue ſwete taſt of thy fatherly
loue and mercie: So let it be thy wyll O
God, to comforte our faynte ſoules with the
continuall preſence of thy heauenly grace:
that we perfectly féelinge, the beinge and
workinge of the ſame in our hartes: maye
vtterly deſpiſe this miſerable world with all
her fooliſh trifiles and fonde vanities: euer
thurſtinge after thée with inſatiable deſire of
heanenly things, willing to be diſolued from
this corrupt and ſinnefull tabernacle, to reſt
with thée in the Tabernacle of peace and
ioyes euerlaſtinge: through Chriſt our
Lorde, Iudge, and redéemer: to
whome with thée and the holy
Ghoſt reigninge in equalitie
& vnitie of maieſtie,
glory, and dominion:
bée all prayſe
honour and
thankes for euer and
euer. Amen.
               
            
         
         
            
               
               ¶A Pſalme to be ſayde in the time of
any common plague, ſickenes, or
other croſſe and viſitation
of God.
               
                  
                     O
                   Come, let vs humble our ſelues
and fall downe before the
Lorde, wyth reuerence and
feare.
               For he is the Lord our God:
and we are the people of his
paſture, and the ſhepe of his handes.
               Come therfore, let vs turne againe vnto
our Lorde, for he hath ſmitten vs, and hée
ſhall heale vs.
               Let vs repent and turne from our wickednes,
and our ſinnes ſhalbe forgeuen vs.
               Let vs turne, and the Lorde will turne
from his heauie wrath, and will pardon vs,
and we ſhall not periſhe.
               For we knowledge our faultes, and our
ſinnes be euer before vs.
               We haue ſore prouoked thine anger (O
Lorde) thy wrath is waxed hot, and thy heauie
diſpleaſure is ſore kyndled againſt vs.
               Thou haſte, in thine indignation ſtriken
vs with thy greuous ſickenes, and by and by

we haue fallen as leaues beaten downe with
a vehement winde.
               In dede we aknowledge that our puniſhment
are leſſe then our deſeruinges: but yet
of thy mercie Lord correcte vs to amendment,
and plague vs not to our deſtruction.
               For thy hand is not ſhortned that thou
canſt not helpe: neither is thy goodnes abated
that thou wilt not heare.
               Thou haſt promiſed, O Lorde, that afore
we crye thou wilt heare vs: whileſt we yet
ſpeake thou wilt haue mercy vpon vs.
               For none that truſt in thée ſhall be confounded:
neither any that call vpon thée ſhalbe
deſpiſed.
               For thou art the onely Lorde, who woundeſt
and doeſt heale againe, who kylleſt and
reuiueſt, bringeſt euen into hell, and bringeſt
backe againe.
               Our Fathers hoped in thée, they truſted
in thée, and thou diddeſt deliuer them.
               They called vpon thée, and weare helped:
they put there truſt in thée, and weare not
confounded.
               O Lorde, rebuke not vs in thine indignation,
neither chaſten vs in thy heauie diſpleaſure.
               O remember not the ſinnes and offences

of our youth: but accordinge to thy mercy
thinke thou vpon vs, O Lorde, for the goodnes.
               Haue mercy vpon vs, O Lorde, for we are
weake: O Lord heale vs, for our bones are
vexed.
               And now in the vexation of our Spirites
and the anguiſhe of our ſoules we remember,
thée, and we crye vnto thée: heare Lorde, &
haue mercye:
               For thine owne ſake, and for thy holy
names ſake incline thine eare, and heare O
mercifull Lorde.
               For we do not poure out our prayers before
thy face, truſtinge in our owne righteouſnes:
but in thy great mercyes.
               Waſhe vs throughly from our wickednes:
and clenſe vs from our ſinnes.
               Turne thy face from our ſinnes, and put
out all our miſdedes.
               Make vs cleane hartes, O God: and renew
a right ſpirite within vs.
               Helpe vs O God of our ſaluation, for the
glory of thy name: O deliuer vs, and be
mercifull vnto our ſinnes for thy names ſake.
               So we that be thy people, and ſhepe of
thy paſture, ſhall geue thée thanckes for
euer, and will alwayes be ſhewinge forth
thy prayſe from generation, to generation.
               
                  
Glory be to the Father, and to the Sonne,
and to the holy Ghoſt,
               As it was in the beginning, is now, and euer
shalbe, world without end. Amen.
            
            
               The comfort and Prayers
of the Sicke.
               
                  MAN that is borne of a woman hath
but a shorte time to liue, and is full of
miſery, he commeth vp and is cutte downe
lyke a flower: fleeth as it weare a shadowe and
neuer continueth in one ſtate, In the middeſt
of lyfe we are dyinge, of whom shall we ſeke
ſuccour and comforte but of thee O Lorde
God our maker.
               
               THou haſt made me of nought O Lorde:
and when it ſhall pleaſe thée to nothing
ſhall I returne: of earth I came and to
earth I ſhall without tarying. I brought nothinge
with me, neither ſhall I cary ought
awaye, when I departe. Thou art my portion
O Lord Chriſt: by thée came grace and
lyfe to the choſen, receiue me to thy mercy:
thou waſt kylled for our ſakes, and art riſen
as the firſt frutes of theym that ſlepe, thou

art crowned with power and glory, thou haſt
diſtſtroyed death, and geuen euerlaſtinge life
to all beleuers. Thou ſhalt reyſe vs vp at
the laſt daye and geue vs poſſeſſion of the
inheritaunce, which thou haſt purchaſed in
thy bloud and righteouſnes, according to the
mercifull will of our heauenly father, whom
thou haſt pacified and pleaſed, for our redemption
and ſaluation for the performaunce of the
othe, which in his eternall and inſerchable,
purpoſe, he promiſed our forefathers. Wherof
in thy mercyfull fauour thou haſt called
me to be partaker: wherby I am taught and
comforted by thy holy ſpirite, to deſpiſe the
worlde and this corrupt Tabernacle of ſinnefull
fleſhe, which hath of it ſelfe deſerued nothinge
but death and dampnation: and wholy
to cleaue vnto thée O my Sauiour. Therefore
ſtand by me O Lorde, and defend me againſt
the aſſaultes of Sathan. That after
triumphant victory throughe the grace and
power of thy holy ſpirite, I maye ioyefully
geue ouer this fleſhly beinge, and come to
thy preſence, O Lorde, to reſt in bliſſefull
peace, tyll the deliuery of thy Sainctes: with
whom I am in aſſured hope (by the witnes,
of thy ſpirite) to haue my portion of the inheritaunce
euerlaſtinge. Amen.
               
            
            
               
               ¶The Sicke ſayth.
               I Heard a voyce from heauen ſaying vnto me,
write, from henceforth, bleſſed are the dead
which dye in the Lorde.
            
            
               ¶PSALME.
               IN thée, O Lorde, haue I truſted, let mée
neuer be confounded: but ridde me and deliuer
me in thy righteouſnes, encline thine
eare to me and ſaue me.
               Be thou my ſtronge holde whereunto I
maye reſorte, for ſuccour: thou art Iuſte O
Lorde, thou haſt promiſed to helpe me: therfore
I flée vnto thée, as the onely caſtle and
forte of my defence and ſauegarde.
               Receaue me to thy tuition, O God, and
ſaue me, deliuer me from the hand, of the
enimie, and my ſoule from the power of the
dogges.
               Caſt me not awaye in my laſt hower O
Lord, neither forſake thou me in my weakenes,
goe not farre from me, but haſt thée to
helpe me, for thou art my hope and ſaluation,
O God.
               Let my harte be fylled with gladnes, and

my mouth with prayſe, that I maye ſinge of
thy glory: and with the reall of thy Sainctes,
geue honour to thy maieſtie, in the eternall
fruition of thy preſence, through Chriſt.
               Prayſed be thy name O louinge God,
that art mercifull vnto ſinners, and ſaueſt
theym from diſtruction.
               Remember not O Lord mine iniquities,
nor the iniquities of my forefathers, take not
vengeance of my ſinnes. Spare me good Lord:
ſpare me whom thou haſt redéemed with thy
precious bloud, and be not angrye with mée
(a wretche) to death.
               O Lorde deliuer me from the power of
the enimie:
               O Lorde ſaue me thy poore ſeruaunt, that
put my truſt in thée.
               Send me helpe from thy holy place.
And euermore mightely defend me.
               Be vnto me a ſtrong Tower O Lorde.
And euermore couer me vnder thy winges.
               O Lord heare my prayer.
And let my crye come vnto thée.
               ¶I knowe that my redemer liueth, and that
I shall riſe out of the earth in the laſt day, and
shalbe couered againe with my ſkinne, and

ſhall ſee God in my fleshe, yea and my ſelfe
ſhal beholde him, not with other but with the
ſame eyes.
               OH my ſoule be ioyefull in the Lorde, and
deſpiſe not his correction, neither faynte
thou at his rebukes.
               For whom the Lorde loueth, him he correcteth,
yea he ſcourgeth euery Sonne whom
he receaueth.
               Thy ſinnes weare innumerable, neither
couldeſt thou clayme ought of dutie, but death
and dampnation.
               Thy mercifull Lorde, hath accepted thy
teares and repentant groninges: and turnde
awaye his face from thyne offences: he fréely
hath forgeuen thée thy ſinnes.
               And becauſe thou haſt repented, & truſted
his mercie, he hath put theym all out of his
remembraunce, neither will hée thinke on
theym any more.
               He will receaue thée into his houſe and
crowne thée with glory and kyndnes.
               Thou ſhalte ſtand before his preſence in
the ſanctuary euerlaſtinge.
               With Angelles and Archangelles, with
the Patriarches and Prophettes, with the
faythfull wytneſſes, and with all the reaſt of

thy choſen children of grace, to honour him to
ſerue him: to magnifie and prayſe him, with
continuall thankes, in bliſſefull ioye and felicitie
for euer and euer.
               
                  NOwe O my ſoule loke vpon Chriſt Ieſus
the righteous, thy aduocate and redemer,
he is ready to receaue thee': therfore be
gladde in him, and geue thankes. Reioycinge
in the viſitation of the Lorde, wherby he ſo
mercifully and louingly warneth thee' to prepare
thee' to the way, that shall bringe thee' out
of this vale of miſery, care, thrall, labour, and
ſorowes, to the caſtell of eternall, ioyes and felicitie.
Plucke vp thy harte with cherefulnes,
deſpiſe the worlde with all her paynted vanities
and illuſions, loke ſtedfaſtly vpon thy Sauiour
who will not fayle thee' in thy diſtreſſe
but ſtand by thee', comforte thee' and deliuer
thee'. Committe thy ſelfe vnto him, and geuing
prayſes vnto his name for that is louely. And
he by death shall receaue thee' to lyfe euer
enduringe.
               
            
            
               ¶Prayers.
               
                  O Loke downe from heauen, viſite and reliue
me thy poore and weake ſeruaunt:

Beholde me with the eyes of thy mercie O
God: geue me comforte, and ſure confidence,
in thée. Defend me from the power of th'ennimie,
and kepe me in thy perpetuall peace
and ſaftie, throughe Ieſus Chriſt my Lorde
and Sauiour. Amen.
               
               
                  O My mercifull Lorde and louing Father,
which accordinge to the multitude of thy
mercies, doeſt ſo put awaye the ſinnes
of thoſe which truly repent: that thou remembreſt
them no more. Open vpon me the eyes
of thy fatherly pitie O Lorde, deſiringe forgeuenes
of my manyfolde offences, earneſtly
repentinge the ſame. Renue O louinge
father, whatſoeuer hath bene or is decayde
in me, by the fraude and malice of the Deuill:
or by mine owne carnall will and fraylenes:
preſerue and continewe me in the vnitie
of thy Church: Conſider my contrition,
accept my teares, aſſwage my payne, geue
me an obedient hart to thy good will & pleaſure,
yelding my ſelfe vnto the ſame wt humble
& cherefull thankeſgiuing. And puttinge my
whole truſt and confidence in thy mercy, impute
not vnto me my ſinnes, but take me in
to thy fauour and bleſſinge, O Lord: through
the merites of thy moſt derely beloued ſonne,

Chriſt Ieſus my Sauiour. Amen.
               
               
                  O Moſt gracious Lord God almightie mercifull
and true: which art a moſt ſtrong
Tower, to all theyme that put theire
truſt in thée: to whom all thinges in heauen,
in earth and vnder earth do bowe and
obaye, be now and euermore my defence,
and make me knowe and féele to the ende,
that there is none other name vnder heauen
geuen vnto man, in whom and throughe
whom, I maye receaue health and ſaluation
but onely the name of Ieſus Chriſt, my
Lorde and Sauiour: for whoſe ſake oh Father
haue mercie vpon me: haue mercie vpon
me Lorde, and ſtand by me to the ende.
Oh Sauiour of the worlde ſaue me which
by thy croſſe and precious bloud haſt redemed
me: helpe me, O God, and ſaue me, for euer,
for thine owne righteouſnes ſake oh
Lorde.
               
                  ¶O my ſoule committe thy ſelfe vnto the
Lorde, for he is readie to receiue thee.
               
               ¶Lord, Lorde, my Redemer haue mercie
vpon me, and receiue my Spirite.
            
         
         
            
            
               ❧THANKESgeuinge.
            
               ¶Prayſe the name of the Lord.
               
                  
                     PRayſed and magnified be thy
name O Lord god euerlaſting:
thy power is infinite, thy counſayles
vnſearchable: thy will
almightie: thy promiſes are
true: and thy iudgementes
righteous.
               
                  Prayſed be thy name O Lord, and magnified
amongeſt all thy creatures: that by thy
worde madeſt the heauens, the earth, the aer
and Sea, and all thinges in theym conteyned.
               
                  Prayſed be thy name O Lorde: vnto
whoſe order and derection all power do bowe
and obeye.
               
                  Prayſed be thy name O Lorde: that of thy
fatherly goodnes and bountie, powreſt thy
bleſſings vpon all creatures: without which,
is no lyfe, no preſeruation, no comforte, no
ſuccour, no foode, nor ſuſtentation.
               
                  Prayſed be thy name O lord God almighttie,
that of one clodde of claye: haſt multiplied,
all the kynreds nations: and generations

of the worlde.
               
                  Prayſed be thy name O Lord: that gaueſt
Adam frée will, and reaſon: and a charge to
obeye thy comaundement: from the which
he fell through his owne infirmitie: to the
vtter ruine and iuſt dampnation of himſelfe,
and all his poſteritie.
               
                  Prayſed be thy name O Lorde God of
mercy: that madeſt a couenaunt with our
forefathers, and haſt performed the ſame to
the ſaluation of thy choſen.
               
                  Prayſed be thy name O gracious Lorde
God euerlaſtinge: that, accordinge to thyne
eternall truth and mercy, haſt ſatiſfied the
longinge hope of thy faythfull ſeruaunts the
Patriarches and Prophettes.
               
                  Prayſed be thy name O heauenly lord and
Father: that dydeſt ſend downe thy Sonne
to become man: to teache vs thy wyll, and
to offer himſelfe vnto thée, for the redemption
of all them that beleue.
               
                  Prayſed be thy name oh mercifull Lorde
and Father: that, of thine owne frée grace
and mercie: haſt begotten vs of the newe,
through fayth and obeydience in Chriſt our
Sauiour: to poſſeſſe eternall lyfe which earſt
we had loſt, through miſbelife and Rebellion.
               
                  Prayſed be thy name oh mercifull Lorde

and father: that geueſt vnto thy beloued
children: thy holy ſpirite to ſanctifie theyre
hartes with fayth & obedience to thy worde:
which as a ſure witneſſe of thy grace and fauour,
worketh loue, and ioyefull peace in their
ſoules: through irremoueable hope of eternall
lyfe.
               
                  Prayſed be thy name O mercifull Lorde
and father, that knitteſt all thy faythfull children
by vnitie of grace and adoption, in one
vnſeperable brotherhode in Chriſt thy ſonne
our Sauiour, whereby we call thée father.
               
                  Prayſed be thy name O gratious Lorde
God almightie: that geueſt wiſedome to
the ſimple, that exalteſt the méeke harted,
that enritcheſt the poore, that comforteſt the
diſtreſſed, that ſuccoureſt the helpeleſſe, that
ſaueſt thy people from deſtruction, and geueſt
them ioyefull victory againſt there enimies.
               
                  Prayſed be thy name O glorious God
euerlaſting: that in the quarell of thy Saincts,
and defence of thy name: troubleſt, breakeſt,
teareſt aſonder, throweſt out, diſparſeſt, and
vtterly diſtroyeſt, the counſayles, determinacions,
dominions, ſtrengthes, powers and
glory: of the proude, of the malicious, of the
cruell, and of the mightie men of the world.
               
                  Prayſed be thy name O Lorde God of

power, that for reuenge of ſinne and diſobedience:
doeſt remoue and ſpoyle: the proude
nations and kyngdomes of the earth conſuminge
theym in the fyre of thy wrath: as
ſtrawe in the flame. And as duſt before the
wynde are they driuen from there ſeates and
habitations.
               
                  Prayſed be thy name O Lorde: that hateſt
the backebiters, and the proude: and to
the humble and meke geueſt, plentie of all
maner of goodnes.
               
                  Prayſed be thy name O God moſt gratious:
that neuer departeſt from theym that
vnfaynedly ſeke after thée: that neuer fayleſt
theym that put their whole truſt in thée, that
heareſt theym that call vpon thée, that deliuereſt
the fayythfull out of all their troubles:
and crowneſt theym with mercie and louing
kyndnes.
               
                  Prayſed be thy name O good and gratious
God: that with the preſence of thy grace
doeſt aſſiſte thy faythfull ſeruauntes, to liue
in holines: and to dye in fayth, workinge in
theym, cherefull aſſuraunce of euerlaſtinge
ſaluation: to reigne with Chriſt in the ioyefull
preſence of thy maieſtie: prayſinge and
magnifyinge, thy moſte glorious name O
God: with continuall myrth and thankeſgeuinge.
               
                  
                  Oh prayſe the name of our louinge God:
for it is he onely that is worthy to be prayſed,
his power is infinite, his glory eternall, and
his mercie is euerlaſtinge.
               
                  ¶Prayſe the Lorde O my ſoule.
               
               
                  ¶Foure formes of prayer deuided for
euery ſixth houre in the daye and
night.
               
               ¶FINIS.
            
         
      
      
         
            ¶IMPRINTED AT LONDON
in Fleteſtreat at the ſigne of the Faucon
by VVylliam Gryffith, and
are to be ſolde at his ſhoppe
in S. Dunſtones Church-yarde.
1570.
            Cum Priuilegio.
            
         
      
   