
      
         
            
            
            OBSERVATIONS,
VPON THE
FIVE FIRST BOOKES
OF CAESARS COMMENTARIES,
SETTING FOVRTH THE PRACTISE OF
THE ART MILITARY, IN THE TIME OF
THE ROMAN EMPIRE. WHEREIN ARE HANDLED ALL THE CHIEfeſt
points of their diſcipline, with the true reaſons of
euery part, together with ſuch inſtructions as may be
drawn from their proceedings, for the better
direction of our moderne
warres.
            BY
CLEMENT EDMVNDS.
            
               printer's device.
               P S
            
            
               AT LONDON,
Printed by Peter Short, dwelling on Bredſtreet hill at
the ſigne of the Starre. 1600.
         
         
            
            
            TO HIS HONORABLE FRIEND AND MOST WORthie
knight, Sir Francis Ʋere, chiefe commander
of her Maieſties forces in the ſeruice of the
ſtates, in the vnited Prouinces, and Gouernour
of the Cautionarie towne of
Briele, in Holland.
            
               SIR, hauing at length ended this taske of obſeruations,
it falleth neceſſarily vnder your patronage,
as well in regard of the continual incouragement,
which I receiued from the fauor you beare to ſuch
imploiments; as alſo for that this worke of Caeſar
hath alwaies beene held in your particular recommendation,
as the Breuiarie of ſoldiers; and thought worthie of as
great regard, as euer M. Brutus attributed to Polybius, or Charles
the fift to Philip de Commines. I muſt acknowledge the beginning
of this work to haue proceeded from Sir Iohn Scot, a knight
deſeruing great honour for his iudgement and skill in matter of
war, whoſe deſire to vnderſtand the true ſenſe of this hiſtory, and
the myſterie of that diſcipline, firſt mooued me to vndertake this
labour. The obſeruations which I haue taken, are ſuch as offer
themſelues to vulgar wits, vpon the conſideration of ſuch points
as are handled in this diſcourſe: for as an old Gouerneſſe well experienced
in error, directeth her young charge to vertue, by ſuch
documents as riſe from her owne miſtakings; ſo the fruit of this
worke riſeth chiefely from thence, where the benefit of good direction
is manifeſt; or where ill atchieuement beareth witneſſe of
an error. The ſpecialities of greater conſequence, which are either
skilfully ſhadowed, or neceſſarily implied in the hiſtorie, I leaue
to the wiſedome of iudicious commanders, as an obiect fit for
ſuch iudgments, and impertinent to conceits of an inferiour condition.
That which is alreadie handled ſhall ſerue to witneſſe, that
Caeſars works containe matter ſufficient to entertaine the greateſt
wits, and that my deſire is to gratifie our ſouldiers with my beſt labour,
which I recommend chiefely to your Lordſhip, and reſt
            
               Readie to doe you ſeruice,
C. EDMVNDS.
            
         
         
            
            TO THE READER.
            
               I Haue aduentured to entertaine our ſouldiers,
with a relation of part of Caeſars actions, vpon
that incouragement which hee himſelfe gaue
to a fiſherman, not to deſpaire of a good paſſage
becauſe he carried Caeſar and his fortunes: wherein I
haue not tied my ſelfe to a litter all tranſlation of the hiſtory,
but followed the ſenſe; not daring to make any reſemblance
of the ſweetneſſe of that ſtile, but deſirous to gratifie our better
ſort of ſouldiers, with the pourtraiture of that diſcipline.
If my labour be accepted with that affection as I offer it, I
ſhall thinke it well ſpent, and imploy more time to doe them
ſeruice. Howſoeuer, I holde it reaſonable to leaue to euery
man the free cenſure of his iudgement, as best fitting him
that readeth with profit, and not to be taken from any reader
whatſoeuer: and as I looke not to be approoued of all;
ſo I make no queſtion but I ſhall finde ſome fauourers, which
is as much as any writer can boaſt of, Farewell.
         
      
      
         
            
            READING AND DISCOVRSE,
ARE REQVISITE TO MAKE A SOVLdier
perfect in the Arte militarie, how great ſoeuer
his knowledge may be, which long experience
and much practiſe of Armes
hath gayned.
            
               WHEN I conſider the weakneſſe of mans iudgment
in cenſuring things beſt knowne vnto it
ſelfe, and the diſability of his diſcourſe in diſcouering
the nature of vnacquanted obiectes;
chooſing rather to hold any ſenſible impreſſion,
which cuſtome hath by long practiſe inured,
then to hearken to ſome other more reaſonable
perſwaſion: I do not maruell that ſuch
ſoldiers, whoſe knowledge groweth only from
experience and conſiſteth in the rules of their
owne practiſe; are hardly perſwaded, that hiſtory
and ſpeculatiue learning are of any vſe in
perfecting of their Arte, being ſo different in nature from the principles of
their cunning, and of ſo ſmall affinity with the life of action; wherein the vſe of
Armes and atchieuments of war ſeeme to haue their chiefeſt being. But thoſe
purer ſpirits embiliſhed with learning, and enriched with the knowledge of other
mens fortunes; wherein variety of accidents affordeth variety of inſtructions,
and the mutuall conference of thinges happened, begetteth both ſimilitudes
and differences, contrary natures, but yet iointly concurring to ſeaſon
our iudgment with diſcretion, and to enſtall wiſedome in the gouernment
of the minde: Theſe men I ſay, mounting aloft, with the winges of contemplation,
doe eaſily diſcouer the ignorance of ſuch Martialiſtes, as are only trained
vp in the ſchoole of practiſe, and taught their rudiments vnder a fewe
yeares experience, which ſerueth to interpret no other author but it ſelfe, nor
can approue his maximes, but by his own authority; and are rather moued to
pittie their hard fortune, hauing learned onely to be ignorant, then to enuie
their skill in matter of war, when they oppoſe themſelues againſt ſo manifeſt a
truth as this: that a meere practicall knowledge cannot make a perfect ſoldier.
            
               
Which propoſition that I may the better confirme, giue me leaue to reaſon
a little of the groundes of learning, and diſpute from the habitude of Arts and
ſciences; which are then ſaid to be perfectly attained, when their particular parts
are in ſuch ſort apprehended, that from the variety of that indiuiduality, the intellectuall
power frameth generall notions and maximes of rule, vniting tearms
of the ſame nature in one head, and diſtinguiſhing diuerſities by differences
of properties, aptely diuiding the whole body into his greateſt and ſmalleſt
branches, and fitting each part with his deſcriptions, duties, cautions and exceptions:
for vnleſſe the vnderſtanding be in this ſort qualified and able by logiſticall
diſcourſe, to aſcend, by way of compoſition, from ſingularitie to catholike
conceptions; and returne againe the ſame waie, to the loweſt order of his
partitions, the minde cannot be ſaide to haue the perfection of that Arte,
nor inſtructed in the true vſe of that knowledge: but guiding her ſelfe by
ſome broken preceptes, feeleth more want by that ſhee hath not, then benefite
by that ſhee hath. Whereby it followeth, that a ſcience deuided
into manie braunches, and conſiſting in the multiplicitie of diuers members,
being all ſo intereſſed in the Bulke, that's Mayme of the ſmalleſt part
cauſeth either debilitie or deformitie in the bodie, cannot be ſaide to bee
throughlie attayned, nor conceiued with ſuch a profiting apprehenſion as
ſteeleth the minde with true iudgement, and maketh the ſcholler maiſter
in his Arte, vnleſſe the nature of theſe particularities bee firſt had and obtained.
            And for as much as no one ſcience or faculty whatſoeuer, in multitude and
pluralitie of partes, may anie waie be comparable to the Arte militarie, wherein
euery ſmall and vnreſpected circumſtance quite altereth the nature of the
Action, and breedeth ſuch diſparitie and difference, that the reſemblance of
their equall participating properties is blemiſhed with the diſſimilitude of their
diſagreeing partes; it cannot be denied, but he that is acquainted with moſt of
theſe particular occurrences, and beſt knoweth the varietie of chances in the
courſe of warre, muſt needes be thought a more perfect ſouldier, and deſerueth
a title of greater dignity in the profeſſion of Armes, then ſuch as content themſelues
with a fewe common precepts and ouer-worne rules: without which, as
they cannot be ſaid at all to be ſouldiers, ſo with them and no more, they no
way deſerue the name of skilfull and perfect men of war. Now whether meere
experience, or experience ioyned with reading and diſcourſe, doe feaſt the
minde with more variety and choiſe of matter, or entertaine knowledge with
greater plentie of nouelties, incident to expeditions and vſe of Armes, I will
vſe no other reaſon to determine of this queſtion, then that which Franciſcus
Patricius alleadgeth in his parallely, where he handleth this argument which I
intreat of.
            He that followeth a warre (ſaith he) doth ſee either the courſe of the whole,
or but a part onely. If his knowledge extend no farther then a part, he hath learned
leſſe then he that ſawe the whole: but admit he hath ſeene and learned the
inſtructions of one whole warre, he hath notwithſtanding learned leſſe then he
that hath ſeene the proceeding of two ſuch warres. And hee againe hath not

ſeene ſo much as another that hath ſerued in three ſeuerall warres: and ſo by
degrees, a ſouldier that hath ſerued ten yeares, muſt needes knowe more then
one that hath not ſerued ſo long. And to conclude, he that hath receiued 22
yeares ſtipend (which was the iuſt time of ſeruice amongſt the Romans before
a ſouldier could be diſmiſt) hath greater meanes of experience than another
that hath not ſo long a time followed the campe, and cannot challenge a diſcharge
by order and cuſtome: And hence it conſequently followeth, that if in
one or more or all theſe warres, there haue happened few or no actions of ſeruice,
which might teach a ſouldier the practiſe of Armes; that then his learning
doth not counteruaile his labour. And if the warre through the negligence, or
ignorance of the chiefe commanders haue beene ill caried, he can boaſt of no
knowledge, but that which acquainted him with the corruptions of militarie diſcipline;
if the part which he followed were defeated and ouerthrowne, he knoweth
by experience howe to looſe, but not how to gaine: And therefore it is not
onely experience and practice which maketh a ſouldier worthie of his name, but
the knowledge of the manifold accidents which riſe from the variety of humane
actions, wherein reaſon and error, like merchants in trafficke, enterchange contrarie
euentes of fortune, giuing ſometime copper for ſiluer, and balme for
poyſon, and repaying againe the like commoditie as time and circumſtances
doe anſwere their directions. And this knowledge is onely to be learned in the
regiſters of antiquitie and in hiſtories, recording the motions of former ages.
            Caius Iulius Caeſar (whoſe actions are the ſubiect of theſe diſcourſes) after
his famous victories in France, and that he had gotten the prouinces of Spaine,
broken the ſtrength of the Romaine Empire at Pharſalia, was held a ſouldier
ſurmounting enuie and all her exceptions; and yet notwithſtanding all this, the
battell he had with Pharnaces king of Pontus, was like to haue buried the glorie
of his former conqueſtes, in the diſhonourable memorie of a wilfull ouerthrow:
for hauing poſſeſt himſelfe of a hill of great aduantage, he began to
encampe himſelfe in the toppe thereof. Which Pharnaces perceiuing, (being
lodged likewiſe with his campe vpon a mountaine confronting the Romaines)
imbattelled his men, marched down from his campe into the valley, and mounted
his forces vp the hill, where the Romaines were buſied about their intrenchments,
to giue them battel. All which, Caeſar tooke but for a brauado: and meaſuring
the enemie by himſelfe, could not be perſwaded that any ſuch foole-hardines
could carrie men headlong into ſo dangerous an aduenture, vntill they
were come ſo neere, that he had ſcarce any time to call the legions from their
worke, and to giue order for the battell: which ſo amazed the Romaines, that
vnleſſe, as Caeſar himſelfe ſaith, the aduantage of the place and the benignitie
of the gods had greatly fauoured them; Pharnaces had at that time reuenged
the ouerthrow of Pompei and the Senat, and reſtored the Romaine Empire to
libertie. Which maie learne vs how neceſſary it is (beſides experience, which in
Caeſar was infinit) to perfect our knowledge with variety of chances: and to meditate
vpon the effectes of other mens aduentures, that their harmes maie be
our warnings, and their happie proceedings our fortunate directions.
            And albeit amongſt ſo manie decades of Hiſtorie, which pregnant wits haue

preſented to theſe latter ages, we ſeldome or neuer meete with any one accident
which iumpeth in all pointes with an other of the like nature, that ſhall
happen to fall out in managing a warre, or ſetting forth of an armie; and ſo doe
ſeeme to reape little benefit by that we reade, and make ſmall vſe of our great
trauell. Yet we muſt vnderſtand that in the Audit of Reaſon, there are many offices,
which through the ſoueraigne power of the diſcourſiue faculty, receiue
great commodities by whatſoeuer falleth vnder their iuriſdiction, and ſuffer no
action to paſſe without due triall of his nature, and examination of his ſtate;
that ſo the iudgment maie not be defrauded of her reuenues, nor the minde of
her learning: for notwithſtanding diſagreeing circumſtances, and differences of
formes, which ſeeme to cut off the priuiledge of imitation, and fruſtrate the
knowledge we haue obtained by reading, the intellectuall facultie hath authoritie
to examine the vſe, and looke into the inconueniences of theſe wants and
diuerſities, and by the helpe of reaſon to turne it to her aduantage; or ſo to
counterpoiſe the defect, that in triall and execution it ſhall not appeare anie
diſaduantage. For as in all other ſciences, and namely in geometrie, of certaine
bare elements, and common ſentences, which ſenſe admitteth to the apprehenſion,
the powers of the ſoule frame admirable Theoremes and Problemes
of infinit vſe, proceeding with certaintie of demonſtration, from propoſition
to propoſition, and from concluſion to concluſion, and ſtill make new wonders
as they go, beſides the ſtrangeneſſe of their Architecture, that vpon ſuch plaine
and eaſie foundations, they ſhould erect ſuch curious and beautifull buildings:
ſo in the Arte Military, theſe examples, which are taken from hiſtories, are but
plaine kinde of principles, on which the minde worketh to her beſt aduantage,
and vſeth reaſon with ſuch dexterity, that of inequalities ſhe concludeth an
equality, and of diſſimilitudes moſt ſweete reſemblances; and ſo ſhe worketh
out her owne perfection by diſcourſe, and in time groweth ſo abſolute in knowledge,
that her ſufficiency needeth no further directions:Lib. 3. but as Lomazzo the
Milineſe, in that excellent worke which he writ of picturing, ſaith of a skilfull
painter, that being to drawe a portraiture of gracefull lineaments, will neuer
ſtand to take the ſymmetry by ſcale, nor marke it out according to rule; but hauing
his iudgment habituated by knowledge, and perfected with the variety of
ſhapes and proportions; his knowledge guideth his eie, and his eie directeth
his hand, and his hand followeth both with ſuch facilitie of cunning, that each
of them ſerue for a rule wherby the true meaſures of nature are exactly expreſſed.
The like may I ſay of a skilfull Souldier, or any Artizan in his faculty, when
knowledge hath once purified his iudgment, and tuned it to the key of true apprehenſion.
            And although there are many that will eaſily admit a reconciliation of this
diſagreement, in the reſemblāce of accidents being referred to the arbitrement
of a well tempered ſpirit; yet they will by no meanes acknowledge, that thoſe
monſtrous and inimitable exāples of valour & magnanimity (whereof antiquity
is prodigall, & ſpendeth as though time ſhould neuer want ſuch treaſure) can
anie way auaile the maners of theſe daies, which if they were as they ought to
be, would appeare but conterfeit to the luſter of a golden age, nor yet comparable

to ſiluer or braſſe, or the ſtrength of yron, but deſerue no better title then
earth or clay, whereof the frame of this age conſiſteth. For what reſemblance
(ſay they) is betweene the cuſtoms of our times, & the actions of thoſe ancient
Heroes? They obſerued equity as well in warre as in peace: for vertue rather
flouriſhed by the naturall diſpoſition of men, then by lawe and authority; the
tenure of their Empire was valour in warre and concord in peace; the greateſt
treaſure which they eſteemed, were the deedes of armes which they had atchieued
for their countrey, adorning the temples of their gods with pietie, and
their priuate houſes with glory, pardoning rather then proſecuting a wrong,
and taking nothing from the vanquiſhed but ability of doing iniury: But the
courſe of our times hath another bias, for couetouſneſſe hath ſubuerted both
faith and equity, and our valour affecteth nothing but ambition, pride and cruelty
tyrannize in our thoughtes, and ſubtilty teacheth vs to carrie rather a faire
countenance, then a good nature; our meanes of getting are by fraud & extortion,
and our manner of ſpending is by waſt and prodigality; not eſteeming
what we haue of our owne, but coueting that which is not ours; men effeminated
and women impudent, vſing ritches as ſeruants to wickedneſſe, and preuenting
natures appetite with want on luxurity; ſupplanting vertue with trecherie,
and vſing victory with ſuch impiety, as though iniuriant facere, were imperio vti:
and therefore the exemplarie patternes of former times wherein true honour is
expreſſed, may ſerue to be gazed vpon, but no way to be imitated by this age,
being too ſubtile to deale with honeſty, and wanting courage to incounter valour.
I muſt needes confeſſe, that he that compareth the hiſtory of Liuie with
that of Guichardine ſhall finde great difference in the ſubiects which they handle;
for Liuie triumpheth in the conqueſtes of vertue, and in euery page erecteth
trophes vnto valour, making his diſcourſe like Cleanthes table, wherein
vertue is deſcribed in her entire maieſtie, and ſo ſweetned with the preſence &
ſeruice of the graces, that all they which behold her are rapt with admiration
of her excellencie, and charmed with the loue of her perfection: but Guichardine
hath more then Theſeus taske to performe, being to winde through the labyrinthes
of ſubtilty, and diſcouer the quaint practiſes of politians, wherein
publike and open deſſignes are oftentimes but ſhadowes of more ſecret proiectes,
and theſe againe ſerue as foiles to more eminent intentions; being alſo
diſcoloured with diſſimulation, and ſo inſnared in the ſleightes of ſubtilty, that
when you looke for war, you ſhall finde peace; and expecting peace, you ſhall
fal into troubles, diſſentions and wars: So crabbed and crooked is his argument
in reſpect of Liuies fortune, and ſuch arte is required to vnfolde the truth of
theſe myſteries.
            But to anſwere this obiection in a word, and ſo to proceede to that which
followeth, I ſay thoſe immortall memories of vertue which former time recordeth,
are more neceſſary to be knowne, then any ſtrategems of ſubtler ages:
for equitie and valour being truely apprehended ſo ſeaſon the motions of the
ſoule, that albeit in ſo corrupt a courſe, they cannot peraduenture ſtir vp imitation;
yet they oftentimes hinder many malicious practiſes, and diueliſh deuiſes,
when euill is reproued by the knowledge of good, and condemned by the

authority of better ages. And if we will needs follow thoſe ſteppes which the
preſent courſe of the world hath traced, and plaie the Cretian with the Cretian;
this obiection hindereth nothing, but that hiſtorie, eſpeciallie theſe of latter
times; affordeth ſufficient inſtructions to make a ſouldier perfect in that
point.
            Let not therefore anie man deſpiſe the ſound inſtructions which learning affordeth,
nor refuſe the helpes that hiſtorie doth offer to perfect the weakneſſe of
a ſhort experience, eſpecially when no worth can counteruaile the waight of ſo
great a buſineſſe for I take the office of a chiefe commander, to be a ſubiect capable
of the greateſt wiſdedome that may be apprehended by naturall meanes,
being to manage a multitude of diſagreeing mindes, as a fit inſtrument to execute
a deſſigne of much conſequence and great expectation, and to qualifie
both their affections and apprehenſions according to the accidentes which riſe
in the courſe of his directions; beſides the true iudgement, which he ought to
haue of ſuch circumſtances as are moſt important to a fortunate end, wherein
our prouidence cannot haue enough either from learning or experience, to
preuent diſaduantages, or to take holde of opportunities. Neither can it be denied,
but as this knowledge addeth perfection to our iudgment, ſo it ſerueth alſo
as a ſpur to glory, and increaſeth the deſire of honour in ſuch as beholde the
atchieuments of vertue, commended to a perpetuall poſteritie, hauing themſelues
the like meanes to conſecrate their memorie to ſucceeding ages, wherein
they may ſerue for examples of valour, and reape the reward of true honour. Or
to conclude, if we thirſt after the knowledge of our owne fortune, and long to
foreſee the ende of that race which we haue taken, which is the chiefeſt matter
of conſequence in the vſe of Armes; what better coniecture can be made, then
to looke into the courſe of former times, which haue proceeded from like beginnings,
and were continued with like meanes, and therefore not vnlikely to
ſort vnto like endes?
            And now if it be demanded whether reading or practice haue the firſt place
in this Arte, and ſerueth as a foundation to the reſt of the building? Let Marius
anſwere this queſtion,Saluſt. de bello Iugur. who enuying at the nobilitie of Rome, ſaith thus. Qui
poſtquam conſules facti ſunt, acta Maiorum & Graecorum militaria praecepta legere
caeperint: homines praepoſteri, nam legere quam fieri, tempore poſterius, re & vſu
prius eſt. Whereas (ſaith he) reading ought to go before practiſe (although it
follow it in courſe of time, for there is no reading, but of ſome thing practiſed
before,) theſe prepoſterous men, after they are made Conſuls and placed at the
helme of gouernment, begin to reade, when they ſhould practiſe that which
they had read; and ſo bewray their inſufficiencie of knowledge by vſing out of
time that, which in time is moſt neceſſarie. This teſtimonie gaue Marius of
reading & booke learning, being himſelfe an enemy to the ſame, for as much as
all his knowledge came by meere experience. But howſoeuer his iudgment was
good in this point: for ſince that all motion and action proceedeth from the
ſoule, and cannot well be produced, vntill the Idea thereof be firſt imprinted in
the minde, according to which patterne the outward being and ſenſible reſemblance
is duely faſhioned; how is it poſſible that any action can be well expreſſed,

when the minde is not directed by knowledge to diſpoſe it in that ſort, as
ſhall beſt agree with the occurrentes of ſuch natures, as are neceſſarily intereſſed
both in the meanes and in the end thereof? And therfore ſpeculatiue knowledge
as the Tramontane, to direct the courſe of all practiſe is firſt to bee reſpected.
            But that I may not ſeeme partiall in this controuerſie, but carrie an equall
hand betweene two ſo neceſſarie yoakefellowes, giue me leaue to conclude in
a word, the benefite of practiſe, and define the good which commeth from experience;
that ſo nothing that hath beene ſpoken may ſeeme to come from affection,
or proceede from the forge of vniuſt partiality. And firſt it cannot bee
denied, but that practiſe giueth boldneſſe and aſſurance in action, and maketh
men expert in ſuch things they take in hand, for no man can reſt vpon ſuch certainty,
through the theorike of knowledge, as he that hath ſeene his learning
verified by practiſe, and acknowledged by the teſtimony of aſſured proofe: Beſides,
there are many other accōplements gotten only by practiſe, which grace
the preſence of knowledge, & giue credit to that which we haue read; as firſt to
learne the vſe and aduantage of the armes which we beare; ſecondly, by frequent
aſpect and familiarity of dangers, and accidents of terrour, to learne to feare
nothing but diſhonour, to make no difference betweene heate and cold, ſommer
and winter, to ſleepe in all places as on a bed, and at the ſame time to take
paines and ſuffer penury, with many other difficulties which cuſtome maketh
eaſie, and cannot be gotten but by vſe and practiſe.
            And thus at length, I haue brought a ſhallow diſcourſe to an abrupt end, wiſhing
with greater zeale of affection then I am able with manifeſt proofe of reaſon,
to demonſtrate the neceſſity, that both theſe partes were by our ſouldiers ſo
regarded, that neither practiſe might march in obſtinate blindneſſe without
learned knowledge; nor this againe be entertained with an idle apprehenſion
without practiſe: but that both of them may be reſpected, as neceſſarie partes to
make a compleat nature; wherein knowledge as the intellectuall part giueth
life and ſpirit to the action, and practiſe as the materiall ſubſtance maketh it of
a ſenſible being, and like a skilfull workman expreſſeth the excellency, which
knowledge hath fore conceiued: wiſhing no man to deſpaire of effecting that
by practiſe which the Theorike of knowledge commendeth. For Cur deſperes
nunc poſse fieri, quod iam toties factum eſt?
            
         
         
            
            
            THE SVMME OF THE
FIRST BOOKE OF CAESARS
COMMENTARIES, WITH OBSERuations
vpon the ſame, diſcouering the
excellencie of Caeſars militia.
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               
                  IN this firſt booke, are contained the ſpecialities of two
great wars, begun and ended both in a ſummer: the firſt,
between Caeſar & the Heluetij:Suitchers. the ſecond, between him
and Ariouiſtus king of the Germans. The hiſtorie of the
Heluetians may be reduced to three principall heads: vnder the
firſt, are the reaſons that moued the Heluetians to entertaine ſo
deſperate an expedition, and the preparation which they made for
the ſame. The ſecond, containeth their defeate by Ceſar: and the
third, their returne into their countrey. That of Ariouiſtus deuideth
it ſelfe into two parts: the firſt giueth the cauſes that induced
Caeſar to vndertake that war: the ſecond intreateth of the warre it
ſelfe, and particularly deſcribeth Ariouiſtus ouerthrow.
            
            
               CHAP. I.
               
                  Gallia deſcribed: the Heluetians diſlike their natiue
ſeate, and propound to themſelues larger territories in
the continent of Gallia. Orgetorix feedeth
this humor, for his owne aduantage.
               
               
                  GALLIA is diuided into three partes, differing one from an other
in manners,Caeſar. in language, and in lawes. The firſt part is inhabited
by the Belgae: the ſecond by the Celtae, whom we call Galli:
and the third by the Aquitani. Belgia is the northeaſt part of
Gallia, bounded on the Eaſt with the riuer Rhene, and deuided
from the Celtae,Matrona & Sequena. with the riuers Marne and Sene. The inhabitants
of this Belgia, are without compariſon the ſtowteſt and beſt men
at armes amongſt all the Galles: for beſides, that they are far remote from the ciuility
of the Roman Prouince, and vnacquainted with traffike or entercourſe of ſtrangers,

they are in continuall warres with the Germans, which maketh them hardy, expert
and valorous. The Celtae poſſeſt the greatest part of Gallia, and haue the Ocean,
Sene, Garum, and the vpper part of Rhene for their confines. Aquitania is limited
with the riuer Garume and the Perinaean hils. In each of theſe partes are diuers ſtates
and common weales, gouerned for the moſt part by the Annuall magiſtracie of their
nobility,Two ſtates in the duchie of Burgundie. but all diuided into factions and partes; whereof the Hedui and Sequani,
are contrarie, chiefe and oppoſite ring-leaders.
               The chiefeſt reaſon that moued the Heluetians to forſake their countrey, was the
good opinion they had of their owne vertue and magnanimity, and the ſmal capacity
and circuit of their territories: For Heluetia being bounded with the famous riuers
Rhene and Rhone,The lake of Geneua. Mont ioux. and with the lake Lemanus, and the high hanging rockes of the
hill Iura; extending it ſelfe within theſe boundes, but 240 miles in length and 180
in breadth, ſeemed too narrow a roome to containe ſo warlike a people, that long before
had ouerflowne the marches of their countrey, with the conceit they had of their
owne valour, and that it heard that nature ſhould oppoſe it ſelfe by riuers and mountaines
againſt the Proweſſe, which no enemy could euer reſiſt: and therefore, they reſolued
to for ſake their countrey, which firſt gaue them breath and being, rather then
it ſhould hinder a correſpondent proceeding to their warlike nature. Theſe coles of
ambition were firſt kindled, and daily blowne, by the earneſt perſwaſions and impulſions
of Orgetorix, the chiefeſt man of authority amongst the Heluetians, both for his
wealth and nobility, who not contented to be greateſt in that manner he was; but affecting
the greatneſſe of princely dignity, thought no meanes fitter to ſhadowe the alteration
of their ſtate, then the change of their ſoile, and in their new ſeate and place
of rest to laie the foundation of a new gouernment.
               
                  THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
                  
                     HE that will examine this expedition of the Heluetians, by the
tranſmigrations and flittings of other nations, ſhall finde ſome vnexampled
particularities in the courſe of their proceeding: for firſt
it hath neuer beene heard, that any people vtterly abandoned that
countrey which nature or prouidence had allotted them; vnleſſe they were driuen
thereunto by a generall calamity, as the infection of the aire, the cruelty &
oppreſſion of a neighbour nation, as were the Sueuians, who thought it great
honor to ſuffer no man to border vpon their confines; or ſome other vniuerſal,
which made the place inhabitable and the people willing to vndertake a voluntarie
exile. But oftentimes we read, that when the inhabitants of a country were
ſo multiplied, that the place was ouer charged with multitudes of ofſpring, and
like a poore father had more children then it was able to ſuſtaine, the aboūding
ſurplus was ſent out to ſeeke new fortunes in forraine countries, and to poſſeſſe
themſelues of a reſting ſeat; which might recompence the wants of their natiue
country, with a plenteous reuenue of neceſſary ſupplementes: And in this ſort,
we read that Rome ſent out manie Colonies into diuers parts of her Empire:
And in this maner the ancient Galles disburdened themſelues of their ſuperfluity,

and ſent them into Aſia. The Gothes came from the Ilandes of the Balticke
ſea, and in Sulla his time ſwarmed ouer Germany: beſides many other nations
whoſe tranſmigrations are particularly deſcribed by Lazius. But amongſt all
theſe, we find none that ſo forſooke their country, but there remained ſome behind
to inhabit the ſame, from whence as frō a fountaine, ſucceeding ages might
deriue the ſtreame of that ouerflowing multitude, and by them take notice of
the cauſes, which moued them vnto it: for their maner was in all ſuch expeditions,
and ſending out of Colonies, to deuide themſelues into two or three parts,
equall both in equality and number. For after they had parted their common
people into euen companies, they deuided their nobility with as great equality
as they could, among the former partitions; and then caſting lots, that part
which went out to ſeeke new aduentures, left their landes and poſſeſſions to the
reſt that remained at home; and ſo by induſtrie they ſupplied that defect which
continuance of time had drawen vpon them. And this was the means which the
firſt inhabitants of the earth found out after the floud, to people the vnhabited
places, and to keepe off the inconueniences of ſcarcity and famine.
               
               
                  THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
                  
                     HE that would prognoſticate by the courſe of theſe ſeuerall proceedings,
whether of the two betokened better ſucceſſe, hath greater
reaſon to foretell happines to theſe which I laſt ſpake of, then to
the Heluetians; vnleſſe their valour were the greater, & quitted al
difficulties which hatred and enuie would caſt vpon them: for an
action which ſauoureth of neceſſitie, (which was alwaies vnderſtood in ſending
out a colonie) hath a more plauiſible paſport amongſt men, then that which
proceedeth from a proud voluntarie motion: for as men can be content to tollerate
the one, if it concerne not their particular; ſo on the other ſide, they
count it gaine to puniſh pride with ſhame, and to oppoſe themſelues againſt
the other.
               
               
                  THE THIRD OBSERVATION.
                  
                     ORgetorix, thirſting after princely dignity, diſcouereth the humor
of vaine glory. For not contented with the ſubſtance of honor, being
already of greateſt power amongſt the Heluetians, and ordering
the affaires of the ſtate by his owne direction, thought it nothing
without the markes and title of dignitie, vnto which the inconueniences of maieſtie
are annexed: not conſidering that the beſt honour ſitteth not alwaies in
imperial thrones, nor weareth the diadems of Princes; but oftentimes reſteth it
ſelfe in meaner places, and ſhineth better with obſcurer titles. For proofe wherof,
to omit antiquity, take the familie of the Medices in Florence, and particularly

Coſimo and Lorenzo, whoſe vertue raiſed them to that height of honour;
that they were nothing inferiour to the greateſt potentates of their time, being
themſelues but priuate gentlemen in that ſtate, and bearing their proper names
as their greateſt titles. But howſoeuer the oportunity of changing their ſoile,
was well obſerued by Orgetorix, as the fitteſt meanes to attempt an innouation;
but the ſucceſſe depended much vpon the fortunate proceeding of their expedition:
for as a multitude of that nature, can be content to attribute a great
part of their happines, wherein euery man thinketh himſelfe particularly intereſſed,
to an eminent leader; and in that vniuerſall extaſie of ioie will eaſily admit
an alteration of their ſtate: ſo if the iſſue be in any reſpect vnfortunate, no
man will acknowledge himſelfe faultie, but euery one deſiring to diſcharge his
paſſion vpon ſome obiect: A chiefe director is likelieſt to be the marke, at which
the dartes of their diſcontent will be throwen, and then he will finde it hard to
effect what he intendeth.
               
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               
                  Orgetorix practiſes are diſcouered: his death: the
Heluetians continue the reſolution of their expedition,
and prepare themſelues
accordingly.
               
               
                  BVT Orgetorix failed in the firſt entrance into his proiectes,Caeſar. for
ſeeking to colour his attempt by the example of Caſticus, a man of
the like authority amongst the Sequani, and Dumnorix among
the Hedui, (whom he perſuaded) in their ſeuerall states to clime
the ſame ſteps of ambition, he reuealed his intent, and ended it
alſo: for being called by the Heluetians to anſwere that treaſon;
before he came to triall, his body was found dead, not without ſuſpition
of murthering himſelfe. The Heluetians notwithſtanding continued their determined
voyage, making preparations correſpondent for the ſame; and for their better
prouiſion of victuals, they thought two yeares little enough to ſtudy tillage, to
furniſh themſelues with conuenient ſtore of corne; and in the meane time to prouide
themſelues of cartes and cariages, that nothing might be wanting to make the iourney
eaſie and the end fortunate. And that no neare borderer might interrupt with newe
troubles, a deſsigne of ſuch hope, they made peace with all their neighbour nations, and
reſolued for their owne aduantage, to part friendes with thoſe, whom they had euer
liued with in continuall iars. And laſtly, conſidering the mutability of mans nature,
which ſcarce continueth conſtant the ſpace of one houre, but altereth his determinations,
according as he diuerſly apprehendeth the ſame ſubiect, leaſt any of them ſhould
change their minde, and ſuffer the difficulties of the action to ouerſway the honour
that might enſue thereof: in the heate of their forwardnes they made a law, which at
the ende of two yeares, commanded their departure.
               
                  
                  THE OBSERVATION.
                  
                     AS theſe prouiſoes were all requiſite, ſo one thing was omitted, which
might haue furthered their good fortune more then any thing
thought of,The omiſſion in the Heluetian expedition. which was to haue concealed by all meanes the time of
their departure: for all the beaſtes of the wood muſt needes ſtand
at gaze, when ſuch lyons rouſed themſelues out of their dens, and be then very
watchfull of their ſafety when they knewe the inſtant of time, when ſome of
their ſpoiles muſt needes be offered to appeaſe their furie: Or at the leaſt it behooued
them ſo to haue dealt by hoſtages and treaty, that ſuch as were likelieſt
and beſt able to croſſe their deſſignements, might haue beene no hinderance
of their proceedings: conſidering there were but two waies out of their countrey
by which they might go, the one narrow and difficult betwene the hill Iura
and the riuer Rhone, by the countrey of the Sequani: the other through Prouence
far eaſier and ſhorter, but not to be taken but by the permiſſion of the
Romans. But howſoeuer their errour was, that after two yeares prouiſion to go,
and hauing made an exterminating decree which inioyned them to go, when
they came to the point they knew not what way to go.
               
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               
                  Caeſar denieth the Heluetians paſſage through the
Roman Prouince: he fortifieth the paſſage
betweene the hill Iura, and the
lake of Geneua.
               
               
                  CAEſar proconſull of the prouince in Gallia,Caeſar. being then at Rome,
and hearing what courſe the Heluetians purpoſed to take, made
great iourneyes to haſten into the Prouince, leaſt it ſhould receiue
any detriment by them: and to that ende he gathered what forces
he could at his first arriuall, which was but one legion, and
cauſed the bridge at Geneua to be broken downe, to hinder their
paſsage what he might: And then too late the Heluetians began
to perceiue their omiſsions, for finding themſelues ready to depart, they raſed all
their walled townes being twelue in number, and burnt 400 villages beſides priuat
houſes, with the reſt of the corne which they could not carrie with them, and appointed
a day to meete all vpon the bankes of Rhone, which day was the fift of the Calendes
of Aprill, in the Conſulſhip of Lu. Piſo, and A. Gabinius: at their arriuall vnderſtanding

of the reſiſtance which Caeſar made; they ſent vnto him ſome of the chiefeſt
of their Tribes, to intreat a quiet paſſage through the Prouince. Although Caeſar was
reſolued to deny thē their paſport, yet for that time he thought it beſt to ſtand doubtfull
of an anſwere; that he might the better prouide himſelfe in the meane time, to
make good his deniall if it were refuſed. The reaſon that moued him to denie them
paſſage, was grounded vpon the ouerthrow which L. Caſsius a Roman Conſull had
receiued by the Heluetians, wherein the Conſull himſelfe was ſlaine, and the ſouldiers
ſolde for bōdſlaues: And this accident procured their hinderance for two reſpects; firſt,
he thought that the people of Rome could not with the maieſty of their Empire, ſhewe
any fauour to a nation that had ſo foiled them, leaſt they ſhould ſeeme to ſtand in feare
of ſuch as durſt make head againſt their armies, and buckle with the ſtrength of their
legions. Secondly, he thought it impoſsible that the Heluetians hauing lent them ſuch
a blow, could paſſe through their Prouince without further violence: and therfore in
this time of deliberation, hee made a ditch, and a rampier from the hill Iura to the
lake of Geneua, containing 19 miles in length. The rampier was 16 foote high with
an anſwerable latitude and depth of the ditch: and this he fortified with many caſtles
well manned with ſouldiers, and stored with munition. Notwithſtanding the Heluetians
attended peaceably their daie of audience; and then returned and receiued
a deniall.
               
                  THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
                  
                     THis manner of prolonging of time to renforce the troupes or get
ſome other aduantage, as it was then of great vſe to Caeſar, and hath
oftentimes beene practiſed to good purpoſe; ſo doth it diſcouer to a
circumſpect enemie, by the directions in the meane time (which cannot
eaſily be ſhadowed) the drift of that delay; and ſo inuiteth him with greater
courage, to take the oportunitie of that preſent aduantage; eſpecially if tract of
time maie ſtrengthen the one, and not further the other, which is eaſily diſcerned
by the circumſtances of the action.
               
               
                  THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
                  
                     THe requeſt of the Heluetians ſeemed to deſerue a facile anſwere,
being in effect no more then nature had giuen to the riuer Rhone,
which was to paſſe through the prouince, with as much ſpeed & as
little hurt as they could: but Caeſar looking further into the matter
and comparing things already paſt, with occurrences that were to follow after,
found the maieſty of the Roman Empire to be intereſſed in the anſwere, being
either to maintaine her greatnes by reſiſting her enemies, or to degenerat from
ancient vertue, by gratifying ſuch as ſought her ruin, which in matter of ſtate are

things of great conſequence. And further, he knew it to be an vnſafe courſe to
ſuffer an enemie to haue meanes of doing hurt; conſidering that the nature of
man is alwaies prone to loade him with further wronges whom he hath once
iniured: not but that he could peraduenture be content to end the quarell vpon
that aduantage; but fearing the other, whom he wronged, to expect but an oportunitie
of reuenge, he gets what aduantage he can before hand, and ſo ceaſeth
not vntill he haue added a bloudie end to an iniurious beginning.
               
               
                  THE THIRD OBSERVATION.
                  
                     COncerning this maruellous fortification, betweene the hill and the
lake, how ſeruiceable ſuch workes were vnto him in all his warres;
in what ſort, and in howe ſmall time, they were made, I will defer
the treatiſe of them vntill I come to the height of Aleſia, where
he gaue ſome ground of that hyperbolicall ſpeech: An me deleto, non animaduertebatis
decem habere lectas quidem legiones populum Romanum, quae non ſolum
vobis obſister ſed etiam coelum diruere poſsent?
                  
               
            
            
               CHAP. IIII.
               
                  The Heluetians failing to paſſe the Rhone, take the
way through the countrey of the Sequani. Caeſar haſteth
into Italie, and there inrolleth more legions: and
returning, ouerthroweth part of them
at the riuer Arar.
               
               
                  THe Heluetians perceiuing Caeſars determination,Caeſar. reſolued to
redeeme the ouerſlip they had committed in the courſe of their
proiect, with the power of their forces; and to open a way by valour
and armes, where peaceable intreatie had no paſſage: and
therfore, they endeuoured ſome by boats, and others by fordes &
ſhallowes, to paſſe the Rhone, and enter into Prouince, maugre
Caeſar and his legion. But being eaſily repelde by meanes of the
fortification, they made a vertue of neceſsity, and tooke the narrow and difficult way,
through the territories of the Sequani: of whom by Dumnorix interceſsion they obtained
a friendly through-fare. In the meane time, Caeſar haſted into Italie, & there
inrolled two new legions, and tooke three more out of their ſtanding campes in Aquileia:
and with theſe fiue legions returned ſpeedily into Gallia. At his returne hee
vnderſtood, that the Heluetians had paſſed the ſtraites, and were now ſacking the
territories of the Edui, a ſtate that had alwaies deſerued well of the people rf Rome.

The Ambari complained in like maner of the ſame hoſtilitie: and ſo did the Allobroges
which inhabited beyond the Rhone. Caeſar not thinking it conuenient to linger
any longer, and vnderſtanding that three partes of their troupes had alreadie paſt
the riuer Arar, and a fourth remained to be tranſported, he thought it not good to
forſlow that aduantage: and therfore at the third watch of the night, he marched out
of his campe with three legions, to the place where they laie, and finding them ſcattered
and diſperſed;Zuricke. he put the greateſt part of them to the ſword, and the rest
eſcaped into the woods neere adioyning. This part that was thus defeated, was named
Pagus Tigurinus.
               
                  THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
                  
                     THis defeat being chiefely a ſeruice of execution vpon ſuch as were
taken at a dangerous diſaduantage, which men call vnaware, containeth
theſe two aduiſoes. Firſt, not to neglect that aduantage which
Sertorius by the haires of his horſe taile hath proued to be very important,
that beginning with a part, it is a matter of no difficulty to ouercome
the whole. Secondly, it may ſerue for a caueat, ſo to tranſport an Armie ouer
awater, where the enemy is within a reaſonable march, that no part may be ſo ſeuered
from the bodie of the Armie, that aduantage may thereby be taken to
cut them off all together, and ſeparate them from themſelues. The ſafeſt and
moſt honourable way, to tranſport an Armie ouer a riuer, is by a bridge, placing
at each end ſufficient troupes of horſe and foote, to defend the Armie
from ſudden aſſaults, as they paſſe ouer the water; and thus went Caeſar ouer
the Rhene into Germanie two ſeuerall times.
               
               
                  THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
                  
                     COncerning the circumſtance of time, when Caeſar went out of his
campe, which is noted to be in the third watch, we muſt vnderſtand
that the Romans diuided the whole night into foure watches,The maner of their watch. euerie
watch containing three houres; and theſe watches were diſtinguiſhed
by ſeuerall notes & ſound of cornets or trumpets, that by the diſtinction
and diuerſitie therof, it might eaſily be knowne what watch was ſounded. The
charge & office of ſounding the watches, belonged to the chiefeſt Centuriō of
a legion, whom they called Primipilus, or Primus Centurio, at whoſe pauilion
the trumpeters attended, to be directed by his houre-glaſſe. The firſt watch began
alwaies at ſunne-ſetting, and continued three houres, (I vnderſtand ſuch
houres as the night contained, being diuided into twelue: for the Romans diuided
their night as well as their day into twelue equall ſpaces, which they called
houres) the ſecond watch continued vntill midnight; and then the third watch
began, and contained likewiſe three houres; the fourth was equall to the reſt,

and continued vntill ſunne riſing. So that by this phraſe de tertia vigilia, we vnderſtand
that Caeſar went out of his campe in the third watch, which was after
midnight: and ſo we muſt conceiue of the reſt of the watches, as often as we ſhal
finde them mentioned in hiſtorie.
               
            
            
               CAP. V.
               
                  Caeſar paſſeth ouer the riuer Arar: his horſemen
incountred with the Heluetians and were
put to the worſt.
               
               
                  THE Heluetians hauing paſſed the riuer,Caeſar. Caeſar made haſte to
followe after, and making a bridge he tranſported ouer his legions
in one day, which the Heluetians could ſcarce doe in twentie:
And ſending all his horſe to the number of foure thouſand
which he had raiſed in the Prouince and amongst the Hedui, to
diſcouer what waie the enemie tooke, it happened that they fell
ſo neare vpon the reregard of the Heluetians, that they were forced
to giue battell in a place of diſaduantage, and by that meanes ſome of them were
ſlaine, and the reſt put to flight. The Heluetians made inſolent with this victory, for
as much as 500 of their men had put to route ſo great a multitude, began now boldly
to reſiſt, and ſometimes part of their rereward would violently aſsault the Roman
legions. Caeſar held his men from giuing battell, thinking it ſufffcient for the preſent
to keepe the enemie from pillaging, forrage, and depopulation: and ſo they marched
fifteene daies together in ſuch ſort, that there was not aboue fiue or ſix miles between
the rereward of the Heluetians and the vangard of the Romans.
               
                  THE OBSERVATION.
                  
                     THis example of the Heluetians maie leſſon a commander, not to
waxe inſolent vpon euery ouerthrow which the enemie taketh, but
duely to waie the true cauſes of a victorie gotten or an ouerthrowe
taken; that apprehending the right currant of the action, he maie
neither vaunt of a blinde victorie, nor be diſmaied at a caſuall miſhappe. And
herein let a heedfull warines ſo moderate the ſequels of victorie in a triumphing
ſpirit, that the care and ielouſie to keepe ſtill that ſweete ſounding fame on foot,
maie as farre ſurpaſſe the induſtrie, which he firſt vſed to obtaine it, as the continuance
of happineſſe doth exceede the beginning of good fortunes. For ſuch
is the nature of our ſoule, that although from her infancy euen to the manhood
of her age, ſhe neuer found want of that which ſhe luſted after; yet when ſhe

meeteth with a counterbuffe to checke her appetite, and reſtraine her affections
from their ſatiſfaction; ſhe is as much troubled in that want, as if ſhe had
neuer receiued anie contentment at all: for our will to euerie obiect which it
ſeeketh after, begetteth alwaies a new appetite, which is not ſatiſfied with a former
quittance, but either ſeeketh preſent paiment, or returneth diſcontentment
vnto the minde. And as our ſoule is of an euerlaſting being, and cannot thinke
of an end, to her beginning; ſo ſhe ſeeketh a perpetuall continuance of ſuch
thinges which ſhe luſteth after: which hee, that meaneth to holde fortune his
friend, will endeuour to maintaine.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VI.
               
                  Caeſar ſendeth to get the aduantage of a hill, and ſo
to giue the Heluetians battell: but was put off by
falſe intelligence: the oportunitie being loſt,
hee intendeth prouiſion of
corne.
               
               
                  CAESAR being aduertiſed by his diſcouerers,Caeſar. that the Heluetians
laie vnder a hill, about eight miles diſtant from his campe;
and vnderſtanding that the aſcent vnto the toppe of the hill, on
the further ſide from the enemie was readie and eaſie: in the
third watch he ſent Labienus with two legions, to poſſeſſe themſelues
of the ſaid hill, and he himſelfe followed with the reſt of the
Armie in the fourth watch. His direction to Labienus was, that
aſſoon as he perceiued him to charge the enemy below in the valley, that then he ſhould
deſcend with as violent a ſhocke as he could, and ſo the Heluetians ſhould bee charged
both in front and flancke at one inſtant. But this intent was at that time fruſtrated
through the cauſeleſse feare of one Publius Conſidius, a man helde very skilfull in
matter of warre, for his experience firſt vnder Sulla, and afterward with Craſsus;
who being ſent by Caeſar to diſcouer whether Labienus had tooke the Hill, was ſtroken
with ſuch a terrour being ſo neare an enemie of that fame, that ſeeing the Roman enſignes
diſplaied vpon the mountaine, could not be perſwaded but they were the Heluetians,
& returned that aduertiſement to Caeſar: wherupon he deſiſted for that time
from following his purpoſe, and retired to the next hill, where he imbattailed his ſouldiers
with aduantage of the place. This oportunitie being thus loſt, becauſe the day of
meaſuring corne vnto the ſouldiers, was within two daies: he would in no wiſe omit
that care (although peraduenture he might haue had the like oportunity within a daie
or two) but turned towardes Bibracte a great and opulent citie of the Hedui 18 miles
diſtant from his campe,Bray in the county of Retell. and there purpoſed to prouide corne to paie his ſouldiers.
               
                  
                  THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
                  
                     THe getting of this hill as a place of aduantage, was maruellous important
to the happy ſucceſſe of the battel: for the aduantage of the
place is not only noted as an eſpecial cauſe of eaſy victory,Places of aduantage in the Roman warres. throughout
this hiſtorie; but in al their warres from the very cradle of their
Empire, it cleared their Armies from all difficulties, to what extremitie ſoeuer
they were put. The firſt reaſon may be in regard of their dartes and ſlinges, and
eſpecially their piles, which being a heauie deadly weapon, could not any waie
be ſo auailable, being caſt countremont or in a plaine leuell, as when the decliuitie
and downfall of a ſwelling banke did naturally ſecond their violent impreſſion:
Neither can the ſhocke at handy-blowes bee anie thing ſo furious
(which was a point of great reſpect in their battels) when the ſouldiers ſpent
their ſtrength in franchiſing the iniurie of a riſing mountaine, as when the place
by a naturall inclination did further their courſe. And to conclude, if the battell
ſucceeded not according to their deſire, the fauour of the place afforded
them meanes of a ſtrong retrait, in the higheſt part wherof, they had commonly
their campes well fenced and fortified againſt all chances. If it be demaunded
whether the vpper ground be of like vſe, in regard of our weapons: I anſwere,
that in a skirmiſh of ſhot, I take the aduantage to lie in the lower ground rather
then on the hill; for the pieces being haſtily charged, as commonly they are after
the firſt volley, if the bullet chance to lie looſe, when the noſe of the peece is
lower then the breech, it muſt needes flie at randome, and be altogether vneffectuall:
but when the noſe ſhall be raiſed vpward to the ſide of a hill, the bullet
being rammed in with his owne waight, ſhall flie with greater certaintie and furie;
conſidering the nature of the pouder to be ſuch, that the more it is ſtopt
and ſhut in, the more it ſeeketh to enlarge his roome, and breaketh forth with
greater violence and fury. Concerning other weapons, I take the vpper ground
in the ſhocke and incounter, to be aduantagious, as well for the ſword as the
pike, and would deſerue as great reſpect, if the controuerſie were decided by
theſe weapons, as ſeldome times it is.
               
               
                  THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
                  
                     BY Cauſidius his demeanour, we ſee that verified which phiſitions
affirme, that nothing will ſooner carrie our iudgment out of her
proper ſeate, then the paſſion of feare: and that amongſt ſouldiers
themſelues, whom cuſtome hath made familiarly acquainted with
horror and death, it is able to turne a flocke of ſheepe into a ſquadron of corſelets,
and a few canes or oſiers into pikes and lanciers: which may ſerue to aduiſe
a diſcreet Generall, not eaſily to credit a relation of that nature, when a man of
reputation, in ſo perfect a diſcipline and ſo experienced in the ſeruice of three
famous Chiefes, was ſo ſurpriſed with feare, that he could not diſcern his friends
frō his enimies: but I wil ſpeake more of this paſſion in the war, with Ariouiſtus.
               
               
                  
                  THE THIRD OBSERVATION.
                  
                     IN euery relation throughout the whole courſe of this hiſtorie,
the firſt wordes are commonly theſe,Their maner of victualing 
                     Re frumentaria comparata;
as the foundation & ſtrength of euery expedition, without which
no man can manage a warre, according to the true maximes and
rules of the Art military, but muſt be forced to relieue that inconuenience,
with the loſſe of many other aduantages of great cōſequence: Which
gaue occaſion to Gaſpard de Coligni that famous Admiral of France amongſt
other oracles of truth, wherewith his minde was maruellouſly enriched, often to
vſe this ſaying: That he that will ſhape that beaſt (meaning warre) muſt begin
with the belly: And this rule was diligently obſerued by Caeſar, who beſt knewe
how to expreſſe the true portraiture of that beaſt, in due proportion and liuely
reſemblance.
                  The order of the Romans was, at the daie of meaſuring, to giue corne to euery
particular ſouldier, for a certain time, which was commonly defined by circumſtances:
And by the meaſure which was giuen them, they knew the daie of the
next paiment; for euerie footman receiued after the rate of a buſhell a weeke,
which was thought ſufficient for him and his ſeruant: for if they had paied them
their whole ſtipend in money, it might haue beene waſted in vnneceſſarie expences;
but by this meanes they were ſure of prouiſion for the time determined;
and the ſequell of the warre was prouidently cared for by the Generall.
                  The corne being deliuered out, was husbanded, ground with hand-milles,
which they carried alwaies with them, & made into haſtie cakes, daintie enough
for a ſouldiers mouth, by no other but themſelues and their ſeruants: Neither
could they ſell it or exchange it for bread; for Saluſt reckoneth this vp amongſt
other diſhonours, of the diſcipline corrupted, that the ſouldiers ſold away their
corne, which was giuen them by the treaſurer, & bought their bread by the day.
And this manner of prouiſion had many ſpeciall commodities, which are not
incident to our cuſtome of victualing: for it is impoſſible, that victualers ſhould
followe an Armie vpon a ſeruice, in the enemies countrey twentie or thirtie
daies together, with ſufficient prouiſion for an Armie: And by that meanes
the Generall cannot attend aduantages and fitteſt oportunities, which in tract
of time are often offered, but is forced either to hazard the whole, vpon vnequall
tearmes, or to ſound an vnwilling retrait. And whereas the victualers are
for the moſt part voluntarie, reſpecting nothing but their gaine; and the ſouldiers
on the other ſide, careleſſe of the morrow and prodigall of the preſent, in
that turbulent marmarket, where the ſeller hath an eie onely to his particular,
and the buyer reſpecteth neither the publike good nor his priuate commoditie,
there is nothing to be looked for, but famine and confuſion. Where as the Romans
by their manner of prouiſion, impoſed the generall care of the publike
good vpon the chiefe commander, whoſe dutie it was to prouide ſtore of corne
for his Armie; and the particular care vpon euerie priuate ſouldier, whome it

eſpecially concerned to ſee, that the allowance which the common weale had in
plentifull manner giuen him, for his maintenance, might not be waſted through
negligence or prodigalitie; which excellent order, the nature of our victuals
will no way admit. Their prouinces and the next confederate ſtates furniſhed
their Armies continually with corne; as it appeareth by this place, that for prouiſion
of graine, he depended altogether vpon the Hedui: And when they were
in the enemies countrey, in the time of harueſt, the ſouldiers went out to reape
and gather corne, and deliuered it threſhed and clenſed to the treaſurer, that it
might be kept vntill the daie of paiment. But to leaue this frugall and prouident
manner of prouiſion as vnpoſſible to be imitated by this age, let vs returne
to our hiſtorie, and ſee how the Heluetians were led, by a probable errour, to
their laſt ouerthrow.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VII.
               
                  The Heluetians follow after Caeſar, and ouertake
the rereward. He imbattaileth his legions vpon the
ſide of a hill: and giueth order for
the battell.
               
               
                  THE Heluetians,Caeſar. vnderſtanding of the Romans departure by
fugitiues that came vnto them, were fullie perſwaded that feare
was the greatest cauſe of their retraite: for the daie before hauing
the vpper ground, they durſt not vſe the aduantage of the
ſame: and hoping withall to intercept them from victuals, they
followed after them with what ſpeed they could, & as they ouertooke
them they charged vpon the rereward. Which when Caeſar
perceiued, he ſent his horſemen to ſuſtaine the aſſault, & in the meane time he drew
his forces vnto the next hill, and in the ſide thereof about the middle of the hill, hee
made a triple battell of foure olde legions, on the toppe of the hill he placed two newe
legions, which he had laſt inrolled in Italie, with the aſſociate forces; and to theſe hee
commended the baggage and impediments of the whole Armie, and filled all the rest
of the hill with light armed men. The Heluetians on the other ſide, conuaied their cariage
and impedimentes into one place; and hauing beaten backe Caeſars horſemen,
with a thicke thronged batallion, they put themſelues into a phalanx, and ſo preſsed
vnder the firſt battell of the Roman legions.
               
                  THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
                  
                     COncerning the true ſenſe of this triple battell, which Caeſar made
vpon the ſide of the hill, I vnderſtand it according to the ancient cuſtome
of the Romans;The manner of their imbattailing. who in the infancie of their militarie diſcipline,
diuided their Armie into three ſortes of ſouldiers, Haſtati,

Principes, and Triarij: for I omit the velites, as no part of their ſtanding battels,
and of theſe they made three ſeuerall battels from front to backe: in the firſt
battell were the Haſtati, and they poſſeſſed the whole front of the Armie, and
were called Acies prima.
                     By triplex Acies. Behinde theſe in a conuenient diſtance, ſtood the
Principes, in like ſort and order diſpoſed, and were called Acies ſecunda: and
laſtly in a like correſpondent diſtance, were the Triarij imbattelled and made Aciem
tertiam. Their legion conſiſted of ten companies, which they called cohortes,
and euerie cohort conſiſted of three ſmall companies, which they named
Manipuli: a maniple of the Haſtati, a maniple of the Principes, and an other
of the Triarij, as I will more particularly ſet downe in the ſecond booke.
And as theſe three kindes of ſouldiers were ſeparated by diſtance of place from
front to backe: ſo was euerie battell deuided into his maniples; and theſe were
deuided by little allies and waies, one from an other, which were vſed to this
purpoſe: The Haſtati being in front did euer begin the battell, and if they
found themſelues too weake to repell the enemie, or were happily forced to a
retrait, they drew themſelues through theſe allies or diſtances, which were in
the ſecond battell betweene the maniples of the Principes into the ſpace, which
was betweene the Principes and the Triarij, and there they reſted themſelues
whileſt the Princes tooke their place and charged the enemie: Or otherwiſe, if
the commanders found it needfull, they filde vp thoſe diſtances of the Principes,
and ſo vnited with them into one bodie, they charged the enemy all in
groſſe; and then if they preuailed not, they retired into the ſpaces between the
Triarij, and ſo they gaue the laſt aſſault, all the three bodies being ioyned all into
one.
                  Now if we examine by the current of the hiſtorie, whether Caeſar obſerued
the ſame order and diuiſions in his warres, we ſhall find little or no alteration at
all, for firſt this triplex Acies here mentioned, was no other thing but the diuiſion
of the Haſtati, Principes and Triarij, according to the manner of the firſt inſtitution.
And leaſt any man ſhould dreame of that ordinarie diuiſion, which is
likewiſe threefold, the two cornets and the battell, and in that ſence he might
ſaie to haue made triplicem Aciem, let him vnderſtand, that the circumſtances
of the diuiſion haue no coherence with that diuiſion; for in that he ſaith of the
Heluetians, ſucceſserunt Aciem primam, preſſed neare the firſt battel or vangard,
he maketh it cleare that the Armie was deuided into a triple battell from front
to backe: for otherwiſe, he would haue ſaid, ſucceſserint dextrum aut ſiniſtrum
cornu, aut mediam Aciem: for ſo were the partes of that diuiſion tearmed. Againe,
in the retrait which the Heluetians made to the hill, when hee ſaith that
the firſt and ſecond battell followed cloſe vpon the enemie, and the third oppoſed
it ſelfe againſt the Boij and Tulingi, and ſtood readie at the foote of the
hill, to charge the legions in the flanke and on the backe. It is manifeſt, that no
other diuiſion can ſo fitly be applied to this circumſtance, as that from front to
backe.
                  But that place in the firſt of the ciuill warres taketh away all ſcruple of controuerſie,
where he vſeth the verie ſame tearmes of prima, ſecunda and tertia
Acies: for being to incampe himſelfe neare vnto Afranius, and fearing leaſt his

ſouldiers ſhould be interrupted in their worke, he cauſed the firſt and ſecond
battel to ſtand in Armes and keepe their diſtance, to the end they might ſhroud
and couer the third battel (which was imploied in making a ditch behind them)
from the view of the enemie; and this kind of imbattailing Caeſar obſerued, in
moſt of his fightes: by which it appeareth that he vſeth the verie ſame order and
diſcipline for imbattailing, as was inſtituted by the old Romans.
                  Concerning the auncient names of Haſtati, Principes and Triarij, which Ramus
in his Militia Iulij Caeſaris, vrgeth to be omitted throughout the whole hiſtorie:
I grant they are ſeldome vſed in theſe Commentaries, in the ſenſe of
their firſt inſtitution: for the Haſtati, when the diſcipline was firſt erected, were
the youngeſt and pooreſt of the legionarie ſouldiers. The Principes were the luſtie,
and able bodied men: and the Triarij the eldeſt and beſt experienced. But
in Caeſars campe, there was little or no difference either of valour or yeares, betweene
the Haſtati, Principes or Triarij, which he nameth Prima, Secunda and
Tertia Acies; and therefore were neuer tearmed by thoſe names, in reſpect of
that difference. Notwithſtanding in regard of order and degrees of diſcipline,
that vertue might bee rewarded with honour, and that time might challenge
the priuiledge of a more worthie place,Lib. 1. de bello Ciuili. the ſaid diſtinctions and tearmes were
religiouſly obſerued: for in the battell with Perreius at Ilerda in Spaine, he mentioneth
the death of Q. Fulginius, ex primo Haſtato legionis quartae decimae: and
in the ouerthrow at Dirrachium he ſaith,Lib 3. de bello Ciuili. that the eagle bearer, being grieuouſly
wounded, commended the ſafetie of his enſigne to the horſemen, all the centurions
of the firſt cohort being ſlaine, praeter principem Priorem. And for the Triarij,
there is no tearme more frequent in Caeſar then Primipilus, which name by
the rules of the ancient diſcipline, but to the chiefeſt Centurion of the firſt maniple
of the Triarij: wherby it appeareth that the maniples kept the ſame names
in regard of a neceſſarie diſtinction, although peraduenture the Haſtati were as
good ſouldiers, as either the Principes or the Triarij. As touching the ſpaces betweene
the maniples, whereinto the firſt battell did retire it ſelfe if occaſion
vrged them, I neuer found any mention of them in Caeſar. Excepting once
here in England, where in a skirmiſh the Brittaines ſo vrged the court of guard,
which kept watch before the Roman campe, that Caeſar ſent out two other cohortes
to ſuccour them, who making diſtance betweene them as they ſtoode,
the court of guard retired it ſelfe in ſafetie, through that ſpace into the campe;
otherwiſe we neuer finde that the firſt battell made any retrait into the allies
betweene the maniples of the ſecond battell, but when it failed in any part, the
ſecond and third went preſently to ſecond them, as appeareth in the battell following
with Arioniſtus and in diuers others.
                  Concerning the vſe of this triple battell,Lib. 5. de militia Romana. what can be ſaid more then Lipſius
hath done? where he laieth open the particular commodities thereof as farre
forth as a ſpeculatiue iudgment can diſcerne of thinges ſo farre remote from
the vſe of this age, which neuer imitateth this triple battell but only in a march:
for then commonly they make three companies, a vangard, a battell and a rereward:
but in imbattailing, they drawe theſe three companies all in front, making
two cornets and the battel, without any other troupes to ſecond them. But

let this ſuffice concerning Caeſar his manner of imbattailing and his triplex Acies,
vntill I come to the ſecond booke, where I will handle more particularly the
parts of a legion, and the commodity of their ſmall battailions.
               
               
                  THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
                  
                     THe Macedonian Phalanx is deſcribed by Polybius to be a ſquare
battell of pikemen, conſiſting of 16 in flancke and 500 in front; the
ſouldiers ſtanding ſo cloſe together that the pikes of the fift ranke
were extended three foote beyond the front of the battell;A phalanx deſcribed. the reſt
whoſe pikes were not ſeruiceable by reaſon of their diſtance from the front,
couched them vpon the ſhoulders of thoſe that ſtoode before them, and ſo locking
them in together in file, preſſed forward to holde vp the ſwaie or giuing
backe of the former rankes, and ſo to make the aſſault more violent and vnreſiſtable.
The Grecians were very skilfull in this part of the Arte militarie, which
containeth order and diſpoſition in imbattailing, for they maintained publike
profeſſors whom they called Tactici, to teach and inſtruct their youth the practiſe
and Art of al formes conuenient for that purpoſe. And theſe Tactici found
by experience, that 16 in flancke ſo ordered as they were in a phalanx, were able
to beare any ſhocke how violently ſoeuer it charged vpon them: which number
of 16 they made to conſiſt of foure doubles, as firſt vnitie maketh no order, for
order conſiſteth in number and pluralitie; but vnitie doubled maketh two, the
leaſt of all orders, and this is the double: which doubled againe maketh the ſecond
order of foure ſouldiers in a file, which doubled the third time maketh 8,
& this doubled maketh 16, which is the fourth doubling from a vnite; and in it
they ſtaied as in an abſolute number and ſquare, whoſe roote is 4 the Quadruple
in regard of both the extremes: for euery one of theſe places, the Tactici had
ſeuerall names, by which they were diſtinctly knowne. But the particular deſcription
requireth a larger diſcourſe, then can be comprehended in theſe ſhort
obſeruations: he that deſireth further knowledge of them, may reade Elianus,
that liued in the time of Adrian the Emperour: and Arianus in his hiſtorie
of Alexander the great: with Mauritius, and Leo imperator, where hee ſhall
haue the diuiſions of Tetrafalangia difalangia, Phalangia vnto a vnite, with all
the diſcipline of the Grecians.
                  The chiefeſt thing to be obſerued is, that the Grecians hauing ſuch skill in
imbattailing, preferd a phalanx before all other formes whatſoeuer; either becauſe
the figure in it ſelfe was very ſtrong, or otherwiſe in regard that it fitted
beſt their weapons, which were long pikes and targets. But whether Caeſar tearmed
the battell of the Heluetians a phalanx in regard of their thicke manner of
imbattailing onely, or otherwiſe, for as much as beſides the forme, they vſed the
naturall weapon of a phalanx which was the pike, it remaineth doubtfull. Brancatio
in his diſcourſes vpon this place, maketh it no controuerſie, but that euerie
ſouldier carried a pike and a target, the target is particularly named in this
hiſtorie: but it cannot ſo eaſily be gathered by the ſame, that their offenſiue weapons

were pikes. In the fight at the baggage it is ſaid, that manie of the legionarie
ſouldiers were wounded through the cart wheeles, with tragulas & materas,
which are commonly interpreted ſpeares and iauelins: and I take them to bee
weapons longer then common dartes, but whether they were ſo long as the ſariſſas
of the Macedonians, I cannot tell. Howſoeuer, this is certaine, that the Heluetians
haue euer beene reputed for the true phalangitae, next vnto the Macedonians;
and that in their thicke and cloſe imbattailing; they failed not at this
time of the forme of a phalanx: for they roofed it ſo thicke with targets, that
Caeſar ſaith they were ſore troubled, becauſe many of their targets were faſtned
and tied together, with piles darted through them: Which argueth that their
phalanx was very thicke thronged, whatſoeuer their weapon was.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VIII.
               
                  Caeſar ſendeth away all the horſes of eaſe:
exhorteth his men: and beginneth
the battell.
               
               
                  BOTH the Armies being in this forwardneſſe,Caeſar. Caeſar to take away
all hope of ſafetie by flight, firſt cauſed his owne horſe and
then all the prinate horſes of eaſe, of the Legates, Tribunes, and
the reſt of the chiefe leaders, to be carried out of the battell, and
vſing ſome motiues of courage, according as the circumſtances afforded
him occaſion, he gaue the ſigne of battell. The Romans caſting
their piles with the aduantage of the hill, did eaſily breake
the Heluetian phalanx; and then taking themſelues to their ſwordes; they did ſecond
the furie of the pile with a rude and violent cloſe.
               
                  THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
                  
                     THe ancient ſages found it neceſſary,Speeches of incouragement before they gaue battell. to a faithfull and ſerious execution
of ſuch an action, to prepare the mindes of their men with
wordes of encouragement, and to take away all ſcruple out of their
conceites, either of the vnlawfulneſſe of the cauſe, or diſaduantage
againſt the enemie: for if at anie time that ſaying be true, that oratio plus poteſt
quam pecunia, it is here more powerfull and of greater effect. For a donatiue or
liberanca, can but procure a mercenarie indeuour euer yeelding to a better offer,
and doe oftentimes breede a ſuſpicion of wrong, euen amongſt thoſe that
are willingly enriched with them; and ſo maketh them flacke to diſcharge their
ſeruice with loialtie: yea oftentimes of friendes to become enemies. But in as

much as ſpeech diſcloſeth the ſecrets of the ſoule, and diſcouereth the intent
and drift of euerie action, a few good wordes laying open the iniurie which is
offered to innocencie, how equity is controlled with wrong, and iuſtice controlled
by iniquitie (for it is neceſſarie that a commander approue his cauſe, and
ſettle an opinion of right in the minde of his ſouldiers, as it is eaſie to make that
ſeeme probable which ſo many offer to defend with their bloud, when indeed
euerie man relieth vpon anothers knowledge, and reſpecteth nothing leſſe the
right) a few good words I ſay, will ſo ſtirre vp their mindes in the feruentnes of
the cauſe, that euery man will take himſelfe particularly ingaged in the action
by the title of equity; and the rather for that it iumpeth with the neceſſitie of
their condition. For men are willing to doe well, when weldoing agreeth with
that they would doe, otherwiſe the Acte may formerly be effected, but the mind
neuer approueth it by aſſent. And this maner of exhortation or ſpeech of incouragement,
was neuer omitted by Caeſar in any conflict mentioned in this hiſtorie:
but he ſtill vſed it as a neceſſarie inſtrument to ſet vertue on foote, and the
only meanes to ſtirre vp alacrity: Or if it happened that his men were at any
time diſcouraged by diſaſter or croſſe accident,Lib. 7. de bello gallico. as they were at Gergobia, and
at the two ouerthrowes he had at Dirrachium; he neuer would aduēture to giue
battell vntill he had incouraged them againe, and confirmed their mindes in valour
and reſolution. But this age hath put on ſo ſcornfull a humor, that it cannot
heare a ſpeech in this key, ſound it neuer ſo grauely, without ſcoffing and deriſion:
and on the other ſide diſcontinuance of ſo neceſſarie a part, hath bred at
length ſuch an inutilem pudorem in our chiefe commanders, that they had rather
looſe the gaine of a great aduantage, then buy it with wordes to be deliuered in
publike.
               
               
                  THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
                  
                     IN this Chapter we may further obſerue the violence of the Roman
pile,The Roman Pile deſcribed which being a heauie deadly weapon, could hardly be fruſtrated
with any reſiſtance, and in that reſpect was very proper and effectual
againſt a phalanx, or any other thicke and cloſe battell, or whereſoeeuer
els, the ſtroke was certaine, or could hardly deceiue the aime of the caſter:
for in ſuch incounters it ſo galled the enemy, that they were neither able to
keepe their order, nor anſwere the aſſault with a reſiſting counterbuffe. By which
it appeareth that the only remedie againſt the pile was, to make the rankes thin,
allowing to euery ſouldier a large podiſme or place to ſtand in, that ſo the ſtroke
might of it ſelfe fall without hurt, or by foreſight be preuented; as it ſhal plainly
appeare by the ſequell of this hiſtorie, which I will not omit to note, as the places
ſhall offer themſelues to the examination of this diſcourſe. But as touching
the pile, which is ſo often mentioned in the Roman hiſtorie, Polybius deſcribeth
it in this manner. A pile (ſaith he) is a caſting weapon, the ſtaffe whereof is
almoſt 3 cubites long, and it hath palmarem diametrum, a hand breadth in thickneſſe.
The ſtaues were armed with an head of yron, equall in length to the ſtaffe

it ſelfe: But in that ſort that halfe the head was faſtened vp to the middle of the
ſtaffe, with plates of yron like the head of a Halbert: and the other halfe ſtucke
out at the ende of the ſtaffe like a pike, containing a fingers breadth in thicknes,
and ſo decreaſing leſſe and leſſe vnto the point which was barbed. This head
was ſo ſlender toward the point, that the waight of the ſtaffe would bend it as it
ſtucke, as appeareth in this battell of the Heluetians. This weapon was peculiar
to the Romans, and was called Pilum, as Varro noteth of Pilum a Peſtell, quod
Hoſtes feriret vt Pilum.
                     Lib. 3. de militia Romana. Lipſius finding that Palmarem diametrum, was too great
a thickneſſe to be managed by any mans hand, interpreteth it to be foure inches
in circuit, if the ſtaffe were either round or ſquare, for they had of both ſortes,
and ſo he maketh it very manageable; but nothing anſwerable to the deſcription
giuen by Polybius either in forme or waight. Patricius in his Paralleli, maketh
the ſtaffe to haue palmarem diametrum in the butte end,Lib. 5. but the reſt of the ſtaffe
he maketh to decreaſe taper wiſe, vnto the head of yron, where it hath the thickneſſe
of a mans finger; and ſo it anſwereth both in forme and waight to a Peſtell,
as may be ſeene by the figure, and I take it to be the meaning of Polybius. Patricius
in that place ſetteth downe foure diſcommodities of the Pile. Firſt a furious
and hoat ſpirited enemie will eaſily preuent the darting of the pile, with a
nimble and ſpeedie cloſe: And ſo we read, that in the battell which Caeſar had
with Ariouiſtus, the Germans came ſo violently vpon them, that the ſouldiers
caſt away their piles, and betooke them to their ſwordes. And likewiſe in that
worthy battell betweene Cateline and Marcus Petreius,Salust. they caſt away their
piles on either part. The ſecond diſcommoditie was, that the piles being ſo heauie,
could not be caſt any diſtance, but were only ſeruiceable at hand. Thirdly,
they could not be caſt with any aime, or as they ſay point blanke: And laſtly the
ſouldiers were to take aduantage of ground backward when they threw them,
which might eaſily diſorder their troups, if they were not very wel experienced.
               
               
                  THE THIRD OBSERVATION.
                  
                     THe laſt thing which I obſerue in this ſpeciality is, that the legionarie
ſouldiers had no other offenſiue weapon, but one pile or two at the
moſt, and their ſwordes. By which it may be gathered, that all their
victories came by buckling at handy-blowes, for they came alwaies
ſo neare before they caſt their pile, that they left themſelues no more time then
might conueniently ſerue them to drawe their ſwordes: neither would their
armes of defence, which was compleat, beſides a large target which they carried
on their left arme, ſuffer them to make any long purſuit, or continued chaſe
whenſoeuer a light armed enemie did make any ſpeedy retrait, as will more
plainly appeare by that which followeth.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. IX.
               
                  The Heluetians fainting in the battell, retire to a
hill, the Romans follow after, and the
battell is continued.
               
               
                  THE Heluetians were ſore troubled with the Roman piles,Caeſar.
which ſtucke ſo faſt in their ſhields, that they were neither able
to pull them out, nor to vſe their targets to any purpoſe: and
therfore after a weariſome toile, they choſe rather to caſt them
away, and to hazard their nakedneſſe vpon agilitie and readineſſe;
then to betray their life with an vnmanageable weapon:
but at length fainting with woundes, they began to giue
place, and made their retrait to a hill not farre off, the better to ſaue themſelues from
the furie of the Romans.Them of Borbon and Loraine. The hill being taken, and the legions following on to driue
them from thence, the reregard of the Heluetians, which were the Boy and Tulingi,
conſiſting of 15000 men ſtood readie at the foote of the hill, to charge the Romans in
flanke and to inuiron them round about: which the Heluetians no ſooner perceiued but
they returned and began a freſh from the hill to renew the battell, and ſo the legions
were ſet vpon both in front and flanke at one inſtant. To remedie this difficultie, conuerſa
ſigna bipartito intulerunt, ſaith the hiſtory: the firſt and ſecond battell fought
againſt the Heluetians that returned from the hill and the third battell turned themſelues
to beare the aſsault of the rereward, which ſtood readie to incloſe them about,
and to charge them on the backe. And here the fight was doubtfull and vehement for
a long time, vntill at length they were no longer able to indure the violence of the legionarie
ſouldiers, part of them fled to the toppe of the hill, and the reſt betooke themſelues
to the place, where their baggage and impediments were lodged. And hitherto,
here was not one man ſeene to haue turned his backe in all the conflict, although the
fight continued from the ſeuenth houre vntill the euening.
               
                  THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
                  
                     COncerning the enſignes of the Romans:The enſignes of the Romans we are to vnderſtand that
the chiefeſt enſigne of euerie legion was an Eagle, which alwaies
attended vpon the Primipile or chiefe Centurion of the ſaid legion.
The enſigne of a maniple was, either a Hand or a Dragon, a
woolfe or a Sphinx, as it appeareth (beſides the teſtimonie of hiſtory) by the
Columne of Traiane in Rome, wherein the enſignes are figured, with ſuch purtraitures:
ſo that theſe enſignes, reſembling the proportions of liuing creatures,
had their fore partes alwaies caried that way which the legions were to march,
or where they were to fight: and therefore in this hiſtorie, by the aſpect and carying
of the enſignes, the front of the Armie was commonly noted: as in this

                     
                     
                        THE BATTEL WHICH CAESAR HAD WITH THE HELVETIANS
                     


                     
                     
place it is ſaid, that the enſignes of the firſt and ſecond battell were carried towardes
the hill, whither the Heluetians had made their retrait; and the enſignes
of the third battell looked an other waie, towardes the Boij and Tulingi, which
ſtood of the foot of the hill: By which is ſignified, how the legions were diuided
to reſiſt the brunt of the double incounter.
               
               
                  THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
                  
                     COncerning the time of the daie:The diuiſion of their day. we are to vnderſtand that the Romans
vſed not the ſame diuiſion of the daie as we commonly do: for
they diuided their artificiall (which is the ſpace betweene ſunne riſing
and ſetting) into 12 equall partes, which the Aſtronomers called
vnequall or planetarie houres. The firſt houre of the daie began alwaies at
ſunne riſing; the ſixt houre was alwaies high noone; and the twelfth houre was
ſunne ſetting. And as the day waxed longer or ſhorter, ſo theſe houres were either
greater or leſſe: neither did they agree with equall or equinoctiall houres,
ſuch as are now vſed, but only at the Acquinoctium: ſo that by this maner of reckoning,
ab hora ſeptima ad veſperum, is meant the battell began about one of the
clocke according to our Computation, and continued vntill the euening. The
like we muſt vnderſtand, throughout this whole hiſtorie, as often as there is
mention made of the circumſtance of time.
               
            
            
               CHAP. X.
               
                  The Heluetians continue their fight, at the cariages:
but at length they left the field, and marched
towardes Langiers.
               
               
                  THE like courage was alſo ſhewed on either ſide at their baggage,Caeſar.
the place being fortified with cartes and wagons in ſteed of a
rampier, which ſo troubled the Romans that they could not winne
it vntill it was late in the night: for the Heluetians being fenced
with their cariages, ſo galled the legions with dartes and tauelins,
vnder the chariots and from betweene the wheeles, that the victory
was not eaſily atchieued. At laſt being able no longer to reſiſt, they left the place and
marched all that night, without any intermiſsion; and the fourth day they came into
the Confines of theLangiers. Lingones, being about 230000 that eſcaped in the battell.
               
                  THE OBSERVATION.
                  
                     IF we conſider the nature of the action, and looke into the true cauſes
of their ouerthrow, as farre as the right ſenſe of the hiſtorie ſhall direct
our iudgment, we ſhall finde valour not to be wanting in the Heluetians,
but rather ſuperlatiuely abounding in the Romans. For that vehement opinion

of their valiancie and manhood, which carried them out of the ſtreights of
the country, to ſeeke larger fortunes in other kingdomes, was not ſo abated with
the loſle of the fourth part of their Hoſt at the riuer Arar; nor with the terrible
furie of thoſe veteran legions: but it yeelded this effect, which Caeſar in his eſtimate
of valour thought memorable, that for fiue houres ſpace or more, there
was not one man ſeene to haue turned his backe. Their manner of imbattailing,
had not the Romans beene the enemy, was vnreſiſtable: for being caſt
into a phalanx, which in the plaines of Aſia had made Alexander the great and
the Macedonians famous, they did as farre ſurpaſſe any other forme of imbattailing
(ſuppoſing that the conueniencie of the place did fit that diſpoſition)
wherein the ſtrength of the whol is deuided into many particulars, as the violēce
of a great bodie exceedeth the force and motion of his partes, when it is diuided
into ſmaller cantons. For as in a phalanx, many particular ſouldiers are by
a cloſe and compact order incorporated into one entire bodie: ſo their ſeueral
vertues are gathered into one head, and are as partes vnited into one generall
force, which eaſily ſwalloweth vp the ability of many other leſſer quantities, into
which a greater ſtrength is equally diuided.
                  The aduantage of the place which they got by retrait, and the double charge
wherewith they ingaged the Romans both in front and flanke, was able in an indifferent
conflict to haue made fortune fugitiue, and beare armes on their ſide;
or at the leaſt ſo to haue ſteemed the ſwelling tide of victorie, which carried the
Romans ſo violently in the chaſe, that they might haue beene equall ſharers in
the honour of the daie: had it not flowed from an Ocean of valour, whoſe
courſe could not be hindered with any ſtops and oppoſitions, vntill it came to
that height, which true valour and vnexampled reſolution affected. And yet the
height of this courage could not ſo alaie the heate of the Heluetians furie; but
it brake foorth into dangerous flames, when they came to the place where their
cariages were laide, and coſt much bloud and many mens liues before they
quitted the place: for they fought with that ſpirit and induſtry, as though they
meant to make triall whether their fortune would proue no better in the night
then it had done in the daie.
                  The ouerthrow of the Tigurine Canton at the riuer Arar, proceeded rather
from want of good directions (which is the leſſe to be maruelled at, conſidering
they had no chiefe commander as we read of) then from any defect of valour:
for the rules of militarie gouernment require eſpeciall care in paſſing ouer a
water;Periculum ſemper ab hoſtibus grauiſſimum ſuſtinet diuiſus & inordinatus exercitus. for then eſpecially an Armie is in greateſt danger, when it is diſordered
and diuided. And therfore the Romans atchieued this victorie by the horrible
vigilancie as Tully calleth it, of their commander: who alwaies watched oportunitates
rei bene gerendae, as neceſſarie and ſpeedie meanes to ouercome in all
his warres.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. XI.
               
                  Caeſar after three daies reſpite, followeth after the
Heluetians: he taketh them to mercie, and ſendeth
them backe againe to the country.
               
               
                  CAESAR abode three daies in the place where the battell was
fought,Caeſar. as well to burie the dead, as to refreſh the wearied ſpirits
of his ouerlaboured ſouldiers, that their woundes might the better
be cured: and in the meane time he ſent letters to theLangres. Lingones,
not to furniſh the Heluetians either with corne, or any other
prouiſions: for if they did, he would eſteeme of them as of enemies,
and take them in the number of the vanquiſhed Heluetians;
and at the three daies end, he made after them with all his forces. The Heluetians
conſtrained through penurie and want of neceſſarie ſupplements, ſent embaſsadors
to Caeſar to intreat an acceptation of rendrie: who meeting him on the waie, threwe
themſelues at his feete, and with manie teares and ſupplications, they craued ſuch fauourable
conditions of peace, as might beſt comfort a diſtreſsed people, and beſeeme the
glory of ſo famous a Conqueſt. Caeſar firſt ſent them word to attend his cōming in the
place where they were: and at his comming he commanded them to deliuer vnto him
a ſufficient number of hoſtages and pledges, 2. to giue vp all the Armes and weapons
they had, 3. and to deliuer vp the fugitiues that were fled vnto them in the time of the
war. Whiles theſe thinges were a doing, part of the Heluetians to the number of 6000,
ſtole out of the campe in the night, and tooke their iourney towardes the Rhene, and
the Confines of the Germans: which when Caeſar vnderſtood, hee ſent preſently to
thoſe cities, through whoſe territories the Heluetians had paſsed; and commaunded
them to bring them backe againe: which being diligently performed, he welcommed
them with the entertainment of an enemy, and put them all to the ſword. The reſt he
commanded to returne into their country from whence they came, and becauſe they
had neither corne nor any other ſuſtenance, he cauſed theSauoyens. Allobroges to ſupply their
neceſsities, and willed the Heluetians to reedifie their townes and citties which they
had before deſtroied, and to inhabit in thoſe friendly places which had giuen to their
anceſtors and themſelues greater fortunes, then could elſewhere be afforded them:
Wherein he was the more carefull, leaſt if their country lying waſte, the fertilitie of
the ſoile might inuite the Germans from beyond the Rhene to taſt the ſweetnes which
the Galles enioyed, and ſo the prouince ſhould be ſure of an vnquiet neighbour. In the
campe of the Heluetians was found a regiſter, containing the particular ſummes of all
that were in that iourney, amounting to the number of 368000, whereof 92000
were fighting men: they that returned and ſaw the fortune of both their ſtates, were
110000. And thus ended that warre.
               
                  THE OBSERVATION.
                  
                     THe directions concerning their rendrie and returne, were very ſound,
and of good conſequence. For firſt in that he commanded them to attend
his comming in the place where they were, he tooke away al motions

of new trouble which often remoues might haue cauſed, by the oportunitie
of ſome accident which might haue happened: aſſuring himſelfe that their
abode in that place would increaſe their miſeries, and conſequently ripen that
deſire of peace which they made ſhew of; conſidering that the Lingones in
whoſe territories they were, durſt not for feare of Caeſars diſpleaſure, furniſh thē
with any neceſſaries in that extremity. Touching the ſecurity which the Romans
required of the loialty of ſuch people as they conquered; their manner
was, to take as hoſtages a ſufficient number of the men children of the chiefeſt
men of that nation, whoſe liues depended vpon their parentes fidelitie, and ended
with the firſt ſuſpicion of their rebellion: which cuſtome beſides the preſent
good, promiſed the like or better ſecurity to the next age, when as thoſe children
by conuerſation and acquaintance ſhould be ſo affected to the Roman
Empire, that returning to their owne country, their actions might rather tend
to the aduancement thereof, then any way be preiudiciall to the ſame. And leaſt
the loue of liberty and freedome ſhould preuaile more with them, then that
affection which nature had inioyned them to beare to their children: he did
what he could to take away the meanes and inſtruments of their rebellion, by
cauſing them to deliuer vp ſuch Armes and weapons as were there preſent: and
ſo to become ſutable to that petition of peace, which they had made. The ſum
of all is this. He corrected the inſolencie of a furious people, & reduced them to
a feeling of their owne madnes. He kept thē from ſacking the poſſeſſions of manie
thouſandes, in the continent of Gallia; and ſent them backe againe to continue
their name and nation in the place, where they firſt inhabited; which continueth
vnto this day. And thus we ſee, that there is no humour ſo headſtrong,
nor ſo backt with ſtrength of circumſtances, but it may meete with a remedie
to qualifie the inſolencie thereof, and make it ſubiect to correction and controlment.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XII.
               
                  The ſtates of Gallia congratulate Caeſars victorie:
they call a councell, and diſcouer their inward
griefe concerning Ariouiſtus, and
his forces.
               
               
                  THE Heluetian warre being ſo happely ended,Caeſar. the Princes and chiefe
men of all the ſtates of Gallia, came to Caeſar to congratulate the
happineſse of his victorie: and with all they beſought him that
with his good liking, they might call a Generall councell; wherein
they had matters of great importance to be handled, which they deſired
with a common conſent, to prefer to his conſideration. Which being
granted, and the day of meeting appointed, they bound themſelues by oath not to
reueale the cauſes of their aſsembly, but to ſuch as they ſhould make choice of, to be their

Oratours. The councell being ended, the ſame Princes returned to Caeſar, and in lamentable
manner caſt themſelues at his feete, contending with as great earneſtneſse,
that thoſe things which they deliuered might not be reuealed, as they did to haue their
petition granted: foraſmuch as they ſaw, that the diſcouerie of ſuch declarations as
they propounded, would neceſsarily pull on moſt grieuous afflictions. Diuitiacus the
Heduan was made ſpeaker for the reſt, and in effect deliuered theſe wordes.
               That Gallia was vnhappely diuided into two factions,The people of Auuergne. the Hedui were the head of
the one, and the Auerni of the other. Theſe two states contending manie yeares for
the principalitie, the Auerni with the Sequani their Clients, finding themſelues
the weaker partie, hired the Germans to take their part, who at the firſt ſent them
15000 men to ſtrengthen their faction: but afterward taſting the ſweeteneſse and
pleaſure of the Galles, the barbarous people ſo liked the country, that now there were
no leſſe then one hundred and twentie thouſand, that were come out of Germanie
and ſeated in their Territories. With theſe the Hedui and their Clients had once or
twiſe fought, hoping by their proweſse, both to chastice the malice of the Sequani, and
to cleare their country of a barbarous enemie: but their labour effected nothing but
their owne calamitie, and the vtter ouerthrowe of their nobilitie and Senate: for
they were driuen to deliuer the chiefeſt of their citie, as pledges to the Sequani, and
to binde themſelues by oath neuer to ſeeke their releaſe or freedome, nor to implore
the aide of the people of Rome, but euer to remaine their perpetuall bondmen: Only
Diuitiacus amongst all the Hedui could neuer be brought to that thraldome, but vſing
that libertie which his reſolution afforded him, he went to Rome and boldly opened
his diſtreſsed caſe vnto the Senate. But in the ende, the victorie became as grieuous
to the Sequani, as to the Hedui. For Ariouiſtus king of the Germans, was alreadie
poſsest of the third part of their Territories, and at that inſtant he commanded
them to let go another third part: for there were 24000 Germans come newely
vnto him, that were allotted to that inheritance. If this violent courſe were not ſtaied
by the oppoſition of ſome greater motion, the Galles would ſoone be driuen out of their
country, and beforced
to imitate the Heluetians in ſeeking new habitations and ſeates
of reſt, farre remote from the crueltie of the Germans. Caeſar might by his owne authoritie,
or by the preſence of his Armie, or by the renowne of his late victorie, or
by the name of the people of Rome, keepe the Germans from tranſporting any more
Colonies into Gallia.
               
                  THE OBSERVATION.
                  
                     IN this relation, there are diuers points worthily recommended to
the diſcretion of ſuch, as are willing to be directed by other mens
miſaduentures. As firſt into what extremities ambition doth driue
her thirſtie fauourites, by ſuppreſſing the better faculties of the ſoule,
& ſetting ſuch vnbrideled motions on foot, as carrie men headlong into moſt
deſperate attempts: for as it had deſerued commendation in either faction ſo
to haue carried their emulation, that by their owne meanes and ſtrength applied

to the rule of good gouernment, their authority might wholy haue ſwaied
the inclinations of the weaker ſtates; ſo was it moſt odious in the Sequani, to call
in forraine forces to ſatisfie the appetite of their vntempered humor, and in the
ende were accordingly rewarded. Secondly, it appeareth how dangerous a thing
it is, to make a ſtranger a ſtickler in a quarrell which ciuill diſſention hath broched,
when the partie that called him in, ſhall not be as able to refuſe his aſſiſtance
vpon occaſion, as he was willing to entertaine it for aduantage. Laſtlie,
the often diſcontents of theſe ſtates ſhew the force of a preſent euill, which poſſeſſeth
ſo vehemently the powers of the ſoule, that any other calamity either already
paſt or yet to come, how great ſoeuer, ſeemeth tollerable and eaſie in regard
of that ſmart which the preſent griefe inflicteth. So the Sequani choſe rather
to captiuate their libertie to the Barbariſme of a ſauage nation, then to indure
the Hedui to take the hand of them: and againe, to make themſelues vaſſals
to the Romans, rather then indure the vſurping cruelty of the Germans: and
finally (as the ſequell of the hiſtorie will diſcouer) to hazard the loſſe of life and
country, then to ſuffer the taxes and impoſitions of the Romans: So predominant
is the preſent euill in mens affections, and ſo it preuaileth at the ſeate of
our iudgment.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XIII.
               
                  The reaſons that moued Caeſar to vndertake
this warre.
               
               
                  TO theſe petitions of the Galles Caeſar made an anſwere,Caeſar. comporting
the mildneſse of his naturall diſpoſition, promiſing them his beſt
furtherance in the cauſe, and doubted not but that Ariouiſtus
would be intreated in any reaſonable matter: and ſo he diſmiſſed
the aſſembly. Amongst many inducements, there were two of eſpeciall
importance, which vrged him to vndertake this warre: the firſt
was the diſhonour and blot of infamie, wherewith the preſent age might haue noted
the Roman Empire, if vpon complaint and imploration of aide, they ſhould haue ſuffered
a barbarous nation to haue held the Hedui in thraldome, who in the maieſty of
their Senate had oftentimes been called their brethren and kinſmen, and graced with
ſuch titles of reſpect, as by the tenure of loyalty and ſincerity of affection, might command
greater dueties then theſe which were required. The ſecond reaſon was the
feare he had, leaſt the Germans accuſtoming more and more to tranſport the ſuperfluitie
of their increaſing families ouer the Rhene, and to plant them in the fertile
ſeates of the Galles, the Roman Prouince might at length he indangered, and Italie it
ſelfe attempted. And therefore it ſeemed beſt vnto him, to ſend embaſſadours to Ariouiſtus,
to will him to thinke of ſome conuenient place of parley, where they might
meete to intreat of matters concerning the publike good.
               
                  
                  THE OBSERVATION.
                  
                     I Maie here take an occaſion,The authoritie of the Roman Generals to ſpeake ſomewhat concerning the authoritie
of the Roman Generals, which we ſee to be verie large, conſidering
that Caeſar of himſelfe, without any further leaue of the Senate
and people of Rome (for what may be gathered by this hiſtorie)
did vndertake a warre of that conſequence, and put in ieopardie the Legions,
the Prouince, or what other intereſt the Romans had in Gallia. Wherein
we are to vnderſtand, that when the ſtate of Rome did allot the gouernment of
any Prouince to a Proconſull, they did likewiſe recommend vnto him the careful
managing of ſuch accidents, as might any way concerne the good of that regiment.
For conſidering that ſuch cauſes as may trouble a well ordered gouernment,
are as well external and forraine, as internall and bred within the bounds
of that Empire: it had beene to ſmall purpoſe to haue giuen him onely authoritie,
to maintaine a courſe of wholeſome gouernment at home, and no meanes
to take awaie ſuch oppoſitions, which forraine accidentes might ſet vp againſt
him: And ſo we ſee that Caeſar vndertooke the Heluetian warre, in regard of the
ſafetie of the Prouince: And this againe with Ariouiſtus, leaſt the Germans
ſhould ſo multiplie in Gallia, that the Prouince it ſelfe might at length bee indangered.
Neither had their Generals authoritie onely to vndertake theſe wars,
but the abſolute diſpoſition alſo of the whole courſe thereof, whether it were to
treat, capitulate, compound, or what els they thought conuenient for the aduancement
of the common weale, did wholy reſt vpon their direction: repub.
bene geſta, being the ſtile of the warrant for all their actions. Neither may we
thinke that any ſubordinate or depending authority can be ſo powerfull in the
courſe of buſineſſes, as that which abſolutely commandeth without controlment,
and proceedeth according to the oportunity of time and occaſion, further
then either preſcription or limitation can direct it. And therefore whenſoeuer
the Roman affaires were diſtreſſed and driuen to an exigent, they created
a Dictator that had regiam poteſtatem, ſuch an abſolute command, that whatſoeuer
power reſted either in the Conſuls, or in the Tribunes, in the Senate or in
the people, it gaue waie to the greatnes of that magiſtrate; that there might be
no let or retracting power to weaken that courſe, which nothing but an abſolute
command could eſtabliſh, for the good of the common weale. And yet notwithſtāding
this abſolute gouernment, they attributed ſuch power to the courſe
of humane actions, that by the puniſhment which they inflicted vpon diſſolute
and vnfortunate leaders, they ſeemed to acknowledge that no man, how circumſpect
ſoeuer, could promiſe more then likelihoods or probabilities of good fortune,
as farre forth as his meanes and induſtrie could atchieue it.Liuie lib. 8. For olde
M. Fabius, pleading for the life of his gallant ſonne, and oppoſing the rigor of
Papyrius the dictator with examples of antiquity, ſaith: Populi quidem, penes
quem poteſtas omnium rerum eſset, ne iram quidem vnquam atrociorem fuiſse in eos
qui temeritate atque inſcitia exercitus amiſiſsent, quam vt pecunia eos multaret: capite 
anquiſitum ob rem male geſtam de imperatore nullum ad eam diem eſſe. The
people (ſaith he) in whome the ſoueraigne power of thinges conſiſteth, neuer
ſhewed greater diſpleaſure againſt ſuch, as had loſt an Armie either by raſhneſſe
or vnskilfulneſſe, then impoſing a fine vpon them: but to bring the life of
a Generall in queſtion for failing in his indeuours, was neuer heard of to that
daie.
                  The condition of the inferiour officers of their campe, was farre otherwiſe
in regard of militarie diſcipline: for preſcription guided them in all their ſeruices,
and the chiefeſt part of their duetie was obedience; although they ſaw euident
reaſon to the contrarie, & found their directions vnperfect in that behalfe:
And therefore Caeſar ſaith vpon that occaſion:Lib. 3. de bello Ciuili. 
                     aliae ſunt legati partes atque imperatoris,
alter omnia agere ad praeſcriptum, alter libere ad ſummam rerum conſulere
debet. The office of a legate or lieutenant, differeth from that of a generall:
The one doing all things by preſcription; and the other freely deliberating
of whatſoeuer may concerne the cauſe. And this courſe the Romans helde, concerning
the authoritie of their Generals.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XIIII.
               
                  Ariouiſtus his anſwere: a ſecond embaſſage,
with the ſucceſſe thereof.
               
               
                  TO that embaſsage Ariouiſtus anſwered,Caeſar. that if his occaſions
had required Caeſars aſsiſtance, he would haue furthered them
with his owne preſence. And he thought it as reaſonable that if
it were in his meanes to pleaſure the Romans, Caeſar ought not
to thinke much of the like labour: for his owne part, he durſt not
come into thoſe quarters without an Armie, neither could he leuie
an Armie without great charge. The thing that he moſt wondered
at was, what the Romans had to doe in that part of Gallia, which the law
of Armes had made his inheritance. Vpon the returne of this meſsage, Caeſar framed
a ſecond embaſſage, the purport whereof caried this ſenſe: For as much as he thus requited
the honour wherewith the people of Rome had beautified his beſt dignitie (for
in Caeſars Conſulſhip by that controlling authoritie of their Empire, they had vouchſafed
to eſteeme of him as a king in his dominions, and as a friend vnto their state)
that he diſdained to admit of a Parlee concerning the common good: let him knowe
that theſe were the thinges which he required to be performed by him. Firſt that he
ſhould not ſuffer any more ſauage troupes of the Germans to be tranſported ouer the
Rheine into Gallia: ſecondly, that he ſhould deliuer vp thoſe Hoſtages which he had
from the Hedui and Sequani, and ſhould ceaſe to moleſt them with further iniuries.
Theſe things if he did performe, Caeſar would aſſure him of a gratefull acceptation, in
the behalfe of the people of Rome: otherwiſe, for as much as he himſelfe was Proconſull

of the Prouince in Gallia, his charge extended by the ſame commiſsion to the defence
of their aſſociates and friendes; and therefore he would not neglect the iniurie of the
Hedui.
               To theſe mandates Ariouiſtus thus anſwered: the lawe of Armes kept this tenure
among all nations, that a conquerour might gouerne a ſubdued people according as
he thought beſt for his owne ſafetie. The people of Rome did not direct the courſe of
their gouernment by another mans preſcript, but by their owne arbitrement: and as
he had not directed the Romans, ſo ought not they to hinder the courſe of his proceedings.
The Hedui hauing tried the fortune of the war, and hauing hazarded their life
and libertie in the caſualtie of many battels, were by right become ſtipendarie to his
Empire, whoſe Hoſtages he would retaine according to the couenants by which they
made their peace. If Caeſar would needes vndertake that quarell; let him know that
no man euer contended with Ariouiſtus, but to his owne deſtruction. Trie when hee
would, he ſhould find what valour conſisted in the Germans, that for 14 yeares ſpace
were neuer couered with any other roofe then the Heauens.
               
                  THE OBSERVATION.
                  
                     ANd thus farre proceeded Caeſar with Ariouiſtus, in debating the
wronges and agreeuances of the Hedui: Wherin appeareth the difference
betweene a matter handled, according to morall ciuilitie in
tearmes of mildneſſe and pleaſing accent, and that which is rudely
deliuered, and dependeth rather vpon the plainneſſe of the proiect, then ſuted
with wordes fit for perſwaſion. For that which Ariouiſtus alleadged, to make
good his intereſt in Gallia, was as conſonant to reaſon, as any thing to the contrarie
vrged by Caeſar. But as the Lacedemonian ſaid of one, that he ſpake the
truth otherwiſe then it ſhould be ſpoken: ſo it may be ſaid of Ariouiſtus anſwere,
that it wanted that ſweeting humanitie which giueth credit to veritie it ſelfe; for
as much as it proceedeth from a well tempered ſpirit, wherein no turbulent
paſſion ſeemeth to controll the force of reaſon, nor hinder the ſentence of true
iudgment; but rather ſeaſoning her conceptions with humilitie, doth couertly
complaine of open wrong, and ſtrengthen her aſſertions with a pleaſing deliuerie.
And therfore how great ſoeuer the controuerſie be, that partie which exceedeth
not the boundes of modeſtie, but maketh mildneſſe his chiefeſt aduocate,
will ſo preuaile in any auditorie, that albeit equitie doth diſallow her title;
yet the maner of his cariage will cleare him from offering wrong, in that he vſeth
the ſequels of innocencie to proue his intereſt in that which he demandeth.
But to leaue this circumſtance, as only to be noted; let vs proceed to the war
it ſelfe, which I made the ſecond part of this hiſtorie.
               
            
            
               
               CAP. XV.
               
                  The Treuiri bring newes of one hundred townſhips
of the Sweui that were come to the Rhene. Caeſar
taketh in Beſanſon: his ſouldiers are ſurpriſed
with an extreame feare of
the Germans.
               
               
                  AT the ſame inſtant,Caeſar. as this countermeſsage returned from Ariouiſtus,
there came meſſengers from the Hedui andTriers. Treuiri vnto
Caeſar: the Hedui complained that theThe country about Cōſtāce in Germanie. Harudes, which were
lately come into Gallia, did ſacke their country and ſpoile their
territories: neither could they conclude any peace with Ariouiſtus;
but by giuing ſufficient pledges for their alleageance. The
Treuiri brought newes of one hundred towneſhippes of the Sueui
that were come vnto the riuer Rhene to ſeeke a paſsage into Gallia, conducted by Naſua
and Cimberius two brethren. Whereat Caeſar being moued thought his beſt means
of preuention to conſiſt in celerity, leaſt the difficultie of reſiſting ſhould grow greater,
when thoſe newe forces of the Sueui were ioyned with that power which was alreadie
with Ariouiſtus. And therfore hauing prouided corne, he made haſte to ſeeke the Germans,
and hauing gone three daies iourney on his way, he had intelligence that Ariouiſtus
with all his forces was going to take in Beſanſon, and that he was three daies
iourney on his waie alreadie. Caeſar knowing how much it imported him to preuent
that diſaduantage (for as much as the ſcite of the towne, was of that ſtrength that
he that commanded it might prolong the warre at his owne pleaſure, being incircled
with the riuerLe doux. Alduabis, excepting a ſmall ſpace of 600 foote, which was fortified
with an exceeding high hill, and the hill ſtrengthened with a wall, and ſo ioyned to
the towne) made al the haſte he could to take in the towne, & left a ſtrong garriſon in
the ſame. And as he reſted there a fewe daies to make prouiſion of corne, his whole
Armie was ſurpriſed with ſuch an extraordinarie feare, that their mindes were not a
little troubled therewith. For the Romans enquiring of the Galles and marchant-men,
concerning the quality of the Germans, vnderſtood that they were men of a huge
ſtature, of courage inuincible, and of great practiſe and experience in feates of Armes:
Whereof the Galles had oftentimes made triall, for when they incountred them they
were not able to indure ſo much as the ſternenes of their countenance, or the fearceneſſe
of their lookes: whereat the whole Armie conceiued ſuch a feare, that the courage
of his men was wonderfullie appalled. The feare began among the Tribunes, and Prefects,
and ſuch other as accompanied Caeſar in this iourney, and had ſmall or no skill in
matter of warre, theſe men faining ſome one excuſe, and ſome an other of verie earneſt
buſineſse which called them home, deſired leaue to depart. The reſt whom ſhame
would not ſuffer to forſake the campe, bewraied the like paſsion by their countenances
and hauiour: For hiding themſelues in their tentes, they either bewailed their deſtiny

ſecretly to themſelues; or otherwiſe with their acquaintance and familiar friendes,
they lamented the danger they were all like to fall into: ſo that throughout the whole
campe there was nothing but making and ſigning of teſtaments. And through the
talke and fearefulneſſe of theſe men, the olde ſouldiers and Centurions and ſuch as
had great experience in the campe, began by little to apprehend the terrour, wherewith
the reſt were amazed: and thoſe that would ſeeme to be leſse fearefull, ſaid they
feared not the enemie, but the narrowneſse of the waies, the greatneſse of the woods
that were betweene them and Ariouiſtus; or otherwiſe they caſt doubtes where they
might haue prouiſion of corne; and manie ſtucke not to tell Caeſar, that whenſoeuer he
ſhould giue commandement to march forward or to aduance the ſtandarts, the ſouldiers
would refuſe to doe it.
               
                  OBSERVATIONS.
                  
                     WHerein, for that we finde a ſtrange alteration, no waie anſwerable
to that courage,The nature of feare. which a late gotten victorie doth vſually breede in
noble ſpirits; it ſhall not be amiſſe a little to inſiſt vpon the quality
of the accident, and to gather ſuch breefe inſtructions from their
weakeneſſe, as may beſt ſerue to qualifie the amaſement of horror, and mitigate
the frenſie of ſo violent a paſſion. And albeit my ignorance in the works of nature
cannot promiſe any ſuch learning, as may diſcouer the true meanes and
ſecret motions, whereby a ſore conceiued feare doth trouble the ſenſes and aſtoniſh
the minde; yet ſince the hiſtorie offereth it to our ſcanning, giue me leaue
only to note the ſtrangenes of the circumſtance, & rudely to delineat the purtraiture
of a beaſt oftener ſeene then well knowen, vſing the vnweldie pile for
my penſile, and ſuting my ſpeech to a warlike auditorie. I know not how it happeneth,
but thus it may happen, that when the ſenſes receiue intelligence of an
eminent euill, which may either diſpoſſeſſe the ſoule of this earthly manſion,
or trouble the quiet wherein ſhe reſteth: the ſpirits (as it ſeemeth) by the direction
of their ſoueraigne miſtreſſe, retire themſelues into the inner cabinets and
ſecreter pauillions of the body, where the chiefeſt part of the ſoule is moſt reſident,
and ſo they leaue the frontire quarters of her kingdome naked and vngarrizoned,
the better to ſtrengthen that capitall citie of the heart, out of which
the life cannot flie but to the vtter ruine and deſtruction of the whole body: For
feare is not onely a perturbation of the ſoule, proceeding from the opinion it
hath of ſome euill to come, but it is alſo a contraction, and cloſing vp of the
heart, when the blood and the ſpirits are recalled from the outward partes, to
aſſiſt that place which giueth life and motion to all the reſt. In this chaos and
confuſion of Humors and ſpirits, when the multiplicitie of faculties (which otherwiſe
require an ordinate diſtinction in their ſeruice, and by the order of nature
ſhould be diſpoſed into ſeuerall inſtruments, and be dilated throughout the
body) are thus blended confuſedly together, the conceptions of the minde,
which preſently riſe from theſe aduertiſements, are ſuddenly choaked with the
diſordered mixture of ſo many ſeuerall properties, and are ſtifled as it were in

the throng, before they can be tranſported to our iudgment, or examined by
reaſon, for want of that ordinate vniformitie of place which nature requireth
in the powers of the minde. And hence proceedeth that amazedneſſe and aſtoniſhment,
which ſo daunteth the hearts of men when they are taken with this
paſſion, that becauſe the ſoule giueth no counſell, the body can afford no motion,
but ſtandeth frozen through the extremitie of the perturbation, benummed
in ſenſe, and forſaken of the ſpirits. So we read that Theophilus the Emperour
in an ouerthrow which hee had giuen him by the Hagerans, was ſtroken
with ſuch an exceſſiue feare, that he could not betake himſelfe to flight, Adeo
pauor etiam auxilia formidat, vntill one of his chiefe commanders ſhaking him
by the ſhoulder, as though he were to awake him out of a deepe ſleepe, threatned
him with preſent death if he would not preuent the ruine of the Empire, by
vſing that meanes, which was only left for his ſafetie.
                  Againe, if in that turbulent conſiſtorie, the ſpirits chance diſtinctly to receiue
any apprehenſion proceeding from the forging facultie of the ſoule, they carie
it preſently to execution before it be examined by reaſon, and follow the action
with ſuch vehemencie, that they leaue no place for better aduice and reknowledgment.
And this is the cauſe that oftentimes through extremitie of feare to
auoide one euill we run headlong into a worſe, and finde a greater danger in the
meanes we vſe to auoide a leſſe, becauſe reaſon did not firſt trie the apprehenſion
before it was deliuered to externall agents. And ſo we finde in the battel betweene
Germanicus and the Almains, that two groſſe troupes of ſouldiers were
driuen into ſuch an extaſie of feare, that taking contrarie courſes to auoide one
and the ſame danger, they eihther of them fled to that place, which the other had
quitted: neither could they bee aduiſed by each others flight, that the places
which they ſought after afforded them no remedie.
                  And albeit reaſon be called to counſell, when a parlee is ſummoned of compoſition,
yet it beareth ſo ſmall a ſway in the conſultation, that the will of it ſelfe
concludeth to betraie vertue to diſhonour; and ſo to purchaſe peace with the
loſſe of the ſoules chiefeſt treaſure: which ought euer to be eſtimated at a higher
rate, then any other happineſſe which can betide the minde. For among all
the ſenſible thinges of this world, there is no creature that hath ſuch a confuſed
feare, or is more amazed therewith, then man is: neither is there anie miſerie
greater, or any bondage more ſhamefull, ſeruile, or vile, then this which maketh
men very abiects, of all other creatures, to redeeme the euill which the danger
threatneth: and then doth ſhame follow after ſo baſe a part, and aggrauatethe
burthen of the ſinne with loathſome diſgrace, and penitent diſcontentment, adding
oftentimes aloes to wormewood, and making the end grieuouſer then the
beginning. And thus doth danger breed feare, and feare yeeldeth to diſhonour,
and diſhonour bringeth ſhame, and ſhame being alwaies mingled with wrath
and anger, reuengeth it ſelfe vpon it ſelfe, and bringeth more perill then the firſt
danger could threaten. Wherby it appeareth, that as the affections of the mind
are bred one of another: ſo on the contrarie part, ſome are bridled and reſtrained
by others; for as enuie, hatred and anger, riſe oftentimes of loue; ſo is ioie
leſſened with griefe, enuie with mercie, and feare with ſhame.
                  
                     
But for as much as all ſuch perturbations proceede of ignorance and inconſiderateneſſe,
whereby we thinke that the euill is greater then indeede it is; let
vs conſider what diſpoſition of our iudgment beſt moderateth the violent heate
of theſe affections. And firſt touching the paſſages, whereby the ſoule receiueth
her aduertiſements, as they are of diuers natures, the chiefeſt whereof are the
eie and the eare, ſo are their auiſos different in qualitie, and require a ſeuerall
conſideration to bee rightly diſcerned. The intelligence by the eie is more
certaine, then that which commeth by the way of hearing: foraſmuch as the eie
is a witnes it ſelfe of euery action, whereof it taketh notice; neither is it deceiued
in her proper obiect: and therfore the iudgment is not much troubled, to determine
definitiuely how great or how ſmall the danger is, when the relations carie
alwaies that certainty. And albeit the eare in like manner be not deceiued in
her proper obiect, for it faithfully giueth vp that ſenſe, which ſound hath deliuered
vnto it: yet for as much as the fantaſie hath greater ſcope to coine her
vaine conceptions, in regard of the abſence of the action, it is neceſſarie that
the diſcourſing facultie be called for an aſſiſtant before the iudgment can truly
determine: and then it will appeare, that the truth doth not alwaies anſwere the
report which is made thereof, in as much as diſeaſed ſpirits will not ſticke to dilate
or qualifie relations, according to the key wherein they themſelues are tuned.
And therefore this firſt commeth to bee conſidered of in all ſuch violent
commotions, by which of theſe two ſenſes the firſt intelligence was receiued.
But concerning the iudgment it ſelfe this is moſt certaine, that the more it is infected
with the corruptions of the fleſh, the more violent are the affections of
the ſoule: And againe, the purer the iudgment is, and the higher it is lifted vppe
from earthly natures, being no further intereſſed therein, then to holde a reſolution
of well doing, the fewer and lighter are the affections, which trouble and
moleſt it; for then it better diſcerneth the truth and falſehood, good or euil that
is in thinges.
                  To redreſſe this inconuenience, Caeſar betooke himſelfe to the fitteſt & moſt
proper remedie, which was by the authoritie of his ſpeech to reſtore reaſon to
her former dignitie, & by diſcourſe which feare had interrupted in them, to put
downe a vſurping paſſion which had ſo troubled the gouernment of the ſoule;
recalling it to the meane of true reſolution, which was to moderat audacity with
warines, but not to choake valour with beaſtly cowardice: for theſe Oratorie inducing
perſwaſions were not the leaſt point of their diſcipline, conſidering how
they framed the inward habite of the minde (being the fountaine and beginning
of all motion) to giue life and force to thoſe actions which the ſeuerity of
outward diſcipline commanded. For as lawes and conſtitutions of men inforce
obedience of the bodie: ſo reaſon and perſwaſions muſt winne the ſoules conſent,
according to that ſaying, homines duci volunt, non cogi.
                  
               
            
            
               
               CAP. XVI.
               
                  Caeſar his ſpeech to the Armie, concerning
this feare.
               
               
                  CAESAR calling a Councell of war,Caeſar. wherein the Legates, Tribunes
and Centurions of all the orders and degrees were aſſembled,
he greatly blamed them: Firſt, that any man ſhould bee ſo
inquiſitiue as to imagine to himſelfe, whither and vpon what ſeruice
they were carried. Concerning Ariouiſtus, he had in the time
of Caeſars Conſulſhippe, moſt earneſtly ſued for the friendſhip of
the people of Rome; and why then ſhould any man miſdeeme, that
he ſhould ſo vnaduiſedly goe backe from his duety? For his owne part he was verelie
perſwaded, that if Ariouiſtus once knew his demandes, and vnderſtood the reaſonable
offers that he would make him, that he would not eaſily reiect his friendſhip, nor
the fauour of the people of Rome. But if he were ſo madde, as to make warre vpon
them, why ſhould they be affraid of him? or why ſhould they deſpaire either of their
owne proweſse, or of Caeſars circumſpectneſse? For if it came to that point, the enemie
that they were to incounter, had beene tried what he could doe twiſe before. Firſt, in
their fathers daies, when theCimbri, a nation came out of Germanie and droue out the Aduatici and are now the Zelanders. Teutoni, Germans. Cimbri and the Teutoni were vanquiſhed by Marius;
and now of late againe in Italie, at the inſurrection of the bondmen, who were not a
little furthered through the practiſe & diſcipline which they receiued of the Romans,
whereby it might be diſcerned how good a thing it is to be conſtant and reſolute: in
as much as whom for a time they feared without cauſe being naked and vnarmed, the
ſame men afterwardes (although well armed and Conquerors withall) they nobly ouercame.
And to be ſhort, theſe were no other Germans, then thoſe whom the Heluetians
had vanquiſhed in diuers conflicts, not onely in their owne country where the
Heluetians dwelt themſelues, but alſo euen at home at their owne dores; and yet the
ſame Heluetians were not able to make their partie good againſt our Armies. Concerning
the Galles, they were ouercome more by cunning & pollicie, then by force; which
although it tooke place againſt ſauage and vnskilfull people, yet was not Ariouiſtus ſo
ſimple as to thinke that he could enſnare our Armies with the like ſubtilties. As for
thoſe that fained the cauſe of their feare to be the difficultie of prouiſion of corne, and
the dangerouſneſse of the way, they tooke more vpon them then became their place, in
preſuming to teach their Generall what he had to doe, as if he had not knowne what
pertained to his duty. The Sequani and Lingones had vndertooke that charge, and
what the waies were, ſhould ſhortly be ſeene: Whereas it was reported that the ſouldiers
would not obey his mandates, nor aduance their ſtandarts, he little eſteemed it;
for he was well aſſured, that if an Armie refuſed to be obedient to their Generall, it
was either becauſe he was thought vnfortunate in his enterpriſes; or els for that hee
was notoriouſly conuicted of Auarice: but the whole courſe of his life ſhould witneſse
his innocencie, and the ouerthrow of the Heluetians his happines. And therefore that
which he was minded to haue put off for a longer time, he would now put in execution
out of hand: for the night following at the fourth watch he would diſlodge from thence,

that without further delay he might vnderſtand, whether ſhame and reſpect of dutie
would preuaile more with them, then feare and cowardice. And though he wist that
no man els would follow him: yet notwithſtanding he would go with the tenth legion
alone, of which he doubted nothing, and would accept it as the chiefe band and guard
of his perſon. Vpon the making of his ſpeech, the mindes of all men were wonderfully
changed: for it bred in euery one a great alacritie and deſire to fight: neither did the
tenth legion forget to giue him thankes by their Tribunes, for the good opinion he had
of them, aſſuring him of their readineſſe to ſet forward to the warre.
               
                  THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
                  
                     IN the ſpeech it ſelfe are preſented many ſpecialities, both concerning
their diſcipline and militarie inſtructions, which deſerue examination;
amongſt which I note firſt, the extraordinarie number
admitted to the Councell, Omnium ordinum ad id concilium adhibitis
Centurionibus: Whereas there were vſually no more admitted to their councell
of warre but the Legates, Queſtor, Tribunes, and the Centurions of the firſt orders,
which I vnderſtand to be the firſt Haſtate, the firſt Princeps, and the firſt Pilum
of euery legion. And this is manifeſtly proued out of the fift Commentarie
where Cicero was beſieged by Ambiorix, in which amongſt other there were
two valiant Centurions, Pulfio, and Varenus: betweene whom there was euerie
yeare great emulation for place of preferment, & iam primis ordinibus appropinquabant,
ſaith Caeſar, that is, they had paſſed by degrees through the lower orders
of the legion, and were very neare the dignitie of the firſt cohort, wherein
as in all the reſt there were 3 maniples, and in euerie maniple two orders.
               
               
                  THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
                  
                     THe firſt motiue which he vſeth to recall their exiled iudgment, diſcouered
their breach of diſcipline: for contrarie to the courſe of
militarie gouernment, they had preſumed not only to make inquirie,
but to giue out whither, and vpon what ſeruice they were caried;
which in the rigour of campe pollicie, could not paſſe without due puniſhment:
for what can more contradict the fortunate ſucceſſe of an expedition,
then to ſuffer to be meaſured with the vulgar conceit? or waied in the ballance
of ſuch falſe iudgmentes? eſpecially when thoſe weake Cenſors are to be Actors,
and executioners of the deſſigne: for then euerie man will ſute the nature
of the action according to his own humor, although his humor be led with
blindneſſe, and haue no other direction, then an vncertaine apprehenſion of
profit or diſaduantage. And in this caſe there cannot be a better preſident then
nature hath preſcribed: for as natural Agents, whileſt they concurre to produce
a worke of abſolute perfection, neither know what they doe, nor can diſcerne
the thinges they looke vpon; but yeeld themſelues to be guided by a moderator

of infinite knowledge: ſo ought a multitude to ſubmit their abilitie to the direction
of ſome wiſe and prudent captaine, that beholdeth the action in true
honour; and balanceth the loſſe of many particulars, with the health and ſafetie
of the publike good. For if euery man ſhould preſcribe, who ſhould obay? Tam
neſcire quaedam milites, quam ſcire oportet, ſaith Otho in Tacitus vpon the like
diſorder: and againe, parendo potius quam imperia ducum ſciſcitando res militares
continentur; which proueth that the greateſt vertue which is required in a ſouldier
is obedience, as a thing wherein the force of all diſcipline conſiſteth.
               
               
                  THE THIRD OBSERVATION.
                  
                     IN the reaſon which he vſeth to proue their diſparitie of valour,Whether men haue greater courage in their owne or in a ſtrangers country. in
regard of the Romans, being ſuperiour to the Heluetians that had
oftentimes ouerthrowen the Germans; he ſtrengtheneth the argument
with the aduantage of the place, and ſaith that the Heluetians
had put them to the worſt, not onely where the Heluetians dwelt themſelues;
but euen in their owne country, and at home at their owne dores: as though an
enemie were charged with greater furie in the preſence of a mans own country
and deareſt friendes, then in a ſtrange and vnknowne land. This queſtion was
handled in the Roman Senate, by Fabius Maximus, and Scipio ſurnamed Africanus,
when they ſate in counſell how to ridde their country of that ſubtile
Carthaginian, that for ſixteene yeares ſpace had fretted like a canker the beautie
of Italie, waſted the land and brought it to deſolation: ſacked their confederates,
or alienated them from their duety, ouerthrowen their Armies, ſlaine
their Conſuls, and threatned their imperiall cittie with ruine and deſtruction.
Fabius vpon the motion to make warre in Africke, thought it agreeable to nature,
firſt to defend that which was their owne, before they attempted other
mens poſſeſſions: when peace was eſtabliſhed in Italy, then let warre be ſet on
foot in Africke; and firſt let them be without feare themſelues, before they went
about to terrifie others: for thoſe forces afforded little hope of victorie in another
kingdome, that were not able to free their owne country from ſo dangerous
an enemie. Alcibiades ouerthrew the Athenian common weale with the
like couuſel: and concerning Hannibal, let them be ſure of this, that they ſhould
finde him a ſorer enemy in his owne country, then in an other kingdome. Scipio
on the other ſide, caried on with the honour of ſo glorious an enterpriſe,
wanted neither reaſons nor examples to impugne Fabius his authoritie: for he
ſhewed that Agathocles the Syracuſian king, being a long time afflicted with
the Punicke warre, auerted the Carthaginean from Cicily, by tranſporting his
forces into Africke: but how powerfull it was to take awaie feare, by retorting
danger vpon the oppreſſor, could there be a preſenter example then Hanniball?
There was great difference in the nature of the action, betweene the ſpoile and
waſt of a ſtrangers country, and to ſee their owne natiue country waſted with
ſword and deſtruction: plus animi eſt inferenti periculum, quam propulſanti, for he
that inuadeth an others kingdome, eaſily diſcouereth both the aduantage which

may be taken againſt the enemy, and the ſtrength whereupon he reſteth: And amongſt
the variable euents of warre, many vnexpected occaſions ariſe which
preſent victory to him that is ready to take it; and many ſtrange chances ſo alter
the courſe of thinges, that no foreſight can diſcerne what may happen. With
theſe and the like remonſtrances, this queſtion of no leſſe doubt then importance,
was handled by two famous and worthy Captaines, whoſe mindes as it
ſeemed, were intangled with ſuch particular affections for the preſent, as might
rather draw them to wreſt reaſon to their owne humor, then to determine in ſincerity
of iudgment, vpon what ſpecialities the truth was grounded, in the contrariety
of their poſitions. But to leaue other commodities or diſaduantages,
which are annexed vnto either part, I will only ſet downe ſome reaſons to proue
how valour and courage may either grow or be abated, by the accidents which
riſe in a warre of that nature. And firſt this cannot be denied, the teſtimonie of
an vnfallible truth being grounded vpon the property of mans nature; that as
aduantage bringeth hope of victorie, and hope conceiueth ſuch ſpirites as vſually
follow, when the thing which is hoped for, is effected; and thereby the courage
becommeth hardie and reſolute in victorie: ſo on the other ſide diſaduantage
and danger breede feare, and feare ſo checketh valour, and controlleth the
ſpirits, that vertue and honor giue place to diſtruſt, and yeelde vp their intereſt
to ſuch directors, as can afford nothing but diffidencie & irreſolution: Neither
can it be denied, but he that ſetteth vpon an enemie in a ſtrange country, and
ſo preuenteth ſuch attemptes as might be made vpon his owne territories, hath
that aduantage which giueth life vnto action, and ſteeleth his enterpriſe with
reſolution; for beſides the commoditie of leauing when he liſt, and proceeding
as far foorth as he ſhall finde his meanes able to fortunate his attemptes; hee
knoweth that the ſtrife and controuerſie is not for his natiue country, which he
quietly enioyeth, and is reſerued at all times to entertaine him, howſoeuer fortune
ſhal fauour his deſſignes: but for a ſtrangers kingdome which his ambition
thirſteth after; wherein for as much as the ritches and wealth of that ſtate are
laide before them as the recompence of their labour, beſides the honour which
is atchieued thereby, euerie mans valour ſoareth at a high pitch, and their courage
is increaſed without any trouble or diſturbance of the other faculties of the
minde. But when a Prince ſhall be aſſaulted in his owne kingdome, and in the
ſight of his ſubiectes haue his land conſumed with ruine and deſtruction: the
danger will ſo diſturbe the powers of the ſoule, that through the turbulent diſorder
of the weaker partes, the better faculties will loſe their prerogatiue of aduiſing
how the enemy may be beſt reſiſted; when as euery man ſhal apprehend
the terrour of the danger, and few or none conceiue the true meanes to auoide
it. And albeit the preſence of ſuch thinges as are deareſt to his ſoule, as the pietie
and reſpect of aged parents, the tender affection towards wife and children,
are ſufficient to raiſe valour to the higheſt point of reſolution: yet the motiues
are of ſuch waight as will rather make them diffident of their owne worth as vnſufficient
to maintaine ſo great a cauſe, then hold them in that key which true
honour affecteth: for as much as the terrour and feare of ſo great a danger
will preſent a greater meaſure of woes to their minde, then the hope of victory

can afforde them ioy. Hence therefore groweth the difference betweene him,
that ſeeketh to maintaine that eſtate which he hath in poſſeſſion by force of
Armes; and an other, that ſeeketh to increaſe his meanes by valour. For the former
is preſented with the danger of looſing all his eſtate, which affrighteth and
troubleth, hauing no other reward propounded vnto him; and the other looketh
vpon the aduantage, which he gaineth by ouercomming; which much increaſeth
his valour, without any loſſe or diſaduantage, if he chance to be put to
the worſt. And therefore there is alwaies great ods betweene him that hath alreadie
loſt his goods, and is by that meanes become deſperate, hauing nothing further
to looſe; and another, that yet keepeth his ſubſtāce, but is in danger to looſe
it: for feare will ſo diſmay his mind, that he will rather diſtruſt his owne ability,
then entertaine a reſolution of valour. To proue this, we neede not ſeeke other
examples, then thoſe imperiall cities, in whoſe cauſe this controuerſie was firſt
moued. For when Hanniball was come into Italy and had defeated Sempronius
the Conſull at Trebeas, the Romans were driuen into ſuch an extaſie of terrour,
that they beleeued verely that the enemie was then comming to aſſault
the citie; neither had they any hope or aid in themſelues to keepe or defend the
ſame. On the other ſide, Scipio was no ſooner landed in Africke, but there was
ſuch a tumult in Carthage, as though the citie had been alreadie taken: neither
could the opinion of victory, which Hanniball by a conquering Armie in Italy
had confirmed for ſixteene yeares together, preuaile in the apprehenſion of ſo
imminent a danger: And then that which Fabius borowed of nature to teach the
Romans (that firſt men ought to defend their own, before they ſeeke other mens
poſſeſſions) was carefully followed by the Carthaginians: for with all ſpeed they
ſent for Hanniball out of Italy, to be their Champion againſt young Scipio. If
therfore other things be correſpondent, as there are many other particularities
concerning the power and ſtrength of either nation to be conſidered, I take it
much better for a Prince to inuade an enemie in his owne country, then to attend
him at home in his owne kingdome.
               
               
                  THE FOVRTH OBSERVATION.
                  
                     THe laſt circumſtance which I note in this ſpeech, was the truſt which
he repoſed in the tenth legion, being in it ſelfe peraduenture as faultie
as any other: wherein he ſhewed great arte and ſingular wiſdome.
For he that hath once offended and is both burthened with the guilt
of conſcience, and vpbraided with the reproch of men, can hardly be perſwaded
that his fault can bee purged with any ſatisfaction. And although the puniſhment
be remitted, yet the memorie of the fact will neuer be blotted out
with any vertuous action; but ſtill remaineth to caſt diſhonour vpon the offender,
and to accuſe him of diſloialtie: And therefore it oftentimes happeneth,
that an errour being once raſhly committed, through deſpaire of remiſſion admitteth
no true penitencie, but either draweth on more grieuous crimes, confirming
that of the Poet, Scelere ſcelus luendum eſt; or maintaineth his errour by

wilfull obſtinacie: as it is ſaide of the Lyon that being found by hunters in a
caue, will rather die in the place then quit it, for ſhame that he was found in ſo
baſe a place of refuge; and therfore his propertie is thus expreſſed, ingrediendo
caecus, exeundo proteruus. This did Caeſar wiſely preuent, by cleering the tenth
legion of that, which he accuſed the reſt of the Armie, which made them ſo
much the more earneſt to anſwere his expectation, in as much as they were witnes
to themſelues of a common errour: and the other legions, enuying at their
fortune, reſolued to ſhew as great alacrity in the ſequell of the warre, and to deſerue
more then the iudgment of the Emperour had imputed to their fellowes.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XVII.
               
                  The treatie betweene Caeſar and
Ariouiſtus.
               
               
                  THE reſt of the legions in like manner dealt with their Tribunes
and chiefeſt Centurions,Caeſar. to ſatiſfie Caeſar of their obedience, affirming
that they neuer doubted nor feared, no nor ſo much as
thought that it belonged to them, to determine any thing concerning
the courſe of the warre, but that it was onely left to their
Emperour; their purgation accepted, and good inſtructions being
taken by Diuitiacus, in the fourth watch he marched forward according
to the purport of his former ſpeech. The ſeuenth day as he continued on his
iourney, his eſpialles brought him word, that Ariouiſtus with all his forces was within
24 miles of that place: who aſsoone as he vnderſtood of Caeſars comming, ſent embaſſadours
vnto him, declaring that foraſmuch as he was come ſomewhat nearer, and that
he might doe it without danger, he was content to admit of a parlee, vpon this condition,
that Caeſar would bring no footmen to the meeting (for he feared to be ſurpriſed
by treacherie) but onely horſemen, and in that ſort he would meete him. Caeſar accepted
of the condition, hoping at length that he would harken to reaſon and deſist from
wilfull obſtinacie: and becauſe he durſt not commit himſelfe to the French horſemen,
he thought it beſt to take their horſes, and to ſet the ſouldiers of the tenth legion vpon
them, that if he ſtood in neede he might haue a faithfull guard of his friendes about
him. There was a great and open plaine, and in the middeſt thereof a riſing mount,
and thither they came to the parlee: the legion which Caeſar had brought with him on
horſebacke, he placed 200 paces from the ſaid mount; and likewiſe the horſemen of
Ariouiſtus ſtood in the ſame diſtance: Ariouiſtus requeſted that they might talke on
horſebacke, and bring each of them ten perſons to the parlee. Their expoſtulations were
the ſame in effect, with thoſe meſsages which were carried betweene them by embaſſadours.
Much vnkindnes tooke by Caeſar, conſidering the friendſhip which the Romans
had ſhewed vnto Ariouiſtus, that he would not vouchſafe to treate with them: and on
the other ſide as great iniurie conceiued by him, foraſmuch as the law of nations gaue
no ſuch prerogatiue to any one people that they ſhould challenge in other countries by

deſert: but that generally it had giuen dominion to valour, and kingdomes to conquering
armies. But while the treatiſe thus continued, it was told Caeſar that Ariouiſtus
his horſemen were comming neerer vnto the mount, and that they began to
skirmiſh with his ſoldiours; whereupon Caeſar brake off the treatie, and withdrewe
himſelfe to his men, commaunding them that they ſhoulde not caſt a weapon at the
enemie: for although hee perceiued that without peril of his legion hee might haue
incountered with Ariouiſtus men, yet he would not giue occaſion by putting them
to flight, to haue it ſaid, that he had entrapped them vnder pretence of parlee. At his
returne, when it was reported to the common ſoldiors, howe arrogantly Ariouiſtus
had caried himſelfe in the treaty, forbidding the Romaines all Gallia, and that his
men of armes did offer to aſſault the legion, inſomuch that the treaty was thereby
broken off; the ſoldiors were more deſirous of battell then before, and by theſe degrees
they obtained it. Two daies after Ariouiſtus ſent againe to Caeſar, to haue thoſe
thinges perfited which were begun in the treaty. Caeſar thought it not good to make
any further meeting in his owne perſon, and the rather becauſe the Germaines had
no ſtaie of themſelues the daie before, but they threwe dartes and ſtones at his men;
and whome ſoeuer of his men hee ſhould ſend vnto him ſhould go into great danger,
as caſt into the hands of a ſauage people. The beſt way he could thinke of was, to ſend
Valerius Procillus, a well accompliſht yong man, that ſpake the French toung well,
and had no waie offended the Germaines, and with him he ſent Marcus Titius, a
man well knowne to Ariouiſtus, vſing ſometimes to reſort as a gueſt vnto him: To
theſe he gaue in charge that they ſhould diligentlie marke, and iuſtlie report vnto
him what Ariouiſtus ſaid; But aſſoone as Ariouiſtus ſawe them in his campe, hee
cried out to them in the preſence of his army, asking them what they ahd to do there,
and whether they came as ſpies? And as they went about to make their anſwere, he
would not heare them, but cauſed them to be caſt into irons. The ſame day he remoued,
and incamped vnder the ſide of a hill 6. miles from Caeſars campe; the next day
he came two miles beyond Caeſar, neerer to the middeſt of Gallia, of purpoſe to cut off
all corne and conuoie as ſhould be ſent vnto the Romains, by the Hedui and Sequani.
From that day forwarde, by the ſpace of fiue daies togither, Caeſar imbattailed his
men before his campe, to the intent that if Ariouistus pleaſed to giue battell, he
might haue libertie when hee would; but Ariouiſtus all this while kept his armie
within his campe, and daily ſent out his horſemen to skirmiſh with the Romaines.
This was the manner of fighting which the Germaines had practiſed: there were
6000. horſemen, and as many ſtrong and nimble footmen, whom the horſemen had
ſelected out of the whole hoſt, euerie man one for his ſafegard; theſe they had alwaies
at hand with them in battell, and vnto theſe they reſorted for ſuccour; if the horſemen
were ouercharged, theſe euer ſtept into helpe them, if anie one were wounded
and vnhorſed, they ſtood about him and ſuccoured him: if the matter required either
to aduenture forward, or to retire ſpeedilie backe againe; their ſwiftneſſe was ſuch
through continuall exerciſe, that hanging on the horſe maine by the one hand, they
would run as faſt as the horſes.
               
                  THE OBSERVATION.
                  
                     IT may ſeeme ſtrange vnto the ſoldiours of our time, that the footemen
ſhould bee mingled pell mell amongſt the horſemen,Foote men intermingled amongſt horſemen. without hurte and
diſaduantage to themſelues: ſo vnlikely it is that they ſhoulde either ſuccour

the horſemen in any danger, or annoy the enemy: and therefore ſome haue imagined
that theſe footmen in the incounter caſt themſelues into one bodie,
and ſo charging the enemy aſſiſted the horſemen. But the circumſtances of this
place, and of others which I wil alleage to this purpoſe, plainly euince that theſe
footemen were mingled indifferently amongſt the horſemen, to aſſiſt euery particular
man as his fortune and occaſion required: and therfore the choiſe of
theſe footemen, was permitted to the horſemen, in whoſe ſeruice they were to
be imploied, that euery man might take his friend in whom he repoſed greateſt
confidence: When they were ouercharged theſe ſtept in to helpe them; if anie
man were wounded or vnhorſed he had his footeman ready to aſſiſt him; and
when they were to go vpon any ſpeedie ſeruice, or ſuddainly to retire vpon aduantage,
they ſtaied themſelues vpon the maine of the horſes with one hande,
and ſo ran as faſt as the horſemen could go: which ſeruices they could not poſſiblie
haue performed without confuſion and diſorder, if the footemen had not
ſeuerally attended vpon them, according to the affection ſpecified in their particular
election. The principall vſe of theſe footmen of the Germaines conſiſted
in the aide of their owne horſemen vpon any neceſſity, not ſo much regarding
their ſeruice vppon the enemie, as the aſsiſtance of their horſemen. But
the Romains had long before practiſed the ſame Arte to a more effectuall purpoſe,
namely as a principall remedy not onely to reſiſt, but to defeat far greater
troupes of horſe, then the enemy was able to oppoſe againſt them. Wherof the
moſt ancient memory which hiſtory mentioneth, is recorded by Liuie in the ſecond
punicke war, at the ſiege of Capua, vnder the regiment of Quintus Fuluius
the Conſul: where it is ſaid, that in all their conflicts, as the Romaine legions
returned with the better; ſo their caualry was alwaies put to the worſt: & therfore
they inuented this means to make that good by Art which was wanting in force.
Out of the whole army were taken the choiſeſt young men, both for ſtrength &
agilitie, and to them were giuen little round bucklers, and ſeuen darts apeece in
ſteed of their other weapons; theſe ſoldiours practiſed to ride behind the horſemen,
and ſpeedily to light from the horſes at a watchword giuen, & ſo to charge
the enemy on foot: And when by exerciſe they were made ſo expert that the nouelty
of the inuention no whit affrighted them, the Romaine horſemen went
forth to incounter with the enemy, euery man carying his foot ſoldior behinde
him, who at the encounter ſuddainly alightning charged vpon the enemy with
ſuch a fury, that they followed thē in ſlaughter to the gates of Capua: And hence
ſaith Liuie grew the firſt inſtitution of the Velites, which euer after that time
were inrolled with the legions. The author of this ſtrategem is ſaid to be one Q.
Nauius a Centurion, & was honorably rewarded by Fuluius the conſull for the
ſame. Saluſt, in the hiſtory of Iugurth, ſaieth, that Marius mingled the Velites
with the Caualrie of the aſſociates, vt quacunque inuaderent equitatus hoſtium
propulſarent. The like practiſe was vſed by Caeſar, as appeareth in the thirde
booke of the Ciuill warre; ſauing that inſteed of the velites, hee mingled with
his horſemen 400. of the luſtieſt of his legionarie ſoldiours, to reſiſt the caualrie
of Pompei, while the reſt of his armie paſſed ouer the riuer Genuſum, after the
ouerthrow he had at Dirrachium, qui tantum profecere, ſaith the text; Vt equeſtri

praelio commiſso, pellerent omnes, complures interficerent, ipſique incolumes ad
agmen ſe reciperent. Many other places might be recited, but theſe are ſufficient
to proue, that the greateſt Captaines of auncient times ſtrengthened their caualrie
with footemen diſperſed amongſt them.Lib. 6. The Romaine horſemen, (ſaith
Polibius) at the firſt caried but a weake limber pole, or ſtaffe, and a little round
buckler;Lib. 3. de excid. but afterwards, they vſed the furniture of the Grecians, which Ioſephus
affirmeth to bee a ſtrong launce or ſtaffe, and three or foure dartes in a quiuer
with a buckler, and a long ſword by their right ſide. The vſe of their launce was
moſt effectuall when they charged in troupe, pouldron to pouldron; and that
maner of fight afforded no meanes to intermingle footmen: but when they vſed
their dartes, euerie man got what aduantage of ground he coulde, as our Carbins
for the moſt part do, and ſo the footemen might haue place among them:
or otherwiſe, for ſo good an aduantage, they woulde eaſilie make place for the
footmen to ſerue among them: But howſoeuer it was, it appeareth by this circumſtance
howe little the Romaines feared troupes of horſe, conſidering that
the beſt meanes to defeate their horſe was by their foote companies. But to
make it more plaine, of many examples I will onely alleage two; the one out of
Liuie,Lib. 3. to proue that the Romaine horſemen were not comparable for ſeruice to
footemen:De bello Africano. the other out of Hirtius, to ſhewe the ſame effect againſt ſtrangers,
and Numidian horſemen, In the Conſulſhips of L. Valerius, and Marcus Horatius:
Valerius hauing fortunatelie ouerthrowne the Equi and the Volſci,
Horatius proceeded with as great courage in the warre againſt the Sabines,
wherein it happened, that in the day of battell, the Sabines reſerued 2000. of
their men to giue a freſh aſſault vpon the lefte cornet of the Romaines, as they
were in conflict, which tooke ſuch effect, that the legionarie footemen of that
cornet were forced to retreit. Which the Romaine horſemen beeing in number
600. perceiuing, and not being able with their horſe to make head againſt the enemy;
they preſently forſooke their horſes; and made haſte to make good the
place on foote; wherein they caried themſelues ſo valiantly, that in a moment
of time they gaue the like aduantage to their footemen, againſt the Sabines;
and thē betooke themſelues againe to their horſes, to purſue the enemy in chaſe
as they fled. For the ſecond point. The Numidians, as Caeſar witneſſeth, were
the beſt horſemen that euer hee met with, and vſed the ſame Arte as the Germaines
did, mingling among them light armed footemen: an Ambuſcado of
theſe Numidians charging the legions vpon a ſuddaine, the hiſtory ſaieth, that
primo impetu legionis Equitatus & leuis armatura hoſtium, nullo negotio, loco pulſa
& deiecta eſt de colle. And as they ſometimes retired, and ſometimes charged
vpon the rerewarde of the armie, according to the manner of the Numidian
fight; the hiſtorie ſaieth, Caeſariani interim, non amplius tres aut quatuor milites
veterani ſi ſe conuertiſsent & pila viribus contorta in Numidas infeſtos conieciſsent,
amplius duorum millium ad vnum terga vertebant. So that to free himſelfe of this
inconuenience, he tooke his horſemen out of the rereward, and placed his legions
there, ita vim hoſtium per legionarium militem commodius ſuſtinebat. And
euer as he marched hee cauſed 300. ſoldiours of euerie legion to bee free and
without burthen, that they might be ready vpon all occaſions, Quos in Equitum

Labieni immiſit. Tum Labienus, conuerſis equis, ſignorum conſpectu perterritus
turpiſsime contendit fugere, multis eius occiſis, compluribus vulneratis, milites legionarij
ad ſua ſe recipiunt ſigna, atque iter inceptum ire caeperunt. I alleage the verie
wordes of the hiſtorie, to take awaie all ſuſpicion of falſifying, or wreſting anie
thing to an affected opinion. If any man will looke into the reaſon of this diſparitie,
he ſhall finde it to be chiefely the worke of the Roman pile, an vnreſiſtable
weapon, and the terrour of horſemen, eſpecially when they were caſt with
the aduantage of the place, and fell ſo thicke, that there was no meanes to auoid
them.
                  But to make it plaine, that any light armed footmen could better make head
againſt a troupe of horſe, then the Caualry of their owne partie, although they
bare but the ſame weapons: Let vs conſider how nimble and readie they were,
that fought on foote, either to take an aduantage, or to ſhunne and auoide anie
danger; caſting their darts with farre greater ſtrength and more certaintie, then
the horſemen could doe. For as the force of all the engines of olde time, as the
Baliſtae, Catapultae and Tolenones, proceedeth from that ſtabilitie and reſting
Center, which nature affordeth as the onely ſtrength and life of the engine; ſo
what force ſoeuer a man maketh, muſt principally proceede from that firmenes
& ſtay, which nature by the earth or ſome other vnmoueable reſt, giueth to the
body, from whence it taketh more or leſſe ſtrength, according to the violence
which it performeth; as he that lifteth vp a waight from the ground, by ſo much
treadeth heauier vpon the earth, by how much the thing is heauier then his bodie.
The footmen therfore, hauing a ſurer ſtaie to counterpoiſe their forced motion,
then the horſemen had, caſt their dartes with greater violence, and conſequently
with more certainty.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XVIII.
               
                  Caeſar preuenteth Ariouiſtus of his purpoſe, by
making two Campes. The ſuperſtition
of the Germans.
               
               
                  WHEN Caeſar perceiued that Ariouiſtus meant nothing
leſse then to fight,Caeſar. but kept himſelfe within his campe;
leaſt peraduenture he ſhould intercept the Sequani and
other of his aſsociates, as they came with conuoies of corne
to the Romans, beyond that place wherein the Germans
abode about 600 paces frō their campe; he choſe a ground
meete to incampe in: and marched thither in three battels,
commanding two of them to ſtand readie in Armes, and the third to fortifie the
campe. Ariouiſtus ſent 15000 footmen, and all his horſe to diſturbe the ſouldiers, and
to hinder the intrenchment. Notwithſtanding Caeſar as he had before determined,
cauſed two battels to withſtand the enemie, and the third to go through with the

worke: which being ended, he left there two legions, and part of the aſsociate forces,
and led the other foure legions backe againe into his greater campe, and ſo he rested
ſecure concerning the conuoies from the Sequani, and by his greater campe cut off
the paſſages betweene Ariouiſtus and the Rhene. The next day Caeſar according to
his cuſtome, brought his whole power out of both his campes, and marching a little
from the greater campe, he put his men in aray and profered battell to the enemie; but
perceiuing that Ariouiſtus would not ſtir out of his trenches, about noone he conuaied
his Armie into their ſeuerall campes. Then at length Ariouiſtus ſent part of his forces
to aſſault the leſſer campe: the incounter continued very ſharpe on both parts, vntill
the euening; and at ſunſetting after many woundes giuen and taken, Ariouiſtus
conuaied his armie againe into their campe. And as Caeſar made inquirie of the captaines
what the reaſon was, that Ariouiſtus refuſed battell: he found this to be the
cauſe, The Germans had a cuſtome, that their women ſhould by caſting of lots, and
ſouthſaying, declare whether it were for their behoofe to fight or no, and that they
found by their Arte, the Germans could not get the victorie if they fought before the
newe moone.
               
                  THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
                  
                     FIrſt we may obſerue what eſpeciall importance, this manner of incamping
carried in that abſolute diſcipline which the Romans obſerued,
and by which they conquered ſo many nations: for beſides
the ſafetie which it affoorded their own troupes, it ſerued for a hold
well fenced and manned, or as it were a ſtrong fortified towne in any part of
the field, where they ſaw aduantage, and as oft as they thought it expedient, either
to fortifie themſelues, or impeach the enemie by cutting off his paſſages,
hindering his attempts, blocking vp his campe, beſides many other aduantages,
all auetring the ſaying of Domitius Corbulo: dolabra vincendum eſse hoſtem:
a thing long time neglected, but of late happely renewed by the commanders
of ſuch forces as ſerue the ſtates in the vnited prouinces of Belgia: whom time
and practiſe of the warres hath taught to entertaine the vſe of the ſpade, and
to hold it in as great reputation as any weapons whatſoeuer, which maie bee
thought worthie executioners of the deedes of Armes.
               
               
                  THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
                  
                     IN the ſecond place we may obſerue, that there was no nation ſo barbarous
(for I vnderſtand the Germans to be as barbarous in regard of
the motions of religion as any knowne nation of that time, being in a
Climate ſo neare the North, that it afforded no contemplation at al) that could
not make vſe in their greateſt affaires, of that ſuperſtition to which their minde
was naturally inthralled; and forge propheſies and diuinations as well to ſtir vp
as to moderate the irregular motions of a multitude, according as they might

beſt ſerue to aduantage their proceedings. Neither did Caeſar let ſlip the occaſion
of making vſe of this their religion: for vnderſtanding by their priſoners,
that their diuinations forbad them to fight before the newe moone, he vſed all
the meanes he could to prouoke them to battell; that their religious opinion
of miſchieuing might preiudice their reſolution to returne conquerers: Which
may ſerue to proue that a ſuperſtitious people are ſubiect to many inconueniences,
which induſtry or fortune may diſcouer to their ouerthrow. It is recorded
that Columbus, being Generall of ſome forces, which Ferdinando king of Caſtile
ſent to diſcouer the weſt Indies, & ſuffering great penury for want of victuals
in the Ile of Iamaica: after that he had obſerued how the Ilanders worſhipped
the moone, and hauing knowledge of an Eclipſe that was ſhortly after to
happen, he tolde the inhabitants that vnleſſe they would furniſh him with ſuch
neceſſaries as he wanted for the time, the wrath of their God ſhould quickly appeare
towardes them, by changing his bright ſhining face into obſcuritie and
darkeneſſe: which was no ſooner happened, but the poore Indians, ſtroken with
a ſuperſtitious feare of that which the courſe of nature required, kept nothing
backe that might aſſiſt their enemies to depopulate, and ouer runne their owne
countrie.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XIX.
               
                  Caeſar ſeeketh meanes to giue them battell, and the
Germans diſpoſe themſelues thereunto.
               
               
                  CAESAR foreſlowed not that aduantage:Caeſar. but the next daie in
the morning leauing a ſufficient garriſon in each of his campes,
for as much as the number of his legionarie ſouldiers was ſmall
in reſpect of the multitude of the Germans, he placed al the auxiliarie
troupes, for a ſhew before the leſser campe, and putting his
legions into a triple battell, he marched towardes the campe of
Ariouiſtus. And then at length were the Germans conſtrained
to bring out their power, ſetting euery tribe & people by it ſelfe, in a like diſtance and
order of battell, and inuironing their whole Armie with their cartes and cariage,
that there might be no hope at all left to ſaue any man by flight, that durſt not abide
the fortune of the battell: In theſe chariots they placed their women, that they by their
outſtretched handes and teares mouing pitty, might implore the ſouldiers as they deſcended
by courſe into the battell, not to deliuer them, the authors of their life and being,
into the bondage and thraldome of the Romans. Caeſar aſsigned to euerie legion
a Legate and a Queſtor, that euerie man might haue an eie witneſſe of his valour:
and he himſelfe began the battell with the right cornet; for as much as he perceiued
that part of Ariouiſtus Armie to be the weakeſt.
               
                  
                  THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
                  
                     THE Romaines euen from the infancie of their ſtate were euer zealous
admirers of true honour, and alwaies deſired to beholde with the
eye, to what meaſure of vertue euerie man had attained; that the
toung with greater feruency of ſpirit might ſounde out the celebration
of Macte virtute, which imported more honour then any wealth that could
be heaped vpon them. Neither was this the leaſt part of their wiſedom, conſidering
that the moſt pretious things that are, looſe much of their worth, if they
be not ſuted with other correſpondent natures, whoſe ſympathie addeth much
more excellencie then is diſcerned, when they appeare by themſelues without
ſuch aſſiſtance. For how ſmall is the beauty which nature hath giuen to the eiepleaſing
diamond, when it is not adorned with an artificiall forme? or what perfection
can the forme giue without a foile to ſtrengthten it? or what good is in
either of them if the light doe not illuminate it? or what auaile all theſe where
there wanteth an eye to admire it, a iudgement to value it, and an heart to imbrace
it? ſuch a vnion hath nature imprinted in the diuerſitie of creatures concurring
to perfection, and eſpecially in morall actions, in whoſe cariage there
is a far greater exactnes of correſpondency required to approue them honorable,
then was requiſite to make the iewell beautiful. And this did Caeſar in all
his battels; amongſt the reſt that at Aleſia is particularly noted in this manner,
Quod in conſpectu imperatoris res gerebatur, neque recte aut turpiter factum celari
poterat, vtroſque & laudis cupiditas & timor ignominiae ad virtutem excitabat.
And when Liuie would expreſſe how valiantly an action was caried, he ſaith no
more but in conſpectu imperatoris res gerebatur, which is as much to ſaie, that
foraſmuch as the Romaines were diligent obſeruers of euerie mans worth, rewarding
vertue with honor, and cowardice vvith reproch; euerie man bent his
vvhole indeuour to deſerue the good opinion of his Generall, by diſcharging
that duty which he owed to the common wealth, with all loyalty and faithfulnes
of ſpirit.
               
               
                  THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
                  
                     THe Romaines had foure formes of the front of their battell, the firſt
was called Acies recta, when neither the cornets nor the battell was
aduanced one before another, but were all caried in a right line, and
made a ſtraight front; and this was their moſt vſuall manner of imbattailing.
                  The ſecond forme of the front was called obliqua, when as one of the cornets
was aduanced neerer vnto the enemy then the reſt, to beginne the battell:
and this was commonly as Vegetius noteth, the right cornet: for the right cornet
of an army had great aduantage againſt the left of the enemies, in regarde

of their weapons and furniture: But Caeſar did it in this place, becauſe hee perceiued
that the enemy was weakeſt in that part; following a maxime of great
authoritie, that the weakeſt part of an enemie is in the beginning to be charged
with the ſtrength of an army: for ſo fauorable are mens iudgementes to that
which is already happened, that the ſequell of euery action dependeth for the
moſt part vpon the beginning, Dimidium facti qui bene caepit habet, (ſaith a Poet)
and not without great reaſon, ſo forcible continually is the beginning, and ſo
connexed to the ſequel by the nature of a precedent cauſe, that the ende muſt
needes erre from the common courſe, when it doth not participate of that qualitie
which was in the beginning. Neither can there be any good ende without a
good beginning: for although the beginning bee oftentimes diſaſtrous and
vnlucky, and the end fortunate and happie, yet before it came to that end there
was a fortunate beginning: for the bad beginning was not the beginning of
a good, but of an euill end. And therefore that his men might foreſee a happy
ende in a good beginning, it behooued him with the beſt of his armie to aſſault
the weakeſt part of the enemy.
                  The third forme of the front is called Sinuata, when both the cornets are aduanced
forward, and the battell ſtandeth backwarde off from the enemy, after
the faſhion of a halfe moone. Scipio vſed it in Spaine, hauing obſerued ſome
daies before, that the enemy continually ſo diſpoſed of the battell, that his beſt
ſoldiours were alwaies in the midſt; and therefore Scipio put all his old ſoldiours
in the cornets, and brought them out firſt to charge vpon the weakeſt part
of the enemy, that thoſe might decide the controuerſie, before the other that
were in the midſt could come to fight.
                  The laſt forme is called gibboſa or gibbera Acies, when the battel is aduanced,
and the two cornets lag behinde. This forme did Haniball vſe in the battell of
Cannas, but with this Art, that he ſtrengthened his two cornets with the beſt of
his ſoldiours, and placed his weakeſt in the middeſt, that the Romaines following
the retreit of the battell, which was eaſily repeld, might be incloſed on each
ſide with the two cornets.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XX.
               
                  The battell betweene Caeſar and Ariouiſtus.
               
               
                  THE ſigne of battel was no ſooner giuen, but the Romaines charged
vpō the enemy ſo fiercely,Caeſar. as though they ment to giue themſelues the
lye: for ſeeming to acknowledge that they once conceiued any feare
of the Germaines; and the enemie on the other ſide returned ſo
ſpeedie a counterbuffe, that the legions had no time to caſt their
Piles, and therefore they ſpeedilie betooke them to their ſwordes.
But the Germaines putting themſelues according to their manner into a Phalanx,
receiued the force of their ſwords, without any daunger or loſſe at all. In the battell

there were many legionarie ſouldiers, that were ſeene to keepe vpon the phalanx, & to
pull vp with their hands the targets that couered it, and ſo to wound & kil thoſe that
were vnderneath: and by that means, they brake & diſperſed it, and ſo the left cornet
of the enemy, was ouerthrowne & put to flight. Now while the right cornet was thus
buſied, the left cornet was ouercharged with an vnequall multitude of the Germans,
which young Craſsus the Prefect of the horſemen no ſooner perceiued (hauing more
ſcope and libertie then any of the commanders that were in the battell) he ſent tertiam
Aciem, the third battell, to reſcue and aide their fellowes that were in danger, by
meanes whereof the fight was renewed, and all the enemie was put to flight and neuer
looked backe vntill they came to the Rhene, which was about fiue miles from the
place where they fought; where ſome few of them ſaued themſelues by ſwimming, others
found a fewe boates and ſo eſcaped; Ariouiſtus lighting vpon a little barke tied
to the ſhore, with much a doe recouered the other ſide of the Rhene, and ſo ſaued himſelfe:
the reſt were all ſlaine by the horſemen. As Caeſar purſued the German horſemen,
it was his chance to light vpon Valerius Procillus, as he was drawne vp and
downe by his keepers, bound with three chaines, which accident was as gratefull to him
as the victorie it ſelfe; being ſo fortunate to recouer his familiar friend, whom the barbarous
enemie, contrarie to the law of nations, had caſt into priſon; & in his own preſence
had three ſeuerall times caſt lots vpon his life, whether he ſhould be then burned
or repriued vnto another time; and ſtill he was ſaued by the fortune of the lots: and
Marcus Titius was found in like manner and brought vnto him. The fame of this battell
being caried beyond the Rhene: the Sueui that were come to the bankes of Rhene,
returned home againe, whom the inhabitants belonging to the ſaide riuer purſued,
and ſlew a great number of them. Caeſar hauing thus ended two great warres in one
ſommer, he brought his Armie into their wintering campes, ſomewhat ſooner then
the time of the yeare required.
               
                  THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
                  
                     THis phalanx here mentioned, can hardly be proued to be the right
Macedonian Phalanx; but we are rather to vnderſtand it to be ſo
tearmed, by reaſon of the cloſe and compact imbattailing, rather
then in any other reſpect: and it reſembled much a teſtudo, as I ſaid
of the Heluetian phalanx. Secondly, I obſerue, that Caeſar kept the olde rule
concerning their diſcipline in fight: for although the name of Triaries be not
mentioned in his hiſtorie; yet he omitted not the ſubſtance, which was, to haue
primam, ſecundam, & tertiam Aciem; and that prima Acies ſhould begin the
battell, and the ſecond ſhould come freſh and aſſiſt them; or peraduenture if
the enemie were many and ſtrong, the firſt and ſecond battell were ioyned together,
and ſo charged vpon the enemie with greater furie and violence: but at
all aduentures, the third battell was euer in ſubſidio, as they tearmed it, to ſuccour
any part that ſhould be ouercharged; which was a thing of much conſequence,
and of great wiſedome. For if we either reſpect the incouragement of
the ſouldiers, or the caſualtie of fortune; what could be more added to their diſcipline
in this behalfe, then to haue a ſecond & a third ſuccour, to giue ſtrength
to the fainting weaknes of their men, and to repaire the diſaduantage which any

accident ſhould caſt vpon them? or if their valour were equally balanced, and
victorie ſtood doubtfull which of the two parties ſhee ſhould honour, theſe alwaies
ſtept in, being freſh, againſt wearie and ouer laboured ſpirits, and ſo drew
victorie in deſpite of caſualtie vnto themſelues.
               
               
                  THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
                  
                     COncerning vſe of lots,The vſe of lots. it ſhall not be amiſſe to looke into the nature
of them, being in former times ſo generall, that there was no nation
ciuill or barbarous, but were directed in their greateſt affaires, by
the ſentence of lots. As we may not refuſe for an vndoubted truth,
that which Salomon ſaith the 16 of Prouerbs: The lots are caſt into the lap: but
the direction thereof belongeth to the Lord: Through the knowledge whereof,
Ioſua was directed to take Achan, the Mariners Ionas, and the Apoſtles, to conſecrate
Matthias. So whether the heathen and barbarous people, whoſe blindnes
in the way of truth could direct them no further then to ſenceleſſe ſuperſtition,
and put them in minde of a dutie which they owed; but could not tell them what
it was, nor how to be performed: whether theſe I ſay, were perſwaded that there
was any ſupernaturall power in their lotteries, which directed the action to the
decree of deſtenie, and as the Gods would haue it, it remaineth doubtfull. Ariſtotle
the wiſeſt of the heathen, concerning things naturall, nameth that euent
caſuall, or proceeding from fortune; of which the reaſon of man could aſſigne
no cauſe, or (as he ſaith) which hath no cauſe: So that whatſoeuer happened in
any action beſides the intent of the agent and workeman, was tearmed an effect
of fortune, or chance of habnab. For all other effects which depended vpon a
certaine and definite cauſe, were neceſſarily produced; and therefore could not
be caſuall or ſubiect to the inconſtancie of chance: And becauſe manie and ſundrie
ſuch chances daily happened, which like terrae filij had no father, and could
not be warranted, as lawfull children, either to nature or to reaſon, by the appearance
of an efficient cauſe, they reduced them all to the power of fortune; as the
principall efficient and ſoueraigne Motor of all ſuch vnexpected euents, that is,
they made nothing elſe the gouerneſſe, and directreſſe of many things: which afterward
grew to ſuch credit amongſt men, that it ſurpaſſed in dignity all naturall
cauſes, and was deified with celeſtiall honour, as the Poet ſaith, Nos te facimus
fortuna deam caeloque locamus. By the prouidence of this blinde goddeſſe which
held her deity by the tenure of mens ignorance, were all caſuall actions directed,
and eſpecially lots; the euent whereof depended onely vpon her pleaſure
and decree: neither could their direction be aſſigned to any other power, for
then their nature had been altered from chance to certainty, & the euent could
not haue been called Sors, but muſt haue been reputed in the order of neceſſary
effects, whereof diſcourſe of reaſon acknowledgeth a certaine foregoing cauſe.
Whereby we ſee vpon how weake an axletree, the greateſt motions of the godleſſe
world were turned, hauing irregularitie and vncertaintie, for the intelligentiae,
that gouerned their reuolutions. All herein all ſortes of men, (although
in diuers reſpectes) reſted as well contented, as if an Oracle had ſpoken vnto
them, and reuealed the myſteries of fatall deſtinie.
                  
                     
Rome directed the maine courſe of her gouernment, by the fortune of this
mocke deſtiny. For although their Conſuls and Tribunes were elected by the
people, who pleaſed their own fancie with the free choice of their commanders,
and ſuted their obedience with a well liking authority: yet the publike affaires,
which each Conſull was ſeuerally to manage, was ſhared out by lots. For if an enemie
were entered into their confines to depopulate and waſt their territories,
the lots aſſigned this Conſull for the gouernment of the cittie; and the other to
command the legions, and to manage the war. If forces were to be ſent into diuers
prouinces and againſt ſeuerall enemies, neither the Senate nor the people
could giue to either Conſull his taske: but their peculiar charges were authoriſed
by lots. If any extraordinarie action were to be done in the citie, as the dedication
of a temple, the ſanctifying of the Capitoll after a pollution, Sors omnia
verſat, did all in all. And yet (notwithſtanding the weake foundation of this practiſe
in their Theologie & deepeſt diuinitie) we may not thinke but theſe skilfull
Architectors of that abſolute gouernment, wherein vertue ioyned with true wiſdome,
to make an vnexampled patterne: we may not thinke I ſay, but they
foreſaw the manifold danger, which in the courſe of common actions could no
otherway be preuented, but by the vſe of lots. For when things are equally leueled
betweene diuers obiects, and run with indifferencie to equall ſtations, there
muſt be ſome controlling power, to draw the current towardes one coaſt, and to
appropriate it vnto one chanell, that the order of nature be not inuerſed, nor a
well eſtabliſhed gouernmēt diſturbed: So the ſtate of Rome caſting many things
with equall charge vpon her two ſoueraigne magiſtrates, which could not be
performed but by one of them; what better meanes could there be inuented to
intereſſe the one in that office and to diſcharge the other, then to appoint an arbiter,
whoſe decree exceeded humane reaſon? Of which it could not be ſaide
why it was ſo, but that it was ſo: for if the wiſdome of the Senat had been called
to counſell, or the voices of the people calculated to determine of the matter;
it might eaſily haue burſt out into ciuill diſcord, conſidering the often contentions
between the Senat and the people, the factions of Clients, & the conſtant
mutabilitie of euery mans priuate affections neceſſarily inclining vnto one, althogh
their worth were equal & by true reaſon indiſcernable; which might haue
made the one proud of that which peraduenture he had not, and caſt the other
lower then would haue well beſeemed his vertues: And therfore to cut off theſe,
with many other inconueniences, they inuented lots; which without either reaſon
or will might decide ſuch controuerſies. By this it appeareth how little the
ancient law-makers reſpected the ground & reaſon of an ordinance, ſo the commoditie
were great, and the vſe important to the good of the ſtate: for as they
ſaw the thing it ſelfe to be caſuall, ſo they ſaw that caſuall thinges are ſometimes
more neceſſarie, then demonſtratiue concluſions: neither ought the nature, and
ſpeculatiue conſideration of lawes and ſtatutes, belong to the common people:
but the execution and obedience thereof maketh the common weale flouriſh.
And thus endeth the firſt Commentarie of Caeſar his warre in Gallia.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE SECOND COMMENTARIE
OF THE WARS IN GALLIA.
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               
                  LIke as when a heauy bodie lyeth vpon the skirt of a larger
continued quantity, although it couer but a ſmall parcell
of the whole ſurface; yet the other quarters are burthened
& kept vnder with a proportionable meaſure of that waight;
and through the vnion and continuation which bindeth all the
parts into one totality, feele the ſame ſuppreſſion which hath really
ſeaſed but vpon their fellow part: In like maner the Belgae, inhabiting
the furtheſt skirt of that triple continent, ſeemed to repine at
that heauy burthen, which the Romaine Empire had laide vpon
the Prouince, the Hedui, and other ſtates of that kingdome. And
leaſt it might in time be further remoued and laide directly vpon
their ſhoulders, they thought it expedient whileſt they felte it
but by participation to gather their ſeuerall forces into one
head, and trie whether they coulde free their neighbour nations
from ſo greeuous a yoak; or at the leaſt keepe it frō comming any
neerer vnto themſelues: And this is the Argument of this ſecond
booke, which deuideth it ſelfe into two partes: the firſt containing
the warres betweene Caeſar and all the ſtates of Belgia vnited togither:
the ſecōd recording the battailes which he made with ſome
of the ſtates thereof in particular, as time and occaſion gaue him
meanes to effect it.
            
            
               CHAP. I.
               
                  Caeſar haſteth to his army, marcheth towardes the
confines of the Belgae, & taketh in the men of Rheims.
               
               
                  THE report of this confederacie being brought vnto Caeſar, whilest
he wintred beyond the Alpes,Caeſar. as wel by letters from Labienus, as by
the common heareſay of the worlde: hee leuied two new legions in
Lumbardie, and ſent them by Q. Pedius into Gallia, and aſſoone
as there was any forrage in the fieldes he himſelfe came to the armie.
At his arriual, vnderſtanding by the Senones & the reſt of

the Galles that bordered vpon the Belgae (to whom he gaue in charge to learne what
was done amongſt them,) that there was nothing in Belgia but muſtering of ſoldiours,
and gathering their forces into one heade: he thought it not ſafe to make anie
further delaie, but hauing made prouiſion of corne, he drewe out his army from their
wintering campes, and within fifteene daies he came to the borders of the Belgae.
Aſſoone as he was come thither, which was much ſooner then was looked for; the
men of Rheimes being the vttermoſt of the Belgae, next adioining to the Celtae,
thought it beſt to entertaine a peaceable reſolution, and ſent Iccius and Antebrogius,
two of the cheefe men of their ſtate, vnto Caeſar, to ſubmit themſelues and all
that they had, to the mercy of the Romaine Empire; affirming that they were innocent
both of the counſel of the Belgae, and of their conſpiracie againſt the Romaines:
For proofe wherof they were ready to giue hoſtages, to receiue them into their towns,
and to furniſh them with corne or what other thing they ſtood in neede of. That the
reſt of the Belgae were al in armes, and the Germains on the other ſide of the Rhene
had promiſed to ſend them ſuccour: yea their madneſſe was ſo great, that they themſelues
were not able to hold backe the Sueſſones from that attempt, being their brethren
and kinſmen in bloud, and vſing the ſame lawes and customes as they did, hauing
both one magiſtrate and one forme of gouernment; but they would needs ſupport
the ſame quarrel which the reſt of the Belgae had vndertaken.
               
                  THE OBSERVATION.
                  
                     I Might heere take occaſion to ſpeake ſomwhat of a particular reuoult
in a generall cauſe; and howe a confederate ſtate may in regarde of
their owne ſafetie forſake a common quarrell, or whatſoeuer the vniuerſall
ſocietie hath enacted preiudiciall to their common weale:
but that I onely intende to diſcouer warlike practiſes, leauing theſe queſtions of
lawe and policie to men of greater iudgement and better experience. Onlie I
obſerue in the behalfe of the Romaine gouernment, that ſuch cities as yeelded
to the Empire, and became tributarie to their treaſury (howſoeuer they were otherwiſe
combined by confederacy) ſeldome or neuer repented them of their
facte, in regard of the noble patronage which they found in that ſtate, and of
the due reſpect obſerued towards them.
               
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               
                  The power of the Belgae, and their preparation
for this warre.
               
               
                  CAeſar inquiring of the Ambaſsadors which came frō Rheimes what
the ſtates were that had taken armes,Caeſar. and what they were able to
do in matter of war: found the Belgae to be deſcended from the Germaines;
who paſsing ouer the Rhene time out of minde, droue away
the Galles and ſeated themſelues in their poſſeſsions: and that theſe
only of al the Galles kept the Cimbri and Teutoni frō entering into

their country: and in that regard they chalenged to themſelues great authoritie, &
vaunted much in their feats of armes. Concerning their number they had theſe aduertiſements;
theThe country about Beauuois. Bellouaci exceeded all the Belgae in proweſſe, authoritie, and
number of men, and promiſed 60000. men: and in that regard they demanded the
adminiſtration of the whole warre. TheThe country about Soiſſons Sueſſones inhabiting a large and fertile
countrey, and hauing 12. walled towns, promiſed to ſet out 50000. TheThe people about Turnai Neruij as
many; theArras. Attrebatij 15000. theAmyens. Ambiani 10000. the Velocaſſij, andVermandois. Veromandui
as many; theTerwene Morini 25000. the Menapij 7000. the Caletani 10000. the
Catuaci 19000. theLeige. 296000 in al. Eburones, Condruſones, and others 40000. Caeſar incouraging
the men of Rheimes to perſiſt their faithfulnes to the Romaine Empire, propounded
vnto them great offers and liberall promiſes of recompence, and commanded all
their ſenate to come before him, and bring with them their noble mens ſonnes to be
giuen vp for hoſtages, which they diligently perfourmed by a day appointed. And
hauing receiued two eſpecial aduertiſements from the men of Rheimes, the one concerning
the multitude of the enemy; and the other touching the ſingular opinion
which was generally held of their manhood: hee prouided for the firſt by perſuading
Diuitiacus the Heduan, that it much imported the whole courſe of thoſe buſineſſes,
to keepe aſunder the powre of the enemy; and to withhold their forces from making
a head, that ſo he might auoide the dange of incountering ſo great a power at one
inſtant. Which might eaſilie be brought to paſſe, if the Hedui woulde enter with a
ſtrong power into the marches of the Bellouaci, and ſacke their territories with
ſword and confuſion, which Diuitiacus promiſed to performe, and to that purpoſe he
ſpeedily returned into his country. Vpon the ſecond aduertiſement which preſented
vnto him the great valour and manhood of his enemies, he reſolued not to be too haſtie
in giuing them battell, but firſt to proue by skirmiſhing with his horſemen what
his enemies by their proweſſe could do, and what his own men durſt doe.
               
                  THE OBSERVATION.
                  
                     THis rule of making triall of the worth of an enemy, hath alwaies been
obſerued by prudent and graue commanders, as the ſureſt principle
whereon the true iudgment of the euent may be grounded. For if the
doctrine of the old Philoſophers, which teacheth that the worde non
putabam was neuer heard out of a wiſe mās mouth, haue any place in the courſe
of humane actions, it ought eſpeciallie to be regarded in managing theſe main
points, whereon the ſtate of kingdomes and empires dependeth. For vnleſſe
we be perſuaded that blind chance directeth the courſe of this worlde vvith an
vncertaine confuſion, and that no foreſight can ſwaie the balance of our hap
into either part of our fortune; I ſee no reaſon why we ſhould not by al meanes
indeuor to grounde our knowledge vpon true cauſes, and leuel our proceedings
to that certainty which riſeth from the things thēſelues. And this is the rather
to be vrged, inaſmuch as our leaders are oftentimes deceiued when they look no
further then to match an enemy vvith equalitie of number, referring their valour
to bee tried in the battell; not conſidering that the eye of it ſelfe cannot

diſcerne the difference betweene two champions of like preſence and outward
cariage, vnleſſe it ſee their ſtrength compared together and waied as it were in
the ſcale of triall: which Caeſar omitted not diligently to obſerue, before he
would aduenture the hazard of battell. For beſides his owne ſatiſfaction, it gaue
great incouragement to his men, when they ſawe themſelues able to countermatch
an enemie, and knew their taske to be ſubiect to their ſtrength: Neither
did he obſerue it onely at this inſtant, but throughout the whole courſe of his
actions; for we finde that he neuer incountered any enemie, but with ſufficient
power, either in number or in valour to make head againſt them: which equality
of ſtrength, being firſt laide as a ſure foundation, he vſed his owne induſtrie and
skill, and the diſcipline wherein his men were trained, as aduantages to ouerſway
his aduerſarie: and ſo drew victorie maugre fortune vnto himſelfe, and ſeldome
failed in any of his battels.
               
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               
                  Caeſar paſſeth his Armie ouer the riuerLa diſne. Axona,
leauing Titurius Sabinus incamped on the
other ſide with ſixe cohorts.
               
               
                  ASSOONE as Caeſar vnderſtood,Caeſar. as well by his diſcourers, as
from the men of Rheimes, that all the power of the Belgae was aſſembled
together into one place, and was now making towardes
him no great deſtance off; he made all the haſte he could to paſse
his Armie ouer the riuer Axona, which deuided the men of
Rheimes from the other Belgae. Wherby he brought to paſſe, that
no enemie could come on the backe of him to worke any diſaduantage:
and that corne might be brought vnto him from Rheimes, and other cities
without danger. And further, that he might command the paſsage backe againe, as
occaſion ſhould ſerue to his beſt aduantage, he fortified a bridge which he found on the
riuer, with a ſtrong garriſon of men, and cauſed Titurius Sabinus a Legate, to incampe
himſelfe on the other ſide of the riuer with ſixe cohortes, commaunding him to
fortifie his campe with a rampier of 12 foote in altitude, and a trench of 18 foote in
breadth.
               
                  OBSERVATION.
                  
                     IF it be demaunded, why Caeſar did paſſe his Armie ouer the riuer,
leauing it on his backe; and did not rather attend the enemie on the
other ſide, and ſo take the aduantage of hindering him, if he ſhould
attempt to paſſe ouer? I will ſet downe the reaſons in the ſequell of
this warre, as the occurrences ſhall fall out to make them more euident. In the
meane time let vs enter into the particularitie of theſe ſixe cohortes, that wee
maie the better iudge of ſuch troupes which were imploied in the ſeruices of
this warre: but that wee may the better coniecture what number of ſouldiers

theſe ſixe cohortes did containe, it ſeemeth expedient, a little to diſcourſe of
the companies and regiments, which the Romans vſed in their Armies.
                  And firſt we are to vnderſtand,A legion what it was. Lib. 4. De vita Romuli. that the greateſt and chiefeſt regiment in a
Roman Armie, was tearmed by the name of Legio: as Varro ſaith, quod leguntur
milites in delectu: or as Plutarch ſpeaketh, quod lecti ex omnibus eſſent militares;
ſo that it taketh the name Legio of the choiſe and ſelecting of the ſoldiers.
Romulus is ſaid to be the firſt author & founder of theſe legions, making euerie
legion to containe 3000 ſoldiers: but ſhortly after they were augmented, as Feſtus
recordeth vnto 4000: and afterward againe from 4000 to 4200. And that
number was the common rate of a legion vntill Hanniball came into Italie,Liu. lib. 22. and
then it was augmented to 5000, but that proportion continued onely for that
time. And againe, when Scipio went into Africke, the legions were increaſed
to 6200 footmen, and 300 horſe. And ſhortly after the Macedonian warre, the
legions that continued in Macedonie to keepe the Prouince from rebellion,
conſiſted of 6000 footmen and 300 horſe. Out of Caeſar it cannot be gathered,
that a legion in his time did exceede the number of 5000 men; but oftentimes
it was ſhort of that number: for he himſelfe ſaith, that in this warre in Gallia his
ſoldiers were ſo waſted, that he had ſcarce 7000 men in two legions. And if we
examine that place out of the 3 of the ciuill war, where he ſaith, that in Pompei
his Armie were 110 cohorts, which amounted to the nūber of 55000 men: And
being manifeſt as well by theſe number of cohortes, as by the teſtimonie of diuers
authors, that Pompei his Army conſiſted of 11 legions; if we deuide 55000
into 11 partes, we ſhall finde a legion to conſiſt of 5000 men. Which number
or thereabout, being generally knowne to be the vſuall rate of a legion, the Romans
alwaies expreſſed the ſtrength of their Armie by the number of legions
that were therein: as in this warre it is ſaid, that Caeſar had eight legions, which
by this account might ariſe to 40000 men, beſides aſſociates, and ſuch as neceſſarily
attended the Armie. Further we are to vnderſtand, that euery legion had
his peculiar name, by which it was knowne and diſtinguiſhed from the reſt, and
that it tooke either from their order of muſter, or inrolment; as that legion
which was firſt inrolled, was called the firſt legion; and that which was ſecond in
choice, the ſecond legion; and ſo conſequently of the reſt; and ſo we reade in
this hiſtorie, the ſeuenth, the eighth, the ninth, the tenth, the eleuenth and
twelfth legion: or otherwiſe from the place of their warfare, and ſo we read of
legiones Germanicae, Panonicae, Britannicae, and ſuch others; and ſometime of their
Generall, as Auguſta, Claudia, Vitellianae, legiones, and ſo forth. Or to conclude,
from ſome accident or qualitie,Tacitus 3. hiſt. as Rapax, Victrix, Fulminifera and ſuch like.
And this much of the name and number of a legion, which I muſt neceſſarilie
diſtinguiſh into diuers kindes of ſouldiers, according to the firſt inſtitution of
the olde Romans, and the continuall obſeruation thereof vnto the decay of the
Empire, before I come to the deſcription of theſe ſmaller partes, whereof a legion
was compounded.
                  Firſt therefore we are to vnderſtand, that after the Conſuls had made a genenerall
choiſe and ſworne the ſouldiers,Velites. the Tribunes choſe out the youngeſt
and pooreſt of all the reſt, and called them by the name of Velites. Their place

in regard of the other ſouldiers was both baſe & diſhonorable: not only becauſe
they fought a farre off, and were lightly armed; but alſo in regard they were
commonly expoſed to the enemy, as our forelorne hopes are. Hauing choſen
out a competent number for this kinde, they proceeded to the choiſe of them
which they called Haſtati,Haſtati. a degree aboue the Velites, both in age and wealth,
and tearmed them by the name of Haſtati; foraſmuch as at their firſt inſtitution
they fought with a kind of Iauelin, which the Romaines called Haſta: but before
Polybius his time they vſed Piles; notwithſtanding their ancient name continued
vnto the latter time of the Empire.Principes. The third choiſe which they made
was of the ſtrongeſt and luſtieſt bodied men, who for the prime of their age
were called Principes; the reſt that remained were named Triarij, as Varro ſaith,
Quod tertio ordine extremis ſubſidio deponuntur: Theſe were alwaies the eldeſt
and beſt experienced men, and were placed in the third diuiſion of the battell,
as the laſt helpe and refuge in all extremity.Lib. 6. Polybius ſaith, that in his time the
Velites, Haſtati, and Principes, did conſiſt of 1200 men a peece; and the Triarij
neuer exceeded the number of 600. although the generall number of a legion
were augmented:Lib. 1. de mil. Rom. whereof Lypſius allegeth theſe reaſons. Firſt bicauſe theſe
Triarij conſiſted of the beſt of the ſoldiors, and ſo might counteruaile a greater
number in good worth and valour. Secondly, it ſeldome came to buckle with
the enemy, but when the controuerſie grewe very doubtfull. Laſtly, wee may
well coniecture that the voluntaries and extraordinarie folowers, ranged themſelues
amongſt theſe Triaries, and ſo made the third battel equal to either of the
former; but howſoeuer, they neuer exceeded the number of 600. And by this it
appeareth, that in Polybius his time the common rate of a legion was 4200.
                  In this diuiſion of their men conſiſted the ground of that well ordered diſcipline;
for in that they diſtinguiſhed them according to their yeeres and abilitie,
they reduced their whole ſtrength into ſeueral claſſes; & ſo diſpoſed of theſe
different parts,The vſe of this diuiſion. that in the generall cōpoſition of their whole bodie euery part
might be fitted with place and office, according as his worth vvas anſwerable to
the ſame: & ſo they made not only a number in groſſe, but a number diſtinct by
parts and properties, that from euery accident which met with any part of the
armie, the iudgement might determine how much or howe little it imported
the whole bodie: beſides the great vſe vvhich they made of this diſtinction
in their degrees of honour and preferment; a matter of no ſmal conſequence, in
the excellencie of their gouernment.
                  The ſoldiours,The diſtinction of their companies. Manipuli. at their inrolement beeing thus deuided according to their
yeeres and abilitie, they then reduced them into ſmaller companies, to make
them fitter for command and fight: and ſo they deuided the Haſtati, Principes,
and Triarii, each of them into 10 companies, making of thoſe 3. ſortes of ſoldiours
30. ſmall regiments, vvhich they called Manipuli: And againe, they ſubdeuided
euerie maniple into two equall parts,Ordo. and called them Ordo, vvhich was
the leaſt companie in a legion; and according to the rate ſet down by Polybius,
contained 60. ſoldiours. In euerie Ordo there was a Centurion, or Captaine,
and a Lieuetenant, whom they named Optio or Tergiductor. The maniples of
the Triarii were much leſſer then the maniples of either the Haſtati or the Principes;

for as much as their whole band conſiſted but of 600. men. The Velites
were put into no ſuch companies, but were equally diſtributed amongſt the other
Maniples; and therefore the Haſtati, Principes, and Triarij were called ſubſignanos
milites, to make a difference between them and the Velites, which were
not deuided into bandes; and ſo conſequently had no enſigne of their own, but
were diſtributed amongſt the other companies: ſo that euery Maniple had 40.
Velites attending vpon it. And now I come to the deſcription of a cohort, which
the hiſtory heere mentioneth.
                  The worde Cohors in latine doth ſignifie that part of grounde which is commonly
incloſed before the gate of a houſe,Cohors. Lib. 3. de re rust. which from the ſame word we call a
court: and Varro giueth this reaſon of the metaphor. As in a farme houſe, ſaith
he, many out-buildings ioined together make one incloſure; ſo a cohort conſiſteth
of ſeuerall maniples ioined together in one body. This cohort conſiſted of
three maniples; for euerie legion had ten cohorts, which muſt neceſſarily comprehend
thoſe thirty maniples: but theſe 3. maniples were not al of one and the
ſame kind of ſoldiors, as three maniples of the Haſtati, 3. of the Principes, and 3.
of the Triarij, as Patricius in his Paralleli ſeemeth to affirme; for ſo there
would haue remained an odde maniple in euery kind, that could not haue been
brought into any cohort: But a cohort contained a maniple of the Haſtati, a
maniple of the Principes, and a maniple of the Triarij; and ſo al the 30. maniples
were included into 10. cohorts; & euery cohort was as a little legion; foraſmuch
as it conſiſted of al thoſe ſortes of ſoldiours that were in a legion. So that making
a legion to containe 5000. men; a cohort had 500. and ſo theſe 6. cohorts,
which he incamped on the other ſide of the riuer, vnder the command of Titurius
Sabinus, contayned 3000. ſoldiours: but if you make a legion to conſiſt
but of 4200. which was the more vſuall rate, there were 2520. ſoldiours in theſe
ſixe cohortes.
                  By this therefore it may appeare, that a legion conſiſted of foure ſorts of ſoldiours,
which were reduced into ten cohorts, and euery cohort contained 3. maniples;
& euery maniple 2. orders; and euery order had his Centurion marching
in the head of the troupe; and euery Centurion had his optionem, or Lieutenāt,
that ſtood in the taile of the troupe.
                  When a legion ſtoode ranged in battell ready to confront the enemy,Alegion ranged in battell. the
leaſt body or ſquadron that it contained was a maniple; wherein the two orders
were ioined together, making iointly ten in front, and twelue in file: and ſo euerie
fiue files had their Centurion in front, and Lieutenant in the rereward,
to direct them in all aduentures. In the time of the Emperours, their battailions
conſiſted of a cohort, and neuer exceeded that number how great ſoeuer
the army were.
                  Polybius diſtinguiſhing a maniple into two centuries or orders,The firſt order ſaith, that
the Centurion firſt choſen by the Tribunes, commanded the right order, which
was that order which ſtoode on the right hand, knowne by the name of Primus
ordo: and the Centurion elected in the ſecond courſe, commanded the left order;
and in the abſence of either of them, hee that was preſent of them two,
commaunded the whole maniple. And ſo wee finde that the Centurion of the

firſt place was called Prior Centurio: in which ſenſe Caeſar is to be vnderſtood,
where hee ſaith,3. De bello ciuili. that all the Centurions of the firſt cohorte were ſlaine, praeter
principem priorem. From whence we gather two ſpecialities, firſt; the prioritie
betweene the Centurions of the ſame maniple: for a cohorte conſiſting of 3.
maniples, vvhereof the firſt maniple vvere Triarij, the ſecond Principes, and
the thirde Haſtati; and euerie maniple containing two orders; and euerie order
a Centurion: he ſaith, that all the Centurions of this cohort vvere ſlaine; ſauing
the firſt or vpper Centurion of the Principes.Prima cohors The ſecond thing vvhich I obſerue,
is the title of the firſt cohort: for theſe 10. cohortes, vvhereof a legion
conſiſted, vvere diſtinguiſhed by degrees of worthineſſe; and that vvhich vvas
held the vvorthieſt in the cenſure of the Electors, tooke the prioritie both of
place and name, and vvas called the firſt cohort: the next, the ſecond cohort; &
ſo conſequently vnto the tenth and laſt.
                  Neither did the legions want their degrees of preheminēce, both in imbattailing
& in incāping, according either to the ſeniority of their inrolement, or their
fauor of their General, or their own vertue: And ſo we read that in theſe vvars
in Gallia, the tenth legion had the firſt place in Caeſars army. And thus much
concerning the diuiſions, and ſeuerall companies of a legion, and the degrees
of honour which they held in the ſame.
                  Vpon this deſcription it ſhall not be amiſſe, briefelie to laie open the moſt
apparant commodities depending vpon this diſcipline;The benefit of this diſcipline the excellency vvhereof
more plainely appeareth, bein compared to that order, vvhich nature hath
obſerued in the frame of her vvorthieſt creatures: for it is euident, that
ſuch workes of nature come neereſt to perfect excellencie, vvhoſe material ſubſtance
is moſt particularlie diſtinguiſhed into parts, and hath euery part indued
vvith that propertie, which beſt agreeth to his peculiar ſeruice. For beeing
thus furniſhed with diuerſitie of inſtruments, and theſe directed vvith fitting abilities;
the creature muſt needs expreſſe many admirable effects, and diſcouer
the vvorth of an excellent nature: vvhereas thoſe other bodies, that are but ſlenderly
laboured, and find leſſe fauour in natures forge, being as abortiues, or barbarouſly
compoſed, vvanting the diuerſitie both of partes and faculties; are no
vvay capable of ſuch excellent vſes, nor fit for ſuch diſtinct ſeruices, as the former
that are directed vvith ſo many properties, and inabled vvith the power of ſo
wel diſtinguiſhed faculties. Which better works of nature the Romains imitated
in the Architecture of their army, deuiding it into ſuch neceſſary & ſeruiceable
partes, as were beſt fitting all vſes and imploiments: as firſt into legions, and legions
into cohorts, and cohorts into maniples, and maniples into centuries or
orders, and theſe into files; wherein euery man knewe his place, and kept the
ſame without exchange or confuſion. And thus the vniuerſall multitude was
by order diſpoſed into partes, vntill it came vnto a vnitie: for it cannot bee
denied, but that theſe centuries were in themſelues ſo ſenſiblie diſtinguiſhed,
that euerie Soldiour caried in his minde the particular Mappe of his whole
centurie: for in imbtttailing, euerie centurie was diſpoſed into 5. files, contayning
twelue in a file, whereof the leaders were alwayes certaine, and
neuer changed but by death or ſome other eſpeciall occaſion: and euerie

leader knew his follower, and euerie ſecond knewe the third man, and ſo conſequently
vnto the laſt.
                  Vpon theſe particularities it plainly appeareth, how eaſie a matter it was, to
reduce their troupes into any order of a march or a battell, to make the front
the flanke, or flanke front, when they were broken and diſrankt to rallie them
into any forme, when euery man knew both his owne and his fellowes ſtation.
If any companies were to be imploied vpon ſudden ſeruice, the generall Idea of
the Armie being ſo deepely imprinted in the minde of the commanders, would
not ſuffer them to erre in taking out ſuch conuenient troupes, both for number
and quality, as might beſt agree with the ſafetie of the Armie, or nature of the
action: At all occaſions and oportunities, theſe principles of aduantage offered
themſelues, as readie meanes, to put in execution any deſſigne, or ſtratagem
whatſoeuer; the proiect was no ſooner reſolued of, but euerie man could
readily point out the companies that were fit to execute the intention. And
which is more important, in regard of the life and ſpirit of euerie ſuch part,
their ſodalitie was ſweetned, or rather ſtrengthened with the mutuall acquaintance,
and friendſhippe one of another, the captaine marching alwaies in the
head of the troupe, the enſigne in the middeſt, and the lieutenant in the rereward,
and euerie man accompanied with his neighbour and his friend; which
bred a true and vnfained courage, both in regard of themſelues, and of their
followers. Beſides theſe ſpecialities, the places of title and dignity depending
vpon this order, were no ſmall meanes to cutte off all matter of ciuill diſcorde,
and inteſtine diſſention: for here euerie man knew his place in the file, and euerie
file knewe his place in the Centurie, and euerie Centurie in the Maniple,
and euerie Maniple in the Cohort, and euerie Cohort in the Legion, and euerie
Legion in the Armie; and ſo euerie ſouldier had his place, according to his
vertue; and euerie place gaue honour to the man, according as their diſcipline
had determined thereof.
                  The vvant of this diſcipline hath diſhonoured the martiall gouernment
of this age, with bloudſhed and murthers; whereof France is too true a witneſſe,
as well in regard of the French themſelues, as of our Engliſh forces that
haue beene ſent thither to appeaſe their tumults: for through defect of this order,
which allotteth to euerie man his due place, the controuerſie grew between
Sir William Drurie and Sir Iohn Bowrowes, the iſſue whereof is too well known
to the world: wherein as our commanders in France haue been negligent, ſo I
may not forget to giue due commēdation to the care which is had of this point
amongſt the Engliſh troups, in the ſeruice of the ſtates in the vnited prouinces,
where they are very curious in appointing euerie man his place in the file, and
euerie file in the troupe, and find much benefit thereby, beſides the honour of
reuiuing the Roman diſcipline.
                  To conclude this point,The benefit of ſmall battailions: and the diſaduantage of great ſquadrons▪
                      I will onely touch in a word the benefite, which the
Romans found in their ſmall battailions, and the diſaduantage, which we haue in
making great ſquadrons. And firſt it cannot be denied, but that ſuch troupes
ſtand beſt appointed for diſpoſition and array of battell, which ſtanding ſtrong
to receiue a ſhocke, bring moſt men to fight with the enemie: for the principall

thinges which are required in ſetting of a battell, are ſo to order the troupes, that
the depth in flanke may ſerue conueniently to withſtand the aſſault, taking vp no
more men then may well ſerue for that purpoſe; and giuing meanes to the reſt
to fight with the enemie; and in theſe two points, were both their defenſiue and
offenſiue conſiderations comprehended. But ſmaller troupes and battailons afforde
this conueniencie better then great ſquadrons, which drowne vp manie
able men in the depth of their flankes, and neuer ſuffer them to appeare, but
when the breaking of the ſquadron doth preſent them to the butcherie of the enemie.
The Macedonian Phalanx, as I haue noted in the firſt booke, neuer caried
aboue 16 in flanke, and brought 500 to fight in front. And theſe little battailons
(conſidering them as they ſtood in battell ray) made as great a front or
greater, then that of the Phalanx, keeping a depth anſwerable to the ſame; beſides
the 2 and 3 battell, which alwaies were to ſuccour them, which the Phalanx
wanted: neither would their thicke and cloſe imbattailing admit any ſuch ſuccour
behind them. Now if we cōpare the aduantages & diſcommodities, which
by place and accident were incident to either of theſe, we ſhall find great ods
betweene them. Theſe great ſquadrons are not faiſable, but in plaine and open
places, where they may either ſtand immoueable, or make eaſie and ſlow motions
without ſhaking, or diſordering their bodie: but the leſſer are a ſcantling
for all places, champion or wooddie, leuell or vneuen, or of what ſite or quality
ſoeuer. And to conclude, if two or three rankes of theſe great battailons chance
to be broken and diſordered, the whole body is as much intereſſed in the diſorder,
as the ſaid rankes are; and hath leſſe meanes to rally it ſelfe, then any other
leſſer companie: but if any violence chance to rout a maniple, it proceedeth no
further in the Armie, then that part which it taketh: Neither can the diſranking
of any one part, betraie the ſafetie of the Armie to diſorder and confuſion; for
as much as their diſtinction ſerued to cut off ſuch inconueniences, and yet no
waie hindered the generall vniting of their ſtrength into one body. More may
be ſaid concerning this matter, but I onely point at it, and leaue the due conſideration
thereof, to the iudgment of our commanders, & returne to our hiſtory.
               
            
            
               CHAP. IIII.
               
                  The Belgae attempt the ſurpriſe ofBray in the county of Retell. Bibrax:
Caeſar ſendeth ſuccour vnto it.
               
               
                  THere was a towne called Bibrax, belonging to the ſtate of Rheimes,
about eight mile from Caeſars campe; which the Belgae thought to
haue ſurpriſed, as they came along to meete with Caeſar, and ſuddenly
aſſaulted it with ſuch furie, that the towneſmen could hardly
hold out the firſt daie. The Celtae and Belgae vſe one and the ſame
manner, in aſsaulting a towne: for hauing beſet the whole compaſse
of the wall with rankes of ſouldiers, they neuer ceaſe flinging of ſtones vntill they

finde the wall naked of defendantes; and then caſting themſelues into a Teſtudo, they
approch to the gate and vndermine the walles. Aſsoone as the night had made an end
of the aſsault, Iccius of Rheimes, a man of great birth and authoritie in his countrey,
who at that time was gouernour of the towne, and had beene before with Caeſar, to
treat and conclude a peace: ſent him word by meſsengers, that if there came not preſent
ſuccour, he was not able to holde out any longer. The ſame daie about midnight
(vſing the ſame meſſengers for guides) he ſent both Numidian and Cretian Archers,
and ſlingers of the Iles of Baleares, to relieue the towne; by meanes whereof, the
towneſmen were put in good hope to make their partie ſtrong, and the enemie
made hopeles of winning the towne: and therefore after a ſmall ſtay, hauing populated
their fieldes, and burned their villages and out-buildinges, they marched with all
their power towardes Caeſars campe, and within leſſe then two miles of his Armie,
they incamped their whole hoaſt: which, as was gathered by the ſmoake and fire, occupied
more ground then eight miles in breadth.
               
                  THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
                  
                     IN the deſcription of their aſſault, we are to obſerue two circumſtances:
The firſt is,To take a towne by ſurpriſe. the manner they vſed in a ſudden ſurpriſe: The ſecond
is, the forme and quality of a Teſtudo. Although Caeſar ſeemeth to
attribute this manner of aſſaulting a towne, as peculiar, to the Galles; yet wee
maie not thinke but that the Romans vſed it, as often as they had occaſion to
ſurpriſe any cittie: but becauſe the Galles knew no other means to take a towne
but this, therefore he ſetteth it downe as peculiar vnto them. The Romans called
this manner of aſſault Corona; and ſo we read oftentimes this phraſe, Cingere
vrbem corona: for as much as the ſouldiers incloſed the towne with a circle,
and ſo reſembled a crowne or garland. Ammianus ſpeaketh of a triple crown of
ſouldiers, which incompaſed a towne: And Ioſephus telleth of Iotapatam,
which the Romans beſieged duplici peditum corona: and beſides theſe, there was
a third circle of horſemen vtmoſt of all. There is no further matter to be obſerued
but this, that in ſurpriſing a towne, they incircled it round about with thick
continued rankes of men, and where they found the wall weakeſt, there they entered
as they could.
               
               
                  THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
                  
                     THe Teſtudo requireth a larger diſcourſe,A Teſtudo deſcribed. Lib. 44. and is liuely deſcribed in
Liuie, after this manner. In the Amphitheater, where the people
did often aſſemble to ſee ſtrange ſightes and publike ſhewes, were
brought in (ſaith he) 60 Iuſtie young men, who after ſome motion,
and ſeemely march, caſt themſelues into a ſquare troupe, & roofing their heads
cloſe with their targets, the firſt ranke which made the front of the Teſtudo,
ſtood vpright on their feete; the ſecond ranke bowed it ſelfe ſomewhat lower;

the third and fourth rankes did more incline themſelues, and ſo conſequentlie
vnto the laſt ranke, which kneeled on the ground, and ſo they made a bodie
reſembling halfe the ſide of an houſe, which they called Teſtudo. Vnto this
ſquadron thus ſtrongly combined togither, came two ſoldiours running ſome
fiftie foot off, and threatning each other with their weapons, ran nimbly vp the
ſide of the roofe; and ſometimes making as though they would defend it againſt
an enemy, that would haue entred vpon it; ſometimes againe incountering each
other in the midſt of it, leaped vp and downe as ſteddily as if they had been vpon
firme ground. And which is more ſtrange, the front of a Teſtudo being applied
to the ſide of a wall, there aſcended many armed men vpon the ſaid Teſtudo,
and fought in an equall height with other ſoldiors, that ſtood vpon the ſaid
wal to defend it. The diſſimilitude in the compoſition was this, that the ſoldiors
that were in front, and in the ſides of the ſquare, caried not their Targets ouer
their heads, as the other did; but couered their bodies with them, and ſo no weapons
either caſt from the wall, or otherwiſe throwne againſt it, coulde any waie
hurt them; and whatſoeuer waight fell vppon the Teſtudo, it quicklie glided
downe by the decliuitie of the roofe, without anie hurte or annoyance
at all.
                  Thus far Liuie goeth, neither doe I know what to ſaie further of it: the chiefeſt
vſe thereof was in a ſurpriſe or ſuddaine attempt againſt a towne, before the
townes men were throughly prepared to defend the ſame. This inuention ſerued
them to approach the wall with ſafetie, and ſo either to vndermine it, or to
clime vp: and to that ende they oftentimes erected one Teſtudo vpon another.
Tacitus ſaith, that the ſoldiours climed vppon the wall, ſuper iteratam teſtudinem,
by one Teſtudo made vpon an other; and this was the ancient forme and
vſe of a Teſtudo in a ſuddain aſſault or ſurpriſe.
                  Dio Caſſius in the actes of Anthonie,Lib. 49. ſaieth, that beeing galled with
the Parthian Archers, hee commanded his whole armie to put it ſelfe into
a Teſtudo, which was ſo ſtrange a ſight to the Parthians, that they
thought the Romaines hadde ſunke downe for wearineſſe and faintneſſe;
and ſo forſaking their horſe, drewe their ſwordes to haue made execution:
and then the Romaines at a watch-worde giuen, roſe againe with ſuch a furie,
that they put them all to ſworde and flight. Dio deſcribeth the ſaide
Teſtudo after this manner, They placed, ſaieth hee, their baggage, their
light armed men and their horſemen, in the middeſt; and thoſe heauie armed
footemen that caried long gutter-tiled Targettes, were in the vtmoſt
circles nexte vnto the enemie; the reſte which bare large Ouall Targettes
were thronged togither throughout the whole troupe, and ſo couered with
their Targets both themſelues and their fellowes, that there was nothing diſcerned
by the enemy but a roofe of Targets, which were ſo tiled togither, that men
might ſafely go vpon them.
                  Further, wee oftentimes reade, that the Romaines caſt themſelues into a
Teſtudo, to breake through an enemy, or to route and diſranke a troupe. And
this vſe the Romaines had of a Teſtudo in field ſeruices, and only by the benefit
of their Target. It was called a Teſtudo, in regarde of the ſtrength, for that it

couered and ſheltred, as a ſhell couereth a fiſh. And let this ſuffice concerning
a Teſtudo.
               
               
                  THE THIRD OBSERVATION.
                  
                     THirdly we may obſerue,The neceſſitie of good diſcouerie. how carefully Caeſar prouided for the ſafetie
of ſuch ſuccours, as he ſent vnto Bibrax: for hee commanded the
ſame meſſengers to direct them that came from the towne, as the
beſt and ſureſt guides in that iourney, leaſt peraduenture through ignorance
of the way, they might fall into inconueniences or dangers: a matter
of no ſmall conſequence in managing a warre, but deſerueth an extraordinarie
importunitie, to perſuade the neceſſitie of this diligence. For a Generall that
hath perfectlie diſcouered the nature of the countrey, through which he is to
march, and knoweth the true diſtances of places, the qualitie of the waies, the
compendiouſneſſe of turnings, the nature of the hils and the courſe of the riuers,
hath all theſe particularities as maine aduantages, to giue meanes of ſo
many ſeuerall attempts vpon an enemy: And in this point Hanniball had a ſingular
dexterity, and excelled all the commanders of his time in making vſe of
the way, by which he was to paſſe. But he that leadeth an army, by an vnknown
and vndiſcouered way, and marcheth blindfold vpon vncertaine aduentures,
is ſubiect to as many caſualties and diſaduantages, as the other hath opportunitie
of good fortune. Let euery man therefore perſuade himſelfe, that good diſcouerers
are as the eyes of an army, and ſerue for lights in the darkeneſſe of ignorance,
to direct the reſolutions of good prouidence, and make the path of ſafetie
ſo manifeſt, that we neede not ſtumble vpon caſualties. Caeſar in his iourney
to Ariouiſtus vſed the helpe of Diuitiacus the Heduan, in whome amongſt
all the Galles, he repoſed greateſt confidence to diſcouer the waie, and acquaint
him with the paſſages; and before hee would vndertake his voyage vntoNow England. Britanie,
he well enformed himſelfe by marchants and trauailers, of the quantity
of the Iland, the quality of the people, their vſe of warre, and the oportunitie
of their hauens: Neither was he ſatisfied with their relations, but hee ſent Caius
Voluſenus in a ſhip of warre, to ſee what hee could further diſcouer, concerning
theſe points. Suetonius addeth moreouer, that hee neuer caried his
army, per inſidioſa itinera, vnleſſe he had firſt well diſcouered the places.
                  Concerning the order, which skilfull leaders haue obſerued in diſcoueries,The order which is to be obſerued in diſcouery.
we are to knowe that this point conſiſteth of two partes: the one in vnderſtanding
the perfect deſcription of the countrey; and the ſecond in obſeruing the
motions of the enemy. Touching the firſt, we finde as well by this as other hiſtories,
that the Romains vſed the inhabitants of the country for guides, as beſt
acquainted with their natiue places, that they might not erre in ſo important a
matter; prouided alwaies, that their owne ſcoutes were euer abroad to vnderſtand
what they could of themſelues, that they might not altogither relie vpon
a ſtrangers direction. The motions of the enemy were obſerued by the horſemen,
and theſe for the moſt part were Veterani, well experienced in the matter

of warre, and ſo the generall receiued ſound aduertiſements: and yet they were
not too forward vpon any new motion, vnleſſe they found it confirmed by diuers
waies: for ſome eſpials may erre, either through paſſion or affection, as it
happened in the Heluetian warre. If therefore the vſe and benefit, which prudent
and wiſe commanders made of this diligence, or the misfortune which the
want of this knowledge brought vpon the ignorant, haue any authoritie to perſwade
a circumſpect care herein, this little that hath beene ſpoken may be ſufficient,
for this point.
               
               
                  THE FOVRTH OBSERVATION.
                  
                     THe ſouldiers which Caeſar ſent to relieue Bibrax,Slingers with their arte and vſe. were Archers of
Creta and Numidia, and ſlingers of the Iles Baleares, which are now
called Maiorica, and Minorica: which kinde of weapon, becauſe it
ſeemeth ridiculous to the ſouldiers of theſe times, whoſe conceites
are held vp with the furie of theſe fierie engines; I will in briefe diſcouer the nature
and vſe of this weapon.
                  The Latines (ſaith Iſodore) called this weapon funda: quod ex ea fundantur
lapides. Plinie attributeth the inuention thereof to the Inſulairs called Baleares.
Florus in his third booke and eighth chapter, ſaith, that theſe Baleares vſed three
ſortes of ſlinges, and no other weapon beſides: for a boy had neuer any meate
giuen him, before he had firſt ſtrooke it, with a ſling. Strabo diſtinguiſheth theſe
three ſortes of ſlings, which the Baleares vſed; and ſaith that they had one ſling
with long raines, which they vſed when they would caſt a farre off: and another
with ſhort raines, which they vſed neere at hand: and the third with raines of a
meane ſiſe, to caſt a reaſonable diſtance. Lipſius ſaith, that in Columna Antonina
at Rome, he obſerued that the Balearean was made with one ſling about his
head, another about his bellie, and the third in his hand; which might be their
ordinarie manner of carrying them. The matter whereof they were made was
threefold, the firſt was hempe or cotton, the ſecond haire, and the third ſinewes:
for of either of theſe ſtuffes, they commonly made them: the forme and faſhion
of a ſling reſembled a platted rope, ſomewhat broade in the middeſt, with an
Ouall compaſſe; and ſo by little and little decreaſing into two thongs or raines.
Their manner of ſlinging was to whirle it twiſe or thriſe about their head, and
ſo to caſt out the bullet. Virgill ſpeaking of Mezentius ſaith,
Ipſe ter adducta circum caput egit habena.
But Vegetius preferreth that skill, which caſt the bullet with once turning it about
the head. In Suidas we find, that theſe Baleares did commonly caſt a ſtone
of a pound waight, which agreeth to theſe dames in Caeſar, fundas, librales. The
leaden bullets are mentioned by Saluſt, in the warre with Iugurth; and by Liuie,
where he ſaith, that the Conſull prouided great ſtore of arrowes, of bullets,
and of ſmall ſtones to be caſt with ſlings. This weapon was in requeſt amongſt
diuers nations, as well in regard of the readines, & eaſie reiterating of the blow,
as alſo for that the bullet fledde verie farre, with great violence: the diſtance

which they could eaſily reach with their ſling, is expreſſed in this verſe,
Fundum Varro vocat, quem poſsis mittere funda.
Which Vegetius interpreteth to be 600 foote:Lib. 2. Their violence vvas ſuch, as the
ſame author affirmeth in his firſt booke and ſixteenth chapter, that neither helmet,
gaberdine, nor corſelet could beare out the blow; but he that was hit with
a ſling, was ſlaine ſine inuidia ſanguinis, as he ſaith in the ſame place. Lucrece,
Ouid, and Lucan, three of the Latine Poets ſaie, that a bullet skilfully caſt
out of a ſling,Lib. 2. natu: questions. went with ſuch violence that it melted as it flew: vvhereof Seneca
giueth this reaſon, motion (ſaith he) doth extenuate the aire, and that extenuation
or ſubtilitie doth inflame: and ſo a bullet caſt out of a ſling melteth as it
flieth. But howſoeuer, Diodorus Siculus affirmeth, that theſe Balearean ſlingers
brake both target, headpiece, or any other armour vvhatſoeuer.
                  There are alſo two other ſorts of ſlings, the one mentioned by Liuie; and the
other by Vegetius: that in Liuie is called Ceſtrophendo, vvhich caſt a ſhort arrowe
with a long thicke head: the other in Vegetius, is called fuſtibalus, vvhich
was a ſling made of a coard and a ſtaffe. But let this ſuffice for ſlinges and ſlingers,
vvhich were reckoned amongſt their light armed ſouldiers, and vſed chieflie
in aſſaulting, and defending townes, and fortreſſes, vvhere the heauie armed
ſouldiers could not come to buckle; and preſent the place of our Hargebuſiers,
which in their proper nature, are leuis armaturae milites, although more terrible
then thoſe of ancient times.
               
            
            
               CHAP. V.
               
                  Caeſar confronted the Belgae in forme of battell, but
without any blow giuen: the Belgae attempt the
paſſing of the riuer Axona; but in vaine, and
to their loſſe: they conſult of breaking
vp the warre.
               
               
                  CAESAR at the firſt reſolued not to giue them battell,Caeſar. as well
in regard of their multitude, as the generall fame and opinion
conceiued of their valour: notwithſtanding he daily made triall
by light skirmiſhes with his horſemen, what the enemy could do,
and what his owne men durſt doe. And when he found that his
men were nothing inferiour to the Belgae, he choſe a conuenient
place before his campe and put his Armie in battell: the banke
where he was incamped riſing ſomewhat from a plaine leuell, was no larger then
would ſuffice the front of the battell; the two ſides were ſteepe, and the front roſe a
ſlope by little & little, vntill it came againe to a plaine, where the legions were imbattailed.
And leaſt the enemie abounding in multitude, ſhould circumuent his men
and charge them in flanke as they were fighting, he drew an ouerthwart ditch behind
his Armie, from one ſide of the hill to the other, 600 paces in length; the ends wherof

he fortified with bulwarkes, and placed therein ſtore of engines: and leauing in his
campe the two legions which he had laſt inrolled in Lombardie, that they might bee
readie to be drawne forth when there ſhould neede any ſuccour, he imbattailed his other
ſixe legions in the front of the hill, before his campe. The Belgae alſo bringing
forth their power, confronted the Romans in order of battell. There laie between both
the Armies a ſmall Mariſh, ouer which the enemie expected that Caeſar ſhould haue
paſſed; and Caeſar on the other ſide, attended to ſee if the Belgae would come ouer,
that his men might haue charged them in that troubleſome paſſage. In the meane
time the Caualrie on both ſides incountered betweene the two battels, and after long
expectation on either ſide, neither partie aduenturing to paſſe ouer, Caeſar hauing got
the better in the skirmiſh betweene the horſemen, thought it ſufficient for that time,
both for the incouraging of his owne men, and the conteſting of ſo great an Army; and
therefore he conuaied all his men againe into their campe. From that place the enemy
immediately tooke his way to the riuer Axona, which laie behinde the Romans campe,
and there finding foordes they attempted to paſse ouer part of their forces, to the ende
they might either take the fortreſse which Q. Titurius kept, or to breake downe the
bridge, or to ſpoile the territories of the ſtate of Rheimes, and cut off the Romans from
prouiſion of corne. Caeſar hauing aduertiſement thereof from Titurius, tranſported
ouer the riuer by the bridge all his horſemen and light armed Numidians, with his
ſlingers and archers, and marched with them himſelfe▪ the conflict was hoat in that
place, the Romans charging their enemies as they were troubled in the water, ſlewe
a great number of them; the reſt like deſperate perſons, aduenturing to paſse ouer
vpon the dead carkaſes of their fellowes, were beaten backe by force of weapons: and
the horſemen incompaſſed ſuch as had firſt got ouer the water, and ſlewe euerie man
of them.
               When the Belgae perceiued themſelues fruſtrated of their hopes, of winning Bibrax,
of paſsing the riuer, and of drawing the Romans into places of diſaduantage, and that
their owne prouiſions began to faile them: they called a councell of war, wherein they
reſolued, that it was beſt for the ſtate in generall, and for euerie man in particular,
to breake vp their campe, and to returne home vnto their own houſes: and into whoſe
confines or territories ſoeuer, the Romans ſhould firſt enter to depopulate and waste
them in hoſtile maner, that thither they ſhould haſten from al parts, and there to giue
them battell, to the end they might rather trie the matter in their own countrie, then
abroad in a ſtrange and vnknowne place; and haue their owne houſhold prouiſion alwaies
at hand to maintaine them. And this the rather was concluded, for as much as
they had intelligence, that Diuitiacus with a great power of the Hedui, approched
neare to the borders of the Bellouaci, who, in that regard, made haſte homeward to
defend their country.
               
                  THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
                  
                     FIrſt we may obſerue the Arte, which he vſed to counteruaile the
ſtrength of ſo great a multitude, by chooſing out ſo conuenient a
place, which was no broader in front then would ſuffice the front of
his battell; and hauing both the ſides of the hill ſo ſteepe, that the

enemy could not aſcende nor clime vp, but to their own ouerthrow; hee made
the backe part of the hil ſtrong by Art, & ſo placed his ſoldiors as it were in the
gate of a fortreſſe, where they might either iſſue out, or retire at their pleaſure.
Whereby it appeareth how much he preferred ſecuritie and ſafetie before the
vaine opinion of foole-hardie reſolution, which ſauoreth of Barbariſme rather
then of true wiſedome: for he euer thought it great gaine, to looſe nothing; and
the day brought alwaies good fortune, that deliuered vp the army ſafe vnto the
euening; attending, vntil aduantage had laid ſure principles of victory: and yet
Caeſar was neuer thought a coward.
                  And now it appeareth, what vſe hee made by paſsing his army ouer the riuer,
and attending the enemie on the further ſide, rather then on the ſide of the
ſtate of Rheimes: for by that meanes he brought to paſſe, that whatſoeuer the
enemie ſhould attempt in any part or quarter of the lande, his forces were readie
to trouble their proceedings; as it happened in their attempt of Bibrax:
& yet notwithſtanding, he loſt not the opportunitie of making ſlaughter of thē,
as they paſſed ouer the riuer. For by the benefitte of the bridge which hee had
fortified, he tranſported what forces he woulde, to make heade againſt them,
as they paſſed ouer; and ſo hee tooke what aduantage either ſide of the riuer
coulde affoord him.
               
               
                  THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
                  
                     ANd heere the reader may not maruel, if when the hils are in labour,
they bring forth but a mouſe; for how ſoone is the courage of this
huge army abated? or what did it attempt worthy ſuch a multitude?
or anſwerable to the report which was bruted of their valour? But
beeing haſtely caried together by the violence of paſsion, were as quickly diſperſed
vpon the ſight of an enemy, which is no ſtrange effect of a ſuddaine humour.
For as in nature all violent motions are of ſhort continuance, and the
durabilitie, or laſting qualitie of all actions, proceedeth from a ſlowe and
temperate progreſsion; ſo the reſolutions of the minde that are caried with
an vntemperate violence, and ſauour ſo much of heat and paſsion, do vaniſh
awaie euen with the ſmoake thereof, and bring forth nothing but leaſurable
repentaunce: and therefore it were no ill counſell for men of ſuch natures,
to qualifie their haſtie reſolutions, with a miſtruſtfull lingering, that when
their iudgement is well informed of the cauſe, they may proceed to a ſpeedie
execution.
                  But that which moſt bewraieth their indiſcreet intemperāce, in the hote purſuit
of this enterpriſe, is, that before they had ſcarce ſeene the enemy, or had
oportunity to conteſt him in open field, their victual began to faile them: for
their mindes were ſo caried away with the conceite of warre, that they had no
leiſure to prouide ſuch neceſſaries, as are the ſtrength and ſinewe of the warre:
It was ſufficient for euery particular man, to be knowne for a ſoldiour in ſo honorable
an action, referring other matters in the care to the ſtate. The ſtates

in like manner thought it inough to furniſh out forty or fiftie thouſand men a
peece, to diſcharge their oath, and to ſaue their hoſtages, committing other requiſites
to the generall care of the confederacie: which, beeing directed by as
vnskilful gouernours, neuer looked further then the preſent multitude, which
ſeemed ſufficient to ouerthrow the Romaine Empire. And thus each man relied
vpon an others care, and ſatiſfied himſelfe with the preſent garbe; ſo many
men of all ſortes and qualities, ſo many helmets and plumed creſts, ſuch ſtrife
and emulation, what ſtate ſhould ſeeme in greateſt forwardneſſe; were motiues
ſufficient to induce euerie man to go, without further inquiry, how they ſhould
goe. And herein the care of a Generall ought eſpecially to bee ſeene, conſidering
the weakeneſſe of particular iudgements, that hauing the liues of ſo many
men depending altogither vpon his prouidence, and ingaged in the defence of
their ſtate and country; he do not faile in theſe maine points of diſcipline, which
are the pillars of all warlike deſsignes. To conclude this point, let vs learne by
their errour, ſo to carrie a matter (eſpecially of that conſequence) that we make
it not much worſe by ill handeling it, then it was before we firſt toooke it to our
charge; as it heere happened to the Belgae. For their tumultuous armes ſorted
to no other ende, then to giue Caeſar iuſt occaſion to make warre vpon them,
with ſuch aſſurance of victorie, that he made ſmall account of that which was
to follow, in regard of that which had already happened: conſidering that hee
ſhould not in all likelihood, meet with the like ſtrength againe, in the continuance
of that warre. And this was not onely grauius bellum ſucceſsori tradere, as it
often falleth out in the courſe of a long continued warre; but to drawe a dangerous
warre vpon their heads, that otherwiſe might haue liued in peace.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VI.
               
                  The Belgae brake vp their Campe; and as they
returne home, are chaſed and ſlaughtered
by the Romaines.
               
               
                  THIS generall reſolution beeing entertained by the conſent
of the whole Councell of warre;Caeſar. they departed out of their
Campe with a great noiſe and tumult, without any order (as
it ſeemed) or gouernement: euerie man preſsing to bee formost
on his iourney in ſuch a turbulent manner, that they ſeemed
all to run away: Whereof Caeſar hauing notice by his ſpies,
and miſtruſting ſome practiſe, not as yet perceiuing the reaſon
of their departure, he kept his armie within his Campe. In the dawning of the
day, vpon certaine intelligence of their departure, hee ſent firſt his horſemen to
ſtaie the rerewarde, commaunding Labienus to followe after with three legions;
theſe ouertaking the Belgae, and chaſing them manie miles, ſlewe a great number
of them: And while the rerewarde ſtaied, and valiantlie receiued the charge of
the Romaines, the vantguarde being out of danger, and vnder no gouernment,

aſſoone as they heard the alarum behind them, brake out of their rankes and betooke
themſelues to flight; and ſo the Romaines ſlewe them as long as the ſunne gaue them
light to purſue them; and then ſounding a retrait, they returned to their campe.
               
                  OBSERVATION.
                  
                     IT hath beene an olde rule amongſt ſoldiours, that a great and negligent
errour committed by an enemy, is to be ſuſpected as a pretence
to trecherie. We reade of Fuluius a Legate in the Romaine armie,
lying in Tuſcanie, the Conſul being gon to Rome to performe ſome
publike dutie: the Tuſcanes tooke occaſion by his abſence to trie whether they
could drawe the Romaines into any inconuenience; and placing an ambuſcado
neere vnto their campe, ſent certaine ſoldiours, attired like ſhepheardes, with
droues of cattell to paſſe in view of the Romaine army, who handled the matter
ſo, that they came euen to the rampier of the campe; whereat the Legate wondering
as at a thing void of reaſon, kept himſelfe quiet vntill he had diſcouered
their treacherie, and ſo made fruſtrate their intent: In like maner Caeſar not
perſuaded that men ſhould bee ſo heedles, to carry a retrait in that diſorderly
and tumultuous maner, would not diſcampe his men to take the oportunity of
that aduantage, vntill he had found that to be true, which in all reaſon was vnlikely.
And thus 296000. Belgae were chaſed and ſlaughtered by three legions
of the Romaines, for want of gouernment and order in their departure.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VII.
               
                  Caeſar followeth after the Belgae into the Countrey
of the Sueſſones; and there beſiegeth
Noyon:Nouiodunum.
               
               
                  THE next day after their departure,Caeſar. before they could recouer thē
                  ſelues
of their feare and flight; or had time to put thēſelues againe in
breath: Caeſar as it were continuing still the chaſe and victorie,
led his armie into the countrey of theSoyſſons. Sueſſones, the next borderers
vnto the men of Rheimes: and after a long iourney came vnto
Nouiodunum, a towne of good importance, which he attempted to
take by ſurpriſe, as he paſſed along by it. For he vnderſtoode, that it was altogether
vnfurniſhed of defenſiue prouiſion, hauing no forces within to defende it: but in regard
of the breadth of the ditch and heigth of the wall, he was for that time diſappointed
of his purpoſe: and therefore hauing fortified his campe, hee began to make
preparation for a ſiege. The night following the whole multitude of the Sueſſones,
that had eſcaped by flight, were receiued into the towne: howbeit when the Vineae
were with great expedition brought vnto the wall, the mount raiſed, and the turrets
built; the Galles being amazed at the highnes of the workes, ſuch as they had

neuer ſeene nor heard of before, and the ſpeede which was made in the diſpatch thereof,
ſent ambaſſadours to Caeſar, to treate of giuing vp the towne, and by the mediation
of the men of Rheimes obtained their ſuite.
               
                  THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
                  
                     IN this relation we may obſerue the induſtrious art, which the Romans
vſed in aſſaulting, and taking holdes and townes; wherein we find three
ſortes of engines deſcribed, Vinea, Agger, and Turres.
                  Vinea is thus deſcribed by Vegetius:* Lib. 4. A vinea or vine deſcribed. A little ſtrong built houſe or houell,
made of light wood, that it might be remoued with greateſt eaſe; the roofe was
ſupported with diuers pillars of a foote ſquare, vvherof the formoſt were 8 foot
high, and the hindmoſt 6; and betweene euerie one of theſe pillars, there was
5 foot diſtance: it was alwaies made with a double roofe; the firſt or lower roofe
was of thicke plankes, and the vpper roofe of hurdles, to breake the force of
a waight, without further ſhaking or diſioyning the building: the ſides were
likewiſe walled with hurdles, the better to defend the ſoldiers that vvere vnder it:
the vvhole length vvas about 16 foot, and the breadth 7: the vpper roofe vvas
commonly couered vvith greene or raw hides, to keepe it from burning, Many
of theſe houels vvere ioined together in ranke, vvhen they went about to vndermine
a vval: the higher end was put next vnto the wal, that all the waights which
vvere throwen vpon it might eaſily tumble down, without any great hurt to the
engine: the foure ſides and groundſils, had in euery corner a vvheele, & by them
they vvere driuen to any place as occaſion ſerued: the chiefeſt vſe of them vvas
to couer and defend the ſouldiers, as they vndermined or ouerthrew a vval. This
engine vvas called Vinea, which ſignifieth a vine, for it ſheltered ſuch as vvere
vnder the roofe thereof, as a vine couereth the place vvhere it groweth.
                  Agger;Agger or mount. vvhich vve call a mount, is deſcribed in diuers hiſtories to be a hil or
eleuation made of earth and other ſubſtance, vvhich by little and little was raiſed
forward, vntil it approched neare vnto the place, againſt which it vvas built; that
vpon this mount they might erect fortreſſes and turrets, and ſo fight with an aduantage
of height. The matter of this mount, vvas earth and ſtones, fagots, and
timber. Ioſephus ſaith, that at the ſiege of Ieruſalem, the Romans cut downe al
the trees vvithin 11 mile compaſſe, for matter and ſtuffe to make a mount. The
ſides of this Agger vvere of timber to keepe in the looſe matter; the forepart
which was towards the place of ſeruice, was open without any timber worke: for
on that part they ſtil raiſed it & brought it nearer the wals. That which was built
at Maſſilia vvas 80 foot high, and that at Auaricum 80 foot high and 30 foote
broad. Ioſephus and Egeſippus writ, that there was a fortreſſe in Iudea, 300 cubites
high, which Sulla purpoſing to vvin by aſſault, raiſed a mount 200 cubites
high; and vpon it, he built a caſtle of ſtone 50 cubites high, and 50 cubites
broad; and vpon the ſaid caſtell he erected a turret of 60 cubites in hight, and
ſo took the fortreſſe. The Romans oftentimes raiſed theſe mounts in the mouth
of a hauen, and commonly to ouer-toppe a towne, that ſo they might fight with
much aduantage.
                  
                     
Amongſt other engines,Towers or Turrets deſcribed. in vſe amongſt the Romans, their moueable Turrets
were verie famous; for they were built in ſome ſafe place out of danger, and
with wheeles put vnder them, were driuen to the walles of the towne. Theſe Turrets
were of two ſortes, either great or little: the leſſer ſort are deſcribed, by Vitruuius,
to be 60 cubites high; and the ſquare ſide 17 cubites; the breadth at the
top was a fift part, of the breadth at the baſe; and ſo they ſtood ſure without any
danger of falling: the corner pillars were at the baſe, 9 inches ſquare; & 6 inches
at the top: there were commonly 10 ſtories in theſe little turrets, & windowes in
euerie ſtorie. The greater ſort of towers were 120 cubites high, and the ſquare
ſide was 24 cubites, the breadth at the top was a fift part of the haſe; and in euerie
one of theſe were commonly 200 ſtories. There was not one and the ſame
diſtance kept betweene the ſtories, for the loweſt commonly was 7 cubites, and
12 inches high: the higheſt ſtorie 5 cubites, and the reſt 4 cubites, and a third.
In euerie one of theſe ſtories, were ſouldiers and engines, ladders, and caſting
bridges, by which they got vpon the wall and entered the towne. The forepart
of theſe Turrets were couered with yron, and wet couerings, to ſaue them from
fire. The ſouldiers that remoued the tower to and fro, were alwaies within the
ſquare thereof, and ſo they ſtood out of danger. The new water-worke by broken
Wharfe in London much reſembleth one of theſe towers.
               
               
                  THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
                  
                     VPon the building of theſe mightie engines, it was no maruell if the
Sueſſones ſubmitted themſelues to ſuch powerfull induſtrie. For
whatſoeuer is ſtrange and vnuſuall, doth much affrighte the ſpirits
of an enemie, and breede a motion of diſtruſt and diffidencie,
when as they finde themſelues ignorant of ſuch warlike practiſes: for noueltie
alwaies breedeth wonder, in as much as the true reaſons and cauſes being vnknowen,
we apprehend it, as diuers from the vſuall courſe of thinges, and ſo
ſtand gazing at the ſtrangeneſſe thereof: and wonder as it addeth worth to the
noueltie; ſo it inferreth diffidencie, and ſo conſequently feare, the vtter enemie
of martiall valour.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VIII.
               
                  Caeſar carieth his Armie to the Territories of the
Bellouaci, Ambiani and the Neruij.
               
               
                  CAESAR taking for pledges the chiefeſt of their cittie,Caeſar. vpon the
deliuerie of all their Armes, receiued the Sueſsones to mercie: and
from thence led his Armie againſt the Bellouaci;The Bellouaci taken to mercie. who hauing conuaied
both themſelues and their goods into the towne, called Bratiſpantium,
and vnderſtanding that Caeſar was come within fiue mile
of the place, all the elder ſort came foorth to meete him, ſignifying

their ſubmiſsion, by their lamentable demeanour. For theſe Diuitiacus became a
mediator (who after the Belgae had broken vp their campe, had diſmiſſed his Heduan
forces and was returned to Caeſar) the Hedui (ſaith he) haue alwaies found in the
Bellouaci, a faithfull and friendly diſpoſition to their ſtate: and if they had not beene
betraied by their nobilitie, (who made them beleeue, that the Hedui were brought
in bondage by the Romaines, and ſuffered all villanie and deſpight at their handes,)
they had neuer withdrawne themſelues from the Hedui, nor conſented to conſpire
againſt the Romaines. The authors of this counſel, perceiuing into what great miſerie
they had brought their countrey, were fled into Britanie: wherfore not onelie
the Bellouaci, but the Hedui alſo in their behalfe beſought him to vſe his clemencie
towardes them. Caeſar in regarde of the Hedui and Diuitiacus, promiſed to receiue
them to mercie; but foraſmuch as the ſtate was verie great and populous, hee demanded
600. hoſtages: Which being deliuered, and their armour brought out of the
towne,The Ambiani yeeld vp themſelues. he marched from thence into the coaſt of the Ambiani, who without further
lingering, gaue both themſelues and al that they had into his power. Vpon theſe
bordered the Neruij, of whom Caeſar found this much by inquirie, that there was
no recourſe of marchants vnto them; neither did they ſuffer any wine, or what thing
elſe might tende to riot, to bee brought into their countrey: for they were perſuaded,
that by ſuch thinges their courage was much abated, and their vertue weakened.
Further, he learned that theſe Neruij were a ſauage people, and of great valour,
often accuſing the reſt of the Belgae, for yeelding their neckes to the Romaine
yoake, openly affirming, that they would neither ſende ambaſſadors nor take peace
vpon any condition.
               Caeſar hauing marched three daies iourney in their countrey,The Neruij. he vnderſtood that
the riuerSābre neere Namours. Sabis was not paſt ten miles from his campe; and that on the further ſide
of this riuer, all the Neruij were aſſembled together, and there attended the comming
of the Romaines: with them were ioined the Attrebatij, and Veromandui,
whom they had perſuaded to abide the ſame fortune of warre with them. Beſides,
they expected a power from the Aduatici; the women and ſuch as were vnmeete
for the fielde, they beſtowed in a place vnacceſſible for any armie, by reaſon of fens
and bogs, and mariſhes. Vpon this intelligence, Caeſar ſent his diſcouerers and Centurions
before, to chooſe out a fit place to incampe in.
               Now whereas many of the ſurrendred Belgae, and other Galles were continuallie
in the Romaine army, certaine of theſe (as it was afterward known by the captiues)
obſeruing the order which the Romaines vſed in marching, came by night to the
Neruij and tolde them, that betweene euerie legion went a great ſort of cariages;
and that it was no matter of difficultie, aſſoone as the firſt legion was come into the
campe, and the other legions yet a great way off, to ſet vpon them, vpon a ſuddaine,
before they were disburdened of their cariages; and ſo to ouerthrowe them: which
legion being thus cut off, and their ſtuffe taken, the rest would haue ſmal courage to
ſtande againſt them. It much furthered this aduice, that, foraſmuch as the Neruij
were not able to make any power of horſe, that they might the better reſiſt the caualrie
of their borderers, whenſoeuer they made any roade into their marches; their
manner was to cut yong trees halfe aſunder, & bowing the tops down to the ground,
plaſhed the boughes in breadth, and with thornes and briers planted between them,
they made them ſo thicke, that it was impoſsible to ſee through them, ſo hard it was
to enter or paſſe through them; ſo that, when by this occaſion, the paſſage of the Romaine
army muſt needes be hindred, the Neruij thought the foreſaid counſell not to
be neglected.
               
                  
                  
                  
                     
                        CAESARS march where in euery Legion had his Cariadges in front
                  
                  
                  
                     
                        CAESARS march where the Enemy was neerer at hand
                  
               
               
                  
                  
The place which the Romaines choſe to incampe in, was a hill, of like leuell from
the top to the bottome, at the foot whereof ran the riuer Sabis: and with the like leuell,
on the other ſide, roſe an other hill directly againſt this, to the quantity of 200.
paces; the bottom whereof was plaine and open, and the vpper part ſo thicke with
wood, that it could not eaſilie be looked into: within theſe woods the Neruians kept
themſelues cloſe, and in the open grounde, by the riuer ſide were onely ſeene a fewe
troupes of horſe, and the riuer in that place was about 3. foot deepe,
               Caeſar ſending his horſemen before, followed after with all his power; but the maner
of his march differed from the report which was brought to the Neruii: for inaſmuch
as the enemy was at hand; Caeſar (as his cuſtom was) led 6. legions alwaies in
areadines, without burthen or cariage of any thing, but their armes: after them hee
placed the impediments of the whole army. And the two legions which were laſt inrolled
were a rereward to the army, and garded the ſtuffe.
               
                  OBSERVATIONS.
                  
                     THis trecherous practiſe of the ſurrendred Belgae, hath fortunatelie
diſcouered the maner of Caeſars march,The maner of the Romaine march. as well in ſafe paſſages, as
in dangerous and ſuſpected places: which is a point of no ſmal conſequence
in martiall diſcipline, being ſubiect to ſo many inconueniences,
and capable of the greateſt arte that may be ſhewed in managing a war.
Concerning the diſcreet cariage of a march;The two reſpects which Caeſar had in ordering a march. 1 Safety. 2 Conueniēcy by this circumſtance it may bee
gathered, that Caeſar principally reſpected ſafetie: and ſecondly conueniency.
If the place affoorded a ſecure paſſage, and gaue no ſuſpicion of hoſtilitie, hee
was content in regarde of conueniency, to ſuffer euery legion to haue the ouerſight
of their particular cariages, and to inſert them among the troupes, that euery
man might haue at hand ſuch neceſſaries as were requiſite, either for their
priuate vſe or publike diſcipline. But if he were in danger of any ſodain attempt,
or ſtood in hazard to be impeached by an enemy; hee then omitted conuenient
diſpoſition, in regard of particular vſe, as diſaduantageous to their ſafety: & caried
his legions in that readines, that if they chanced to be ingaged by an enemy,
they might without any alteration of their march, or incumbrance of their cariages
receiue the charge, in that forme of battell, as was beſt approoued by their
military rules, & the ancient practiſe of their fortunate progenitors.
                  The old Romains obſerued likewiſe the ſame reſpects, for in vnſafe & ſuſpected
places,Agmen quadratum. they caried their troupes agmine quadrato, which as Liuie ſeemeth to
note, was free from all cariage and impediments, which might hinder them in
any ſodaine alarum. Neither doth that ofLib. 8. de bel. Gall. Hirtius any way cōtradict this interpretation,
where he ſaith, that Caeſar ſo diſpoſed his troupes againſt the Bellouaci,
that 3. legions marched in front, & after them came al the cariages, to which
the 10. legion ſerued as a rereward; & ſo they marched, pene agmine quadrato.
                     60. Epiſtle.Seneca in like maner noteth the ſafety of agmen quadratū, where he ſaith, that
where an enemie is expected, wee ought to march agmine quadrato, readie to
fight. The moſt material conſequence of theſe places alleadged is, that as ofte
as they ſuſpected anie onſet or charge, their order in a march little or nothing

differed from their vſuall maner of imbattailing; and therefore it was called agmen
quadratum, or a ſquare march, inaſmuch as it kept the ſame diſpoſition of
parts, as were obſerued in quadrata Acie. For that triple forme of imbattailing,
which the Romaines generally obſerued in their fights, hauing reſpect to the diſtances
between each battel, contained almoſt an equal dimenſion of front and
file: and ſo it made Aciem quadratam; and when it marched, Agmen quadratum.
                  
                  Polybius expreſſeth the ſame in effect,Lib. 6. as often as the place required circumſpection;
but altereth it ſomewhat in regard of the cariages: for he ſaith that in
time of danger, eſpecially where the countrey was plaine and Chāpion, and gaue
ſpace & free ſcope to cleere themſelues, vpon anie accident, the Romains marched
in a triple battel, of equal diſtāce one behind an other, euery battel hauing
his ſeueral cariages in front: And if they were by chance attacked by an enemy,
they turned themſelues according to the oportunity of the place, either to the
right or left hande, and ſo placing their cariages on the one ſide of their army,
they ſtood imbattailed ready to receiue the charge.
                  The contrary forme of marching, where the place afforded more ſecurity, &
gaue ſcope to conueniency,Agmenlongū
                      they named agmen longum; when almoſt euery maniple
or order, had their ſeueral cariages attending vpon them, & ſtroue to keep
that way which they found moſt eaſie, both for thēſelues & their impediments.
Which order of a march, as it was more commodius then the former, in regard
of particularity, ſo was it vnſafe and dangerous, where the enemy was expected:
And therfore Caeſar much blamed Sabinus and Cotta, for marching, when they
were deluded by Ambiorix,Lib. 5. de bel. Gallico. 
                     longiſsimo agmine; as though they had receiued
their aduertiſements from a friend, and not from an enemy.
                  And albeit our moderne wars are far different, in quality, frō them of ancient
times;The vſe that may be made of this in our moderne wars yet in this point of diſcipline, they cannot haue a more perfect direction,
then that which the Romaines obſerued, as the two poles of their motions, ſafety
and conueniency: whereof the firſt dependeth chiefely vpon the prouident
diſpoſition of the leaders; and the other wil eaſily follow on, as the commodity
of euerie particular ſhal giue occaſion.
                  Concerning ſafety in place of danger, what better courſe can bee taken then
that maner of imbattailing, which ſhall be thought moſt conuenient, if an enemy
were preſent to confront them? for a well ordered march muſt either carie
the perfect forme of a battell, or containe the diſtinct principles and elements
thereof, that with little alteration it may receiue that perfection of ſtrength,
which the fitteſt diſpoſition can affoord it. Firſt therefore, a prudent and circumſpect
leader, that deſireth to frame a ſtrong and orderly march, is diligentlie to
obſerue the nature and vſe of each weapon in his army, howe they may be placed
for greateſt vſe and aduantage, both in reſpect of their different and concurring
qualities, as alſo in regard of the place wherein they are managed: and
this knowledge will conſequentlie inferre the beſt and exacteſt diſpoſition of
imbattailing, as the ſaid forces are capable of; which if it may be obſerued in a
march, is no way to be altered. But if this exactnes of imbattailing wil not admit
conuenient cariage of ſuch neceſſarie adiuncts, as pertaine to an armie; the
inconuenience is to bee relieued, with as little alteration from that rule, as in

a warie iudgment ſhall be found expedient: that albeit the forme be ſomewhat
changed; yet the principles and ground wherein their ſtrength and ſafetie conſiſteth,
maie ſtill be retained.
                  Neither can any man well deſcend to more particular precepts in this point:
he may exemplifie the practiſes of manie great and experienced commanders;
what ſort of weapon marched in front, and what in the rereward, in what part
of the Armie the Munition marched, and where the reſt of the cariage was beſtowed,
according as their ſeuerall iudgments thought moſt expedient, in the
particular nature of their occurrences. But the iſſue of all will fall out thus; that
he that obſerued this rule before preſcribed, did ſeldome miſcarrie through an
vnſafe march. Let a good Martialiſt well know their proper vſe in that diuerſity
of weapons in his Armie; how they are ſeruiceable or diſaduantageous, in this
or that place, againſt ſuch or ſuch an enemie: and he will ſpeedily order his battell,
diſpoſe of his march, and beſtow his cariages, as ſhall beſt fall out both for
his ſafetie, and conueniencie.
                  Caeſars cuſtome was, to ſend his Caualrie and light armed footmen, before
the body of his Armie, both to diſcouer and impeach an enemie; for theſe
troupes were nimble in motion and fit for ſuch ſeruices: but if the danger were
greater in the rereward then in the front, the horſemen marched in the tayle of
the Armie, and gaue ſecuritie where there was moſt cauſe of feare. But if it happened
that they were found vnfit to make good the ſeruice in that place, as oftentimes
it fell out, and eſpecially in Africa againſt the Numidians: he then remoued
them, as he beſt found it conuenient, and brought his legionarie ſouldiers,
which were the ſinewes and ſtrength of his forces, and marched continually
in the bulke of the Armie, to make good that which his horſemen could not
performe. And thus he altered the antique preſcription, and vniformitie of cuſtome,
according as he found himſelfe beſt able to diſaduantage an enemie, or
make waie to victorie.
               
            
            
               CHAP. IX.
               
                  The Romans begin to fortifie their campe: but are
interrupted by the Neruij. Caeſar maketh haſte,
to prepare his forces to battell.
               
               
                  THE Roman horſemen,Caeſar. with the ſlingers and archers, paſsed ouer
the riuer, and incountered the Caualrie of the enemie: who
at firſt retired backe to their companies in the wood, and from
thence ſallied out againe vpon them: but the Romans durſt not
purſue them further then the plaine and open ground: in the
meane time the ſixe legions that were in front, hauing their
worke meaſured out vnto them, began to fortifie their campe.
But aſſoone as the Neruij perceiued their former cariages to be come in ſight, which

was the time appointed amongst them to giue the charge, as they ſtood imbattailed
within the thicket, ſo they ruſhed out with all their forces, and aſſaulted the Roman
horſemen: which being eaſily beaten backe, the Neruij ranne downe to the riuer,
with ſuch an incredible ſwiftneſse, that they ſeemed at the ſame inſtant of time to bee
in the woods at the riuer, and charging the legions on the other ſide: For with the
ſame violence, hauing paſſed the riuer, they ranne vp the hill to the Roman campe,
where the ſouldiers were buſied in their intrenchment. Caeſar had all partes to plaie
at one inſtant, the flagge to be hung out, by which they gaue the ſouldiers warning to
take armes, the battell to be proclaimed by ſound of trumpet, the ſouldiers to be recalled
from their worke, and ſuch as were gone farre off to get turfe and matter for the
rampier, to bee ſent for; the battell to be ordered, his men to be incouraged, and the
ſigne of battell to be giuen: the moſt of which were cut off by ſhortneſſe of time, and
the ſudden aſſault of the enemie.
               
                  THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
                  
                     AS the Romans excelled all other nations in many good cuſtomes;The deſcription of the Roman campe, with all the parts belonging vnto it ſo
eſpecially in their campe-diſcipline, they ſtroue to be ſingular: for it
ſeemed rather an Academie, or a citie of ciuill gouernment, then a
campe of ſouldiers: ſo carefull were they both for the ſafetie, and skilfull experience
of their men at armes. For touching the firſt, they neuer ſuffered their
ſouldiers to lodge one night without a campe; wherein they were incloſed with
ditch and a rampier, as in a walled towne: neither was it any newe inuention or
late found out cuſtome in their ſtate, but in vſe amongſt the auncient Romans,
and in the time of their kinges; their manner of incamping was included within
theſe circumſtances.
                  The Centurions,The Centurions made choiſe of the place. that went before to chooſe out a conuenient place, hauing
found a fit ſituation for their campe, firſt aſſigned the ſtanding for the Emperours
pauillion, which was commonly in the moſt eminent place of the campe;
from whence he might eaſily ouerview all the other partes, or any alarum or
ſignum pugnae, might from thence be diſcouered to all quarters. This pauillion
was knowne by the name of Praetorium,
                     The Praetorium. for as much as amongſt the auncient
Romans the Generall of their Armie was called Praetor: in this place where the
Praetorium was to be erected, they ſtucke vp a white enſigne, and from it they
meaſured euerie waie 100 foote, and ſo they made a ſquare containing 200 foot
in euerie ſide, the Area, or content whereof, was almoſt an acre of ground: the
forme of the Praetorium was round and high, being as eminent among the other
tentes, as a temple is amongſt the priuate buildings of a cittie: and therefore
Ioſephus compareth it to a church. In this Praetorium was their Tribunal or
chaire of the eſtate, and the place of diuination, which they called Augurale,
with other appendices of maieſtie and authoritie.
                  The Generals tent being thus placed,The lodging of the legions. they conſidered which ſide of the pauillion
laie moſt commodious for forrage and water, and on that ſide they lodged
the legions, euery legion deuided one from another by a ſtreet or lane of 50


                     
                        
                        
                     


                     
                     
foote in breadth; and according to the degree of honour, that euerie legion
had in the Armie, ſo were they lodged in the campe, either in the midſt which
was counted moſt honourable, or towardes the ſides, which was of meaner reputation.
And againe, according to the place of euerie cohort in his legion, ſo
was it lodged nearer the pauillion of the Emperour, towardes the harte of the
campe; and ſo conſequently euerie maniple tooke place in the cohort, diſtinguiſhing
their preheminence, by lodging them either toward the middle or to
the outſideward; according as they diſtinguiſhed the place of their legions,
there went a ſtreete of fiftie in breadth ouerthwart the middeſt of all the legions,
vvhich was called Quintana;Quintana. for that it deuided the fift cohort of euery legion
from the ſixt.
                  Betweene the tentes of the firſt maniples in euerie legion and the Praetorium,
there went a waie of 100 foote in breadth throughout the whole campe; which
was called Principia;Principia. in this place the Tribunes ſate to heare matters of iuſtice;
the ſouldiers exerciſed themſelues at their weapons, and the leaders and chiefe
commanders frequented it as a publike place of meeting; and it was helde for a
reuerent and ſacred place, and ſo kept with a correſpondent decencie. On either
ſide the Emperours pauillion, in a direct line to make euen & ſtraight the vpper
ſide of the Principia,The tentes of the Tribunes. the Tribunes had their tentes pitched, euerie Tribune
confronting the head of the legion whereof he was Tribune: aboue them, towardes
the head of the campe, were the Legates and Treaſurer: the vpper part
of the campe was ſtrengthened with ſome ſelect cohorts and troupes of horſe,
according to the number of legions that were in the Armie.
                  Polybius deſcribing the manner of incamping which the Romans vſed in his
time, when as they had commonly but two legions in their Armie, with as manie
aſſociates, placeth the Ablecti and extraordinarij, which were ſelect bandes
and companies, in the vpper part of the campe; and the aſſociates on the outſides
of the legions.
                  The ditch and the rampier, that compaſſed the whole campe about, was 200
foote diſtant from any tent:The ſpace betweene the tents and the rampier. vvhere of Polybius giueth theſe reaſons; firſt, that
the ſouldiers marching into the campe in battell array, might there diſſolue
themſelues into maniples, centuries, and decuries, without tumult or confuſion:
for order was the thing which they principally reſpected, as the life and
ſtrength of their martiall body. And againe, if occaſion vvere offered to ſallie
out vpon an enemie, they might verie conueniently in that ſpatious roome,
put themſelues into companies and troupes: and if they vvere aſſaulted in the
night, the dartes and fire vvorkes, vvhich the enemie ſhould caſt into their
campe, would little indammage them, by reaſon of the diſtance betweene the
rampier and the tentes.
                  Their tentes were all of skinnes and hides, helde vp with props, and faſtened
with ropes: there were 11 ſouldiers, as Vegetius ſaith, in euerie tent, and that
ſocietie was called Contubernium,
                     Contuberniū. of whom the chiefeſt was named Decanus,
or Caput Contubernij.
                  
                  The ditch and the rampier were made by the legions,The ditch and the rampier. euerie maniple hauing
his part meaſured out, and euerie Centurion ouerſeeing his Centurie; the

approbation of the whole worke belonged to the Tribunes. Their maner of intrenching
was this: the ſoldiors being girt with their ſwords and daggers, digged
the ditch about the campe, which was alwaies 8 foot in breadth at the leaſt,
and as much in depth, caſting the earth thereof inward; but if the enemy were
not farre off, the ditch was alwaies 11. or 15. or 18. foot in latitude, & altitude;
according to the diſcretion of the General: but what ſcantling ſoueer was kept,
the ditch was made directis lateribus, that is, as broad in the bottome as at the
top. The rampier from the brim of the ditch was three foot in heighth, and
ſometimes foure, made after the maner of a wall, with greene turfes cut all to
one meaſure, halfe a foot in thickneſſe, a foot in breadth, and a foot and a halfe
in length. But if the place, wherein they were incamped, would afford no ſuch
turfe; they then ſtrengthened the looſe earth, which was caſt out of the ditch,
with boughs and fagots, that it might be ſtrong and wel faſtened. The rampier
they properly called Agger:
                     Agger. the outſide whereof, which hung ouer the ditch,
they vſed to ſtick with thicke and ſharpe ſtakes, faſtened deep in the mound, that
they might be firme; and theſe for the moſt part were forked ſtakes, which made
the rampier very ſtrong, and not to be aſſaulted but with great difficulty. Varro
ſaith,Vallum. that the front of the rampier thus ſtucke with ſtakes, was called vallum, a
varicando, for that no man could ſtride or get ouer it.
                  The campe had foure gates,Praetoria porta. the firſt was called praetoria porta, which was alwaies
behind the Emperours tent: and this gate did vſually looke either toward
the eaſt, or to the enemy, or that way that the army was to march. The gate on
the other ſide of the campe oppoſite to this,Porta Decumana. was called Porta Decumana a decimis
cohortibus, for the tenth or laſt Cohort of euery legion, was lodged to confront
this gate: by this gate the ſoldiours went out to fetch their wood, their
water, and their forrage, and this waie their offendours were caried to execution.Portae principales. Laeua. Dextra.
The other two gates were called Portae principales, foraſmuch as they
ſtoode oppoſite to either ende of that ſo much reſpected place, which they
called principia, onely diſtinguiſhed by theſe titles, laeua principalis and dextra,
all theſe gates were ſhut with doores, and in ſtanding Campes fortified with
Turrets, vpon which were planted Engines of defence, as Baliſtae, Catapultae,
Tolenones and ſuch like.
                  The Romaines had their ſummer Campes, which they tearmed Aeſtiua, and
their winter Campes,Caſtra Aestiua. which they called Hiberna, or Hibernacula: their ſummer
campes were in like maner differenced, according to the time, which they continued
in thē. For if they remained in a place but a night or two, they called thē
                     Caſtra or Manſiones; but if they continued in them any long time, they called thē
                     Aeſtiuas or Sedes: And theſe were more abſolute, aſwel in regard of their tents, as
of their fortification,Hiberna. then the former, wherein they ſtaied but one night. The other
which they called Hiberna, had greater labor & coaſt beſtowed vpon them,
that they might the better defend them frō the vvinter ſeaſon. Of theſe we read,
that the tents were either thatched with ſtraw, or roofed with boards, & that they
had their armory, hoſpital, & other publike houſes. Theſe cāps haue bin the beginning
of many famous towns, eſpecially whē they continued long in a place,
as oftentimes they did vpon the banks of Euphrates, Danow, & the Rhene. The

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     

                     
                     
                        
                           Porta Proetoria
THE ROMAINE CAMPE
                     

                     
                     
order which they alwaies obſerued in laying out their camp, was ſo vniforme, &
well knowne to the Romaines, that when the Centurions had limited out euery
parte, and marked it with different enſignes and colours, the ſoldiours entered
into it, as into a knowne and familiar Citie: wherein euerie ſocietie or ſmall
contubernie, knewe the place of his lodging: and which is more, euery particular
man coulde aſsigne the proper ſtation of euerie companie, throughout
the whole armie.
                  The vſe and commodity of this incamping,The commodity of this incamping. I briefely touched in my firſt
booke: But if I were worthie any way to commend the excellency thereof to
our moderne ſoldiours, or able by perſwaſion to reſtabliſh the vſe of incamping
in our warres; I woulde ſpare no paines to atchieue ſo great a good, and
vaunt more in the conqueſt of negligence, then if my ſenſe had compaſſed a
new found out meanes; and yet reaſon would deeme it a matter of ſmall difficultie,
to gaine a point of ſuch worth, in the opinion of our men, eſpeciallie
when my diſcourſe ſhall preſent ſecurity to our forces, and honour to our leaders,
maieſtie to our armies, and terrour to our enmies, wonderment to ſtrangers,
and victorie to our nation. But ſloth hath ſuch intereſt in this age, that it
commendeth vaine glory and foole-hardineſſe, contempt of vertue, and deriſion
of good diſcipline, to repugne the deſſignes of honour, and ſo far to ouermaiſter
reaſon, that it ſuffereth not former harmes to beare witneſſe againſt errour,
nor correct the ill atchieuements of ill directions: and therefore ceaſing
to vrge this pointe anie further, I wil leaue it to the careful reſpect of the wiſe.
               
               
                  THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
                  
                     THe fury of the enemy, and their ſodaine aſſault, ſo diſturbed the ceremonies
which the Romaine diſcipline obſerued,The ceremonies which they vſed in their preparation to battel to make the ſoldiours
trulie apprehend the waight and importance of that action,
which might caſt vppon their ſtate either ſoueraignty or bondage;
that they were all for the moſt part omitted; notwithſtanding they are here noted
vnder theſe titles, the firſt was vexillum proponendum, quod erat inſigne cum ad
Arma concurri oporteret: for when the Generall had determined to fight, hee
cauſed a skarlet coate or red flag to bee hung out vpon the top of his tent, that
by it the ſoldiours might be warned, to prepare themſelues for the battell; and
this was the firſt warning they had, which by a ſilent aſpect preſented bloud and
execution to their eyes, as the onlie meanes to worke out their owne ſafetie,
and purchaſe eternall honour. The ſecond was Signum tuba dandum; this warning
was a noiſe of manie trumpets, which they tearmed by the name of claſsicum
a calando, which ſignifieth calling: for after the eie was filled with ſpecies
ſutable to the matter intended; they then haſted to poſſeſſe the eare, and by the
ſenſe of hearing to ſtir vp warlike motions, and fil them with reſolute thoughts,
that no diffident or baſe conceites might take hold of their mindes. The third
was, milites cohortandi, for it was thought conuenient to confirme this valour,
with motiues of reaſon, which is the ſtrength and perfection of al ſuch motions.

the vſe and benefit whereof I ſomewhat inlarged in the Heluetian warre, and
could affoord much more labour to demonſtrate the commoditie of this part,
if my ſpeech might carrie credit in the opinion of our ſouldiers, or be thought
worthie regard to men ſo much addicted to their owne faſhions. The laſt was
ſignum dandum, which, as ſome thinke, was nothing but a word, by which they
might diſtinguiſh and know themſelues from their enemies. Hirtius in the war
of Afrike ſaith, that Caeſar gaue the word Felicitie; Brutus and Caſſius gaue
Libertie; others haue giuen Virtus, Deus nobiſcum, Triumphus Imperatoris, and
ſuch like wordes, as might be ominous to a good ſucceſſe: Beſides theſe particularities,
the manner of their deliuerie gaue a great grace to the matter. And
that was diſtinguiſhed by times, and cues: whereof Caeſar now complaineth;
that all theſe were to be done at one inſtant of time: for without all controuerſie,
there is no matter of ſuch conſequence in it ſelfe, but may bee much graced
with ceremonies and complements, which like officers or attendants ad much
reſpect and maieſtie to the action; which otherwiſe being but barely preſented,
appeareth farre meaner and of leſſe regard.
               
            
            
               CHAP. X.
               
                  The battell betweene Caeſar and the
Neruij.
               
               
                  IN theſe difficulties,Caeſar. two things were a help to the Romans; the
one was, the knowledge and experience of the ſouldiers: for by
reaſon of their practiſe in former battels, they could as well
preſcribe vnto themſelues, what was to be done, as any other
commander could teach them. The other was, that notwithſtanding
Caeſar had giuen commandement to euerie Legate,
not to leaue the worke or forſake the legions, vntill the fortifications
were perfited; yet when they ſawe extremitie of danger, they attended no
countermaund from Caeſar: but ordered all thinges as it ſeemed beſt to their owne
diſcretion. Caeſar hauing commanded ſuch thinges as he thought neceſsarie, ranne haſtelie
to incourage his ſouldiers, and by fortune came to the tenth legion, where he vſed
no further ſpeech, then that they ſhould remember their ancient valour, and valiantly
withſtand the brunt of their enemies.And therefore I rather take it to bee ſomething els then a word. And for as much as the enemie was no
further off, then a weapon might be caſt to incounter them, he gaue them the ſigne of
battell: and haſtening from thence to another quarter, he found them alreadie cloſed
and at the incounter. For the time was ſo ſhort and the enemie ſo violent, that they
wanted leaſure to put on their headpieces, or to vncaſe their targets: and what part
they lighted into from their worke, or what enſigne they firſt met withall, there they
ſtaied; leaſt in ſeeking out their owne companies, they ſhould looſe that time as was to
be ſpent in fighting. The Armie being imbattailed rather according to the nature of
the place, the decliuitie of the hill, and the breuitie of time, then according to the rules

of art; as the legions incountered the enemie in diuers places at once, the perfect view
of the battell being hindered by thoſe thicke hedges before ſpoken of, there could no
ſuccors be placed any where; neither could any man ſee what was needful to be done: &
therfore in ſo great vncertainty of things, there happened diuers caſualties of fortune.
               The ſoldiers of the ninth and tenth legion, as they ſtood in the left part of the Army,
caſting their piles, with the aduantage of the hil, did driue the Attrebatij, breathles
with running & wounded in the incounter, down into the riuer; & as they paſſed
ouer the water, ſlew many of them with their ſwordes: Neither did they ſticke to follow
after them ouer the riuer, and aduenture into a place of diſaduantage, where the
battell being renewed againe by the enemie, they put them to flight the ſecond time.
In like maner two other legions, the 11 and the 8, hauing put the Veromandui from
the vpper ground, fought with them vpon the bankes of the riuer; and ſo the front &
the left part of the campe was well neere left naked. For in the right cornet were the
12 and the 7 legions, where as all the Neruij, vnder the conduct of Boduognatus,
were heaped together; and ſome of them began to aſsault the legions on the open ſide,
and other ſome to poſseſſe themſelues of the higheſt part of the campe.
               At the ſame time the Roman horſemen, and the light armed footmen that were
intermingled amongſt them, and were at firſt all put to flight by the enemie, as they
were entering into the campe, met with their enemies in the face, and ſo were driuen
to flie out another way. In like manner, the pages and ſouldiers boies, that from the
Decumane port and toppe of the hill, had ſeene the tenth legion follow their enemies
in purſuit ouer the riuer, and were gone out to gather pillage, when they looked behind
them, and ſaw the enemie in their campe; betooke them to their heeles as faſt as
they could. Which accident ſo terrified the horſemen of the Treuiri (who for their
proweſſe were reputed ſingular amongst the Galles, and were ſent thither by their
ſtate, to aide the Romans) firſt when they perceiued the Roman campe to be poſsest,
by a great multitude of the enemie, the legions to be ouercharged and almoſt incloſed
about, the horſemen, ſlingers, and Numidians to be diſperſed and fled, that without
anie further expectation they tooke their waie homeward, and reported to their ſtate,
that the Romans were vtterly ouerthrowen.
               Caeſar departing from the tenth legion, to the right cornet, found his men exceedingly
ouercharged, the enſignes crowded together into one place, and the ſouldiers of
the 12 legion ſo thicke thronged on a heape, that they hindered one another; all the
Centurions of the fourth cohort being ſlaine, the enſigne bearer kild and the enſigne
taken, and the Centurions of the other cohorts either ſlaine, or ſore wounded; amongst
whom Pub. Sextus Baculus, the Primipile of that legion, a valiant man, ſo grieuouſly
wounded, that he could ſcarce ſtand vpon his feete; the rest not verie forward, but
many of the hindmoſt turning taile and forſaking the field; the enemie on the other
ſide, giuing no reſpite in front, although he fought againſt the hill, nor yet ſparing the
open ſide, and the matter brought to a narrow iſſue, without any meanes or ſuccour,
to relieue them: he tooke a target from one of the hindmoſt ſouldiers (for he himſelfe
was come thither without one) and preſsing to the front of the battell, called the Centurions
by name, and incouraging the reſt, commanded the enſignes to be aduanced
toward the enemie, and the Maniples to be inlarged, that they might with greater
facilitie and readineſſe vſe their ſwordes.
               
                  
                  THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
                  
                     THis Publius Sextus Baculus was the chiefeſt Centurion of the 12
legion,The place and office of a primipile. being the firſt Centurion of that Maniple of the Triarij,
that was of the firſt Cohort in that legion; for that place was the
greateſt dignitie that could happen to a Centurion; and therefore
he was called by the name of Centurio primipili, or ſimplie Primipilus, and ſometimes
Primopilus, or Primus Centurio. By him were commonly publiſhed, the
mandates and edicts of the Emperour, and Tribunes: and therefore the reſt of
the Centurions, at all times had an eie vnto him; and the rather for that the eagle,
which was the peculiar enſigne of euerie legion, was committed to his
charge and carried in his Maniple. Neither was this dignitie, without ſpeciall
commoditie, as may be gathered out of diuers authors. We reade further, that
it was no diſparagement for a Tribune, after his Tribunality was expired, to be a
Primipile in a legion; notwithſtanding, there was a law made, I know not vpon
what occaſion, that no Tribune ſhould afterward be Primipile. But let this ſuffice
concerning the office and title of P. S. Baculus.
               
               
                  THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
                  
                     ANd heere I may not omit to giue the Target any honour I may,The Target deſcribed. and
therefore I will take occaſion to deſcribe it in Caeſars hand, as in the
place of greateſt dignitie, and much honouring the excellencie therof.
Polybius maketh the Target to containe two foot and an halfe in breadth, ouerthwart
the conuexſurface thereof; and the length foure foote, of what forme or
faſhion ſoeuer they were of: for the Romans had two ſortes of Targets amongſt
their legionarie, the firſt caried the proportion of that figure, which the Geometricians
call Ouall, a figure of an vnequall latitude, broadeſt in the midſt, and
narrow at both the endes, like vnto an egge, deſcribed in Plano: the other ſorte
was of an equall latitude, and reſembled the faſhion of a guttertile; and thereupon
was called Scutum imbricatum. The matter whereof a target was made,
was a double board, one faſtened vpon another, with lint and Buls glew; and couered
with an Oxe hide, or ſome other ſtiffe leather; the vpper and lower part
of the target were bound about with a plate of yron, to keepe it from cleauing;
and in the middeſt there was a boſſe of yron or braſſe, which they called Vmbo.
Romulus brought them in firſt amongſt the Romans, taking the vſe of them
from the Sabines.Lib. 16. c. 40. The wood whereof they were made, was for the moſt part
either ſallow, alder, or figtree: whereof Plinie giueth this reaſon, for as much
as theſe trees are colde and wateriſh, and therefore any blow or thruſt that was
made vpon the wood, was preſently contracted and ſhut vp againe. But for as
much as the Target was of ſuch reputation amongſt the Roman Armes, and
challenged ſuch intereſt in the greateſt of their Empire, let vs enter a little into

the conſideration of the vſe and commoditie thereof; which cannot be better
vnderſtood, then by that conference, which Polybius hath made betweene the
weapons of the Romans and the Macedonians: and therefore I haue thought it
good to inſert it in theſe diſcourſes. And thus it followeth.
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              Of the difference of the Roman and Macedonian
Weapons.
                              
                                 I Promiſed in my ſixt book that I would make a compariſon, between
the weapons of the Romans, and Macedonians. And that I would
likewiſe write of the diſpoſition of either of their armies; how they do
differ one from another: & in what regard, the one, or the other, were
either inferiour, or ſuperiour: which promiſe I wil now with diligence endeuour
to performe. And for as much as the armies of the Macedonians haue giuen ſo
good teſtimonies of themſelues by their actions, by ouercomming the armies
as wel of thoſe of Aſia, as of Greece; and that the battailes of the Romans haue
conquered, as well thoſe of Africa as all the Eaſterne countries of Europe: It
ſhall not be amiſſe, but very profitable, to ſearch out the difference of either; eſpecially
ſeeing that theſe our times haue not once, but many times ſeene triall,
both of their battailes and forces; that knowing the reaſon why, the Romans do
ouercome, and in their battailes carie awaie the better: we doe not as vaine
men were wont to do, attribute the ſame to fortune, and eſteeme them without
reaſon happy victors; but rather looking into the true cauſes, we giue them their
due praiſes, according to the direction of reaſon, and ſound iudgment. Concerning
the battels betweene Hanniball and the Romans; and concerning the
Romans their loſſes, there is no neede that I ſpeake much. For their loſſes are
neither to be imputed to the defect of their Armes, or diſpoſition of their Armies;
but to the dexteritie and induſtrie of Hanniball: but wee haue entreated
therof when we made mention of the battels themſelues, and the end it ſelfe
of that warre doth eſpeciallie confirme this our opinion. For vvhen they
had gotten a captaine equall vvith Hanniball, euen conſequentlie vvith all
his victories vaniſhed. And hee had no ſooner ouercome the Romans, but
by and by, reiecting his owne weapons, hee trained his Armie to their weapons,
and ſo taking them vp in the beginning, he continued them on vnto the
ende.
                              And Pyrrhus in his war againſt the Romans, did vſe both their weapons and
order, and made as it were a medlie both of the cohort, and phalanx: but notwithſtanding
it ſerued him not to get the victory, but alwaies the euent by ſome
meanes or other, made the ſame doubtfull: concerning whom it were not vnfit,
that I ſhould ſaie ſomething, leaſt in being altogether ſilent, it might ſeeme to
preiudice this mine opinion. But notwithſtanding I will haſten to my purpoſed
compariſon.
                              Now touching the phalanx, if it haue the diſpoſition, and forces proper to it,

nothing is able to oppoſe it ſelfe againſt it, or to ſuſtaine the violence thereof;
as maie eaſily by many documents be approued. For when an armed man doth
ſtand firme in the ſpace of three foote in ſo thicke an array of battell, and the
length of their pikes being according to the firſt baſis, or ſcantling ſixteene
foote; but according to the true and right conueniencie of them, 14 cubits, out
of which are taken foure allowed for the ſpace betweene the left hand, which
ſupporteth the ſame, and the butte ende thereof, vvhiles he ſtandes in a readineſſe
to attend the incounter: being thus ordered, I ſaie, it is manifeſt that the
length of tenne cubites doth extend it ſelfe before the bodie of euerie armed
man, where with both his handes he doth aduance it readie to charge the enemie:
By vvhich meanes it followeth, that ſome of the pikes doe not onely extend
themſelues before the ſecond, third, and fourth ranke, but ſome before
the formoſt, if the phalanx haue his proper and due thickneſſe, according
to his naturall diſpoſition, both on the ſides and behinde, as Homer maketh
mention vvhen he ſaith, that one target doth encloſe and fortifie another; one
headpiece is ioyned to another, that they maie ſtande vnited and cloſe together.
                              Theſe circumſtances being rightly and truely ſet downe, it muſt follow, that
the pikes of euerie former ranke in the phalanx, doe extend themſelues two cubites
before each other, which proportion of difference they haue betweene
themſelues: by which maie euidently be ſeene the aſſault, and impreſſion of the
whole phalanx, what it is, and what force it hath, conſiſting of 16 rankes in
depth, or thickneſſe; the exceſſe of which number of rankes aboue fiue. For as
much as they cannot commodiouſly couch their pikes, without the diſturbance
of the former, the points of them not being long inough to enlarge themſelues
beyond the formoſt rankes, they grow vtterly vnprofitable, and cannot man, by
man, make any impreſſion, or aſſault: but ſerue onely, by laying their pikes vpon
the ſhoulders of thoſe which ſtand before them, to ſuſtaine and hold vp the
ſwaies and giuing backe of the former rankes, which ſtand before them to this
end, that the front may ſtand firme and ſure; and with the thicknes of their pikes
they doe repell all thoſe dartes, which paſſing ouer the heads of thoſe that ſtand
before, would annoy thoſe rankes which are more backward.
                              And farther by mouing forward, with the force of their bodies, they doe ſo
preſſe vpon the former, that they doe make a moſt violent impreſſion. For it is
impoſſible that the formoſt rankes ſhould giue backe.
                              This therefore being the generall and particular diſpoſition of the phalanx:
we muſt now ſpeake on the contrarie part, touching the properties and differences,
as well of the armes, as of the whole diſpoſition of the Roman battell. For
euerie Roman ſoldier for himſelfe, and his weapon is allowed three foot to ſtand
in, and in the incounter, are moued man, by man, euery one couering himſelfe
with his target; and mutually moouing whenſoeuer there is occaſion offered.
But thoſe which vſe their ſwordes, do fight in a more thinne and diſtinct order;
ſo that it is manifeſt, that they haue three foote more allowed them to ſtand in
both from ſhoulder to ſhoulder, and from backe to bellie, that they maie vſe
their weapons with the better commoditie. And hence it commeth to paſſe,

that one Romaine ſoldiour taketh vp as much ground, as two of thoſe which are
to encounter him of the Macedonian Phalanx: ſo that one Romain is as it were
to oppoſe himſelfe againſt tenne pikes, which pikes the ſaid one ſoldior can neither
by any agilitie come to offende, or elſe at handy blowes otherwiſe annoy:
And thoſe which are behinde him, are not onely vnable to repell their force,
but alſo with conueniencie to vſe their owne weapons. Whereby it may eaſily
be gathered, that it is impoſsible, that any battaile being aſſaulted, by the front
of a phalanx, ſhould be able to ſuſtaine the violence thereof, if it haue his due
and proper compoſition.
                              What then is the cauſe that the Romaines do ouercome, and that thoſe that
doe vſe the phalanx are voyde of the hope of victorie? (Euen from hence)
that the Romaine armies haue infinite commodities, both of places, and of
times, to fight in. But the the phalanx hath only one time, one place, and one
kinde, whereto it may profitablie applie it ſelfe: ſo that if it were of neceſsitie,
that their enemy ſhoulde incounter them at that inſtant, eſpeciallie with their
whole forces, it were queſtionleſſe not only, not without danger, but in al probabilitie
likelie, that the phalanx ſhould euer carrie away the better. But if that
may be auoided, which is eaſily done: ſhal not that diſpoſition then, be vtterlie
vnprofitable, and free from all terror? And it is farther euident, that the phalanx
muſt neceſſarily haue plaine & champion places, without any hinderances, or
impediments; as ditches, vneuen places, vallies, little hils and riuers: for al theſe
may hinder & diſioine it. And it is almoſt impoſsible to haue a plaine of the capacity
of 20. ſtadia, much leſſe more, where there ſhall bee found none of theſe
impediments. But ſuppoſe there bee found ſuch places, as are proper for the
phalanx: If the enemy refuſe to come vnto them, and in the meane time, ſpoile,
and ſacke the cities, and countrie round about; what commodity, or profit ſhal
ariſe by an army ſo ordered? for if it remaine in ſuch places, as hath beene before
ſpoken of; it can neither relieue their friends, nor preſerue themſelues. For
the Conuoies which they expect from their friends, are eaſily cut off by the enemy,
whiles they remaine in thoſe open places.
                              And if it happen at any time, that they leaue them vpon any enterpriſe, they
are then expoſed to the enemy. But ſuppoſe, that the Romaine army ſhould
find the phalanx in ſuch places, yet would it not aduēture it ſelfe in groſſe at one
inſtant; but would by little & little retire it ſelfe, as doth plainly appeare by their
vſual practiſe. For there muſt not bee a coniecture of theſe things by my words
only, but eſpecially by that which they do. For they do not ſo equally frame their
battaile, that they doe aſſault the enemy altogether, making as it were but one
front: but part make a ſtande, and parte charge the enemie, that if at any time
the Phalanx doe preſſe them, that come to aſſault them and bee repelled; the
force of their order is diſſolued. For whether they purſue thoſe that retire, or
flie from thoſe that do aſſault them, theſe doe diſioyne themſelues from part of
their armie; by which meanes there is a gap opened to their enemies, ſtauding
and attending their opportunitie: ſo that nowe they neede not anie more to
charge them in the front, where the force of the phalanx conſiſteth: but to aſſault
where the breach is made, both behind, and vpon the ſides. But if at any

time the Romaine armie may keepe his due proprietie, and diſpoſition, the
phalanx by the diſaduantage of the place, being not able to doe the like: doth it
not then manifeſtlie demonſtrate the difference to be great, betweene the goodnes
of their diſpoſition, and the diſpoſition of the phalanx?
                              To this may bee added the neceſſities impoſed vppon an army, which is to
march through places of all natures, to encampe themſelues, to poſſeſſe places
of aduantage, to beſiege, and to be beſieged; and alſo contrary to expectation
ſometimes to come in viewe of the enemie: For all theſe occaſions neceſſarilie
accompanie an armie; and oftentimes are the eſpecial cauſes of victory, to which
the Macedonian phalanx is no way fit, or conuenient: Foraſmuch as neither in
their generall order, nor in their particular diſpoſition, without a conuenient
place, are able to effect any thing of moment: but the Romaine army is apt for
all theſe purpoſes. For euerie ſoldiour amongſt them, beeing once armed and
ready to fight, refuſeth no place, time, nor occaſion; keeping alwaies the ſame
order, whether he fight togither with the whole body of the army, or particularlie
by himſelfe, man to man.
                              And hence it happeneth, that as the commodity of their diſpoſition is aduantagious:
ſo the end doth anſwere the expectation.
                              Theſe things I thought to ſpeake of at large, becauſe many of the Grecians
are of an opinion, that the Macedonians are not to bee ouercome. And againe,
many wondered, how the Macedonian phalanx ſhould bee put to the worſt by
the Romaine army, conſidering the nature of their weapons.
                              Thus far goeth Polibyus, in comparing the weapons and imbattailing of
the Romaines, with the vſe of armes amongſt the Macedonians: wherein we
ſee the Pike trulie, and exactlie ordered, according as the wiſe Grecians could
beſt proportion it with that forme of battell, which might giue moſt aduantage
to the vſe thereof: ſo that if our ſquadrons of Pikes iumpe not with
the perfect manner of a phalanx, (as wee ſee they doe not) they fall ſo much
ſhorte of that ſtrength, which the wiſedome of the Grecians and the experience
of other nations, imputed vnto it. But ſuppoſe wee could allow it that diſpoſition,
in the courſe of our wars, which the nature of the weapon doth require;
yet foraſmuch as by the authority of Polybius, the ſaid maner of imbattailing is
tied to ſuch dangerous circumſtances of one time, one place, and one kinde of
fight: I hold it not ſo profitable a weapon, as the practiſe of our times doth ſeem
to make it, eſpecially in woody countries, ſuch as Ireland is; where the vſe is cut
off by ſuch inconueniences, as are noted to hinder the managing thereof. And
doubtles, if our commanders did but conſider of the incongruity of the Pike &
Ireland, they would not proportion ſo great a number of thē in euery company,
as there is; for commonly halfe the company are pikes, which is as much to ſaie
in the practiſe of our wars, that halfe the army hath neither offenſiue nor defenſiue
weapōs, but only againſt a troupe of horſe. For they ſeldom or neuer come
to the puſh of pike, with the foot cōpanies, where they may charge & offende the
enemy: & for defence, if the enemy think it not ſafe to buckle with thē at hād, but
maketh more aduantage to play vpon thē a far off with ſhort; it affordeth ſmal ſafety
to ſhake a long pike at them, and ſtand faire in the meane time, to entertaine

a volleie of ſhot with the body of their battailion. As I make no queſtion, but
the pike in ſome ſeruices is profitable, as behind a rampier, or at a breach; ſo I
aſſure my ſelfe, there are weapons if they were put to triall, that would counteruaile
the pike euen in thoſe ſeruices, wherein it is thought moſt profitable.
                              Concerning the Target, we ſee it take the hand, in the iudgement of Polybius,
of all other weapons whatſoeuer, aſwell in regard of the diuers and ſundrie
ſortes of imbattailing, as the qualitie of the place wherſoeuer: for their vſe was
as effectuall in ſmall bodies and centuries, as in groſſe troupes and great companies;
in thinne and ſpacious imbattailing, as in thicke thronged Teſtudines.
Neither could the nature of the place make them vnſeruiceable; for whether it
were plaine or couert; leuel or vnequall; narrow or large, if there were any commodity
to fight, the Target was as neceſſarie to defend, as the ſword to offend:
beſides the conueniency, which accompanieth the Target in any neceſſitie impoſed
vpon an armie, whether it bee to march through places of all natures,
to make a faſt march, or a ſpeedie retraite, to incampe themſelues, to poſſeſſe
places of aduantage, to beſiege and to be beſieged, as Polybius ſaith, with manie
other occaſions which neceſſarilie accompanie an armie. The vſe of this
weapon hath beene too much neglected in theſe latter ages, but may be happilie
renued againe in our nation, if the induſtrie of ſuch as haue laboured to preſent
it vnto theſe times, in the beſt faſhion, ſhall finde anie fauour in the opinion
of our commaunders. Concerning which Target, I muſt needes ſaie this
much, that the light Target will proue the Target of ſeruice, whenſoeuer they
ſhall happen to be put in execution: for thoſe which are made proofe, are ſo
heauie and vnwieldie, (although it be ſomewhat qualified with ſuch helpes as
are annexed to the vſe thereof,) that they ouercharge a man, with an vnſupportable
burthen, and hinder his agilitie and execution in fight, with a waight
diſproportionable to his ſtrēgth. For our offenſiue weapons, as namely the Hargebuſiers
and musketiers, are ſtronger in the offenſiue part, then any armes of
defence, which may be made manageable and fit for ſeruice. Neither did the
Romains regard the proofe of their Target further, then was thought fit for the
readie vſe of them in time of battel, as it appeareth in many places, both in the
ciuill warres and in theſe Commentaries: for a Romaine pile hath often times
darted through the Target, and the bodie of the man that bare it, and faſtened
them both to the ground, which is more then a musket can wel do; for the bullet
commonly reſteth in the bodie. And although it may be ſaid that this was
not cōmon, but rather ye effect of an extraordinary arme; yet it ſerueth to proue,
that their Targets were not proofe to their offenſiue weapons, when they were
well deliuered and with good direction. For I make no doubt, but in their battailes
there were oftentimes ſome hinderances, which woulde not ſuffer ſo violent
an effect, as this which I ſpeake of: for in a volley of ſhotte, wee muſt not
thinke that all the bullets flie with the ſame force, and fall with the like hurt; but
as armour of good proofe will hardly hold out ſome of them; ſo ſlender armes
and of no proofe, will make good reſiſtance againſt others. And to conclude,
in a battell or incounter at hand, a man ſhall meete with more occaſions, ſuting
the nature and commoditie of this light Target, then ſuch as will aduantage

the heauie Target of proofe, or counteruaile the ſurplus of waight, which it
earieth with it.
                              Some men will vrge, that there is vſe of this Target of proofe, in ſome places
and in ſome ſeruices: which I deny not to thoſe, that deſire to bee ſecured
from the extremity of peril: but this falleth out in ſome places and in ſome
particular ſeruices, and hindereth not but that the vniuerſal benefit of this weapon
conſiſteth in the multitude of light Targetiers, who are to manage the moſt
important occaſions of a warre.
                              This much I am further to note, concerning the ſworde of the Targetiers,
that according to the practiſe of the Romaines, it muſt alwaies hang on the
right ſide; for carying the Target vpon the left arme, it cannot be that the ſword
ſhould hang on the left ſide, but with great trouble and annoiance: And if any
man ſay, that if it hang on the right ſide, it muſt bee verie ſhort, otherwiſe it
will neuer bee readilie drawne out. I ſaie that the ſworde of the Targetiers, in
regard of the vſe of that weapon, ought to be of a very ſhort ſcantling, when as
the Targetier is to command the point of his ſword within the compaſſe of his
Target, as ſuch as looke into the true vſe of this weapon, wil eaſily diſcouer. But
let this ſuffice concerning the vſe of the pike and the Target.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               CHAP. XI.
               
                  The battell continueth, and in the ende
Caeſar ouercommeth.
               
               
                  AT the preſence of their Generall, the ſoldiours conceiued ſome
better hopes;Caeſar. and gathering ſtrength and courage againe, when
as euery man beſtirred himſelfe in the ſight of the Emperour,
the brunt of the enemie was a litle ſtaied. Caeſar perceiuing
likewiſe the ſeuenth legion, which ſtood next vnto him, to bee
ſore ouerlaide by the enemy, commaunded the Tribunes by little
and little, to ioine the two legions together, and ſo by ioining
backe to backe, to make two contrarie fronts; and beeing thus ſecured one by another
from feare of being circumuented, they began to make reſiſtance with greater
courage. In the meane time the two legions, that were in the rerewarde to guarde
the cariages, hearing of the battell, doubled their pace, and were diſcried by the enemy
vpon the top of the hill. And Titus Labienus, hauing won the campe of the
Neruij, and beholding from the higher ground what was done on the other ſide of
the reuer, ſent the tenth legion to helpe their fellowes, who vnderſtanding by the
horſemen and Lackies that fled, in what caſe the matter ſtood, and in what daunger
the campe, the legions, and the Generall was, made all the haſte they poſsibly could.
At whoſe comming there happened ſuch an alteration and change of things, that
euen ſuch as were ſunke downe, through extreame griefe of their woundes, or leaned
vpon their Targets, began againe to fight a freſh, and the Pages and the boies
perceiuing the enemie amazed, ran vpon them vnarmed, not fearing their weapons:

the horſemen alſo ſtriuing with extraordinarie valour, to wipe away the diſhonour of
their former flight, thruſt themſelues in all places before the legionarie ſouldiers.
Howbeit the enemie in the vtmost perill of their liues, ſhewed ſuch manhood, that
as faſt as the formost of them were ouerthrowen, the next in place beſtrid their carkaſes,
and fought vpon their bodies: and theſe being likewiſe ouerthrowen, and
their bodies heaped one vpon another, they that remained, poſseſt themſelues of that
mount of dead carkaſes as a place of aduantage, and from thence threwe their weapons,
and intercepting the piles, returned them againe to the Romans. By which it
may be gathered, that there was great reaſon to deeme them men of hautie courage,
that durſt paſse ouer ſo broade a riuer, climbe vp ſuch high rockes, and aduenture to
fight in a place of ſuch inequalitie. The battell being thus ended, and the nation
and name of the Neruij being well neare ſwallowed vp with deſtruction, the elder
ſort with the women and children, that before the battell were conuaied into Ilands
and Bogs, when they heard thereof; ſent ambaſsadours to Caeſar, and yeelded themſelues
to his mercie; and in laying open the miſerie of their ſtate affirmed, that of 600
Senatours they had now left but three; and of 60000 fighting men, there was ſcarce
fiue hundred that were able to beare Armes. Caeſar, that his clemencie might appeare
to a diſtreſsed people, preſerued them with great care, granting vnto them the free
poſſeſsion of their townes and country, and ſtreightly commanding their borderers,
not to offer them any wrong or iniurie at all.
               
                  OBSERVATIONS.
                  
                     ANd thus endeth the relation of that great and dangerous battell,Li. de militia Iu. Cae. which
Ramus complaineth of as a confuſed narration: much differing from
the direct and methodicall file, of his other Commentaries. But if that
rule holde good, which learned Rhetoritians haue obſerued in their Oratorie,
that an vnperfect thing ought not to be told in a perfect maner; then by Ramus
leaue, if any ſuch confuſion do appeare, it both ſauoureth of eloquence, and wel
ſuteth the turbulent cariage of the action, wherein order and skill gaue place to
fortune, and prouidence was ſwallowed vp with peraduenture. For that which
Hirtius ſaith of the ouerthrow he gaue to Pharnaces, may as well be ſaid of this;
that he got the victorie, plurimum adiuuante deorum benignitate, qui cum omnibus
belli caſibus interſunt, tum praecipue ijs quibus nihil ratione potuit adminiſtrari.
For ſo it fell out in this battell, and the danger proceeded from the ſame cauſe,
that brought him to that puſh in the battell with Pharnaces: for he well vnderſtood
that the Neruij attended his comming on the other ſide the riuer Sabis:
Neither was he ignorant how to fortifie his camp in the face of an enemy, without
feare or danger, as we haue ſeene in his war with Ariouiſtus; when he marched
to the place where he purpoſed to incamp himſelfe with 3 battels, and cauſed
two of them to ſtand ready in armes to receiue any charge, which the enemy
ſhould offer to giue, that the third battell in the meane time might fortifie the
camp. Which courſe would eaſily haue fruſtrated this ſtratagem of the Neruij,
and made the hazard leſſe dangerous; but he little expected any ſuch reſolution,

ſo contrarie to the rules of militarie diſcipline, that an enemie ſhould not ſticke
to paſſe ouer ſo broad a riuer, to clime vp ſuch ſteepe and high rocks, to aduenture
battell in a place ſo diſaduantagious, and to hazard their fortune vppon
ſuch inequalities. And therefore, hee little miſtruſted any ſuch vnlikelie attempt,
wherein the enemy had plotted his owne ouerthrow, if the legions had
beene ready to receiue them. Which may teach a generall that which Caeſar
had not yet learned, that a leader cannot be too ſecure in his moſt aſſured courſes;
nor too carefull in his beſt aduiſed directions; conſidering that the greateſt
means may eaſily bee preuented, and the ſafeſt courſe weakened with an vnreſpected
circumſtance: ſo powerful are weake occurrences in the maine courſe
of the waightieſt actions; and ſo infinite are the waies, wherby either wiſdom or
fortune may worke. Neither did this warne him, to prouide for that which an enemy
might do, how vnlikelie ſoeuer it might ſeeme vnto him, as appeareth by
that accident in the battel with Pharnaces: which practiſe of attempting a thing
againſt reaſon and the arte of warre, hath found good ſucceſſe in our moderne
wars; as appeareth by the French hiſtories: notwithſtanding, it is to be handeled
ſparingly, as no way ſauoring of circumſpect and good direction, foraſmuch as
temeritas non ſemper felix, as Fabius the great anſwered Scipio.
                  The chiefeſt helpes which the Romaines founde, were firſt the aduantage of
the place; whereof I ſpake in the Heluetian warre. Secondlie, the experience,
which the ſoldiours had got in the former battailes, which much directed them
in this turbulent aſſault; wherein they caried themſelues as men acquainted with
ſuch caſualties: laſtly, the valour and vndanted iudgment of the General, which
ouerſwaied the peril of the battel, and brought it to ſo fortunate an end. Wherin
we may obſerue, that as in a temperate courſe, when the iſſue of the battel reſted
vpon his directions, he wholy intended warines & circumſpection, ſo in the
hazard and peril of good hap, he confronted extremity of danger with extremity
of valor, and ouertopt fury, with a higher reſolution.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XII.
               
                  The Aduatici betake themſelues to a ſtrong hold,
and are taken by Caeſar.
               
               
                  THE * Aduatici before mentioned,Caeſar. either Doway or Boſleduke in Brabant. comming with all their
power to aide the Neruij, and vnderſtanding by the way of
their ouerthrow, returned home againe; and forſaking all the
reſt of their townes, and caſtles, conuaied themſelues and their
wealth into one ſtrong and wel fortified town, which was compaſſed
about with mighty rocks and ſtiepe downefals, ſauing in
one place of 200. foot in breadth, where there was an entry by
a gentle and eaſie aſcent, which paſsage they had fortified with a double wal of a large

altitude, and had placed mightie great ſtones and ſharpe beames vpon the walles readie
for an aſſault. This people deſcended from the Cimbri and Teutoni, who in their
iourney into Italy had left ſuch cariages on this ſide of the Rhene, as they coulde not
conueniently take along with them, in the custodie of theſe forces; who after the
death of their fellowes, being many yeares diſquieted by their neighbours, ſomtimes
inuading other ſtates, and ſometimes defending themſelues, at length procured a
peace, and choſe this place to ſettle themſelues in. At the firſt comming of the Romaine
army, they ſallied out of the towne, & made many light skirmiſhes with them:
but after that Caeſar had drawne a rampier about the towne of 12 foot in height, 15
miles in compaſſe, and had fortified it with castles very thicke about the towne; they
kept themſelues within the wall: And as they beheld the vines framed, the mount
raiſed, and a towre in building a far off; at firſt they began to laugh at it, and with
ſcoffing ſpeeches frō the wal, began to aske: with what hands, & with what ſtrength,
eſpecially by men of that ſtature (for the Romaines were but little men in reſpect of
the Galles) a towre of that huge maſſie waight ſhould bee brought vnto the walles?
But when they ſaw it remoued, and approching neere vnto the towne, as men aſtoniſhed
at the ſtrange and vnaccuſtomed ſight thereof, they ſent ambaſſadors to Caeſar,
to intreat a peace with this meſſage: They beleeued that the Romaines did not make
war, without the ſpecial aſſiſtance of the gods, that could with ſuch facility tranſport
engines of that height, & bring them to incounter at hand, againſt the ſtrongeſt part
of their town: and therfore they ſubmitted both themſelues, and all that they had, to
Caeſars mercy; deſiring one thing of his meere clemency, that he would not take away
their armes, foraſmuch as al their neighbors were enemies vnto them, and enuied at
their valour; neither were they able to defend themſelues, if they ſhoulde deliuer vp
their armor: ſo that they had rather ſuffer any inconuenience by the people of Rome,
then to be butcherly murthered by them, whom in former time they had held ſubiect
to their command.
               To this Caeſar anſwered, that hee would ſaue the city rather of his owne cuſtome,
thē for any deſert of theirs; ſo that they yeelded before the Ram touched the wal: but
no condition of remedy ſhould be accepted, without preſent deliuery of their armes;
for he would do by thē as he had done by the Neruij, and giue cōmandement to their
neighbours, that they ſhould offer no wrong to ſuch, as had commended their ſafety
to the people of Rome. This anſwere being returned to the city, they ſeemed contented
to doe whatſoeuer hee commanded them, and thereupon caſting a great part of their
armour ouer the wall into the ditch, inſomuch as they fild it almoſt to the top of the
rampier: and yet (as afterward was known) concealing the third part, they ſet open
the gates, and for that daie caried themſelues peaceably. Towards night Caeſar commanded
the gates to be ſhut, and the ſoldiours to be drawn out of the towne. But the
Aduatici hauing conſulted together before, foraſmuch as they beleeued that vpon
their ſubmiſſion, the Romaines woulde either ſet no watch at all, or at the leaſt,
keepe it verie careleſlie; partlie with ſuch armour as they had retained, and partly
with Targets, made of barke or wrought of wicker, which vppon the ſodaine they
had couered ouer with leather, about the third watch where the aſcent to our fortifications
was eaſieſt; they iſſued ſodainly out of the towne with al their power: but
ſignification thereof being giuen by fiers, as Caeſar had commanded, the Romains haſted
ſpeedilie to that place. The enemy fought very deſperatelie, as men in the laſt
hope of their welfare, incountering the Romains in a place of diſaduantage, at length
with the ſlaughter of 4000. the reſt were driuen backe into the towne. The

next daie when Caeſar came to breake open the gates, and found no man at defence, he
ſent in the ſoldiors, and ſold al the people and ſpoile of the towne: the number of perſons
in the towne amounted to 53000. bondſlaues.
               
                  THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
                  
                     IN the ſurpriſe,Circūuallatio attempted by the Belgae vpon Bibract, I ſet downe the
maner, which both the Galles and the Romaines vſed in their ſodaine
ſurpriſing of a towne: whereof if they failed (the place importing any
aduantage in the courſe of the war) they then prepared for the ſiege, in that maner,
as Caeſar hath deſcribed in this place. They inuironed the town about with
a ditch and a rampier, and fortified the ſaide rampier, with many caſtles and
fortreſſes, erected in a conuenient diſtance one from another; and ſo they kept
the town from any forraine ſuccor or reliefe: and withal ſecured themſelues frō
ſallies or other ſtratagerns, which the townſmen might practiſe againſt them.
And this manner of ſiege was called circumuallatio; the particular deſcription
wherof,In the ſeuenth commentarie. I refer vnto the hiſtory of Aleſia, where I will handle it, according to the
particulars there ſet down by Caeſar.
               
               
                  THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
                  
                     THe Ram,Aries or the Ram. which Caeſar heere mentioneth, was of greateſt note amongſt
all the Romaine Engines, and helde that place which the
Canon hath in our warres. Vitruuius doth attribute the inuention
thereof, to the Carthagimans, who at the taking of Cadiz, wanting
a fit inſtrument to raze and ouerthrow a caſtle,Cales. they tooke a long beame or timber
tree, and bearing it vpon their armes and ſhoulders, with the one end thereof
they firſt brake downe the vppermoſt ranke of ſtones: and ſo deſcending by
degrees,Aries ſimplex they ouerthrewe the whole towre. The Romaines had two ſortes of
Rams, the one was rude and plaine; the other artificial and compound: the firſt,
is that which the Carthaginians vſed at Cadiz, and is purtraited in the column
of Traian at Rome.
                  The compound Ram is thus deſcribed by Ioſephus;Aries compoſita. a Ramme (ſaith he) is a
mighty great beame, like vnto the maſt of a ſhip, and is ſtrengthned at one end
with a head of yron, faſhioned like vnto a Ram; and thereof it tooke the name.
This Ram is hanged by the middeſt with roapes vnto an other beame, which
lieth croſſe a couple of pillars, and hanging thus equallie balanced, it is by
force of men thruſt forward, and recoiled backeward; and ſo beateth vpon the
wall with his yron heade: neither is there any towre ſo ſtrong, or wal ſo broad,
that is able to ſtande before it. The length of this Ramme was of a large ſcantling,
for Plutarch affirmeth, that Anthonie in the Parthian warre had a Ram
eighty foote long: and Vitruuius ſaith, that the length of a Ramme was vſuallie
106. and ſometimes 120; and this length gaue great ſtrength and force to the

engine. It was managed at one time with a whole Centurie or order of ſouldiers:
and their forces being ſpent, they were ſeconded with another Centurie;
and ſo the ramme plaied continually vpon the wall, without intermiſſion. Ioſephus
ſaith, that Titus, at the ſiege of Ieruſalem, had a ramme for euerie legion:
it was oftentimes couered with a vine, that the men that managed it might bee
in more ſafety. It appeareth by this place, that if a towne had continued out vntill
the ramme had touched the wall, they could not preſume of any acceptation
of rendrie; for as much as by their obſtinacie, they had brought in perill the
liues of their enemies, and were ſubdued by force of Armes, which affoordeth
ſuch mercie as the victor pleaſeth.
               
               
                  THE THIRD OBSERVATION.
                  
                     THe Aduatici, as it ſeemeth, were not ignorant of the ſmall ſecuritie,
which one ſtate can giue vnto another, that commendeth their ſafetie
to be protected by it: for as Architas the Pythagorean ſaith, a bodie,
a familie, and an Armie are then well gouerned, when they containe
within themſelues the cauſes of their ſafetie; ſo we muſt not looke for anie
ſecuritie in a ſtate, when their ſafetie dependeth vpon a forraine protection. For
the olde ſaying is, that Neque murus, neque amicus quiſquam teget, quem propria
arma non texere. Although in this caſe the matter was well qualified, by the maieſtie
of the Roman Empire, and the late victories in the continent of Gallia,
wherof the Hedui with their aſſociates were very gainful witneſſes: but amongſt
kingdomes, that are better ſuted with equalitie of ſtrength & authority, there is
ſmall hope of ſafetie to be looked for, vnleſſe the happy gouernment of both do
mutually depend vpon the ſafetie of either nation. For that which Polybius obſerued
in Antigonus king of Macedonia, taketh place for the moſt part amongſt
all Princes; That kinges by nature eſteeme no man, either as a friend or an enemie,
but as the calculation of profit ſhall finde them anſwerable to their proiectes.
And contrariwiſe, it cutteth off many occaſions of practiſes & attempts,
when it is knowne that a ſtate is of it ſelfe able and readie to reſiſt the deſſignes
of forraine enemies, according to that of Manlius: Oſtendite modo bellum, pacem
habebitis: videant vos paratos ad vim, ius ipſi remittent.
                  
               
               
                  THE FOVRTH OBSERVATION.
                  
                     THe manner of ſignifying any motion or attempt by fire,To giue notice of an Alarum by fire. was of great
vſe in the might leaſon, where the fortification was of ſo large an extenſion:
for fire in the night doth appeare far greater then indeed it is, for
as much as that part of the aire, which is next vnto the fire, as it is illuminated
with the light thereof, in a reaſonable diſtance cannot be diſcerned from the fire
it ſelfe, and ſo it ſeemeth much greater then it is in ſubſtance: and contrariwiſe,

in the daie time it ſheweth leſſe then it is; for the cleare brightneſſe of the aire
doth much obſcure that light, which proceedeth from a more groſſe and materiall
bodie: and therefore their cuſtome was to vſe fire in the night, and ſmoake
in the daie, ſuting the tranſparent middle with a contrarie qualitie, that ſo it
might more manifeſtly appeare to the beholder.
               
               
                  THE FIFT OBSERVATION.
                  
                     ANd albeit after the victorie, the Romans inflicted diuers degrees of
puniſhment,Lib. 25. according to the malice which they found in an enemie;
yet as Flauius Lucanus ſaith in Liuie, there was no nation
more exorable,The puniſhments which the Romans laied vpon a conquerednation. nor readier to ſhew mercie, then the Romans were.
The puniſhments which we find them to haue vſed towardes a conquered nation,
were theſe; either they puniſhed them by death, or ſolde them for bondſlaues,
ſub corona, or diſmiſſed them ſub iugum; or merced them, in taking away
their territories; or made them tributarie ſtates.
                  Of the firſt we finde a manifeſt example in the third of theſe Commentaries,
where Caeſar hauing ouerthrowne the Veneti by ſea, in as much as they had retained
his ambaſſadours by force, contrarie to the law of nations, he put all the
Senate to the ſword, and ſold the reſt ſub corona.
                  
                  Feſtus ſaith, that an enemie was ſaid to be ſold ſub corona, in as much as the
captiues ſtood crowned in the market place, where they were ſet out to ſale; as
Cato ſaith in his booke de re militari, vt populus ſua opera potius ob rem bene geſtam
coronatus, ſupplicatum eat? quam re male geſta coronatus vaeneat. And Gellius
affirmeth the ſame thing, but addeth alſo another reaſon, for as much as the ſoldiers
that kept them while they were in ſelling, incircled them round about, to
keepe them together; and this round-about-ſtanding was called Corona. Feſtus
ſaith, that oftentimes they vſed a ſpeare; and therfore they were ſaid to be ſold
ſub haſta: for as much as amongſt the Greekes, by the ſpeare or pike, was ſignified
the power of Armes, and maieſtie of Empires.
                  When they diſmiſſed them ſub iugum, their order was to erect three trees
like a paire of gallowes, vnder which they cauſed all the captiues to paſſe, as a
ſigne of bondage: for they had ſo conquered them by force of Armes, that they
laide vpon their necke the yoake of thraldome. Liuie ſaith, that Quintius the
dictator diſmiſſed the Aequos ſub iugum; and this iugum was made of 3 ſpeares,
whereof two were ſtucke vpright in the ground, and the third was tied ouerthwart
them. The ſouldiers that paſſed ſub iugum, were vngirt, and their weapons
taken from them, as Feſtus ſaith.
                  Sometimes againe they tooke awaie their landes and territories, and either
ſolde it for mony, & brought it into the treaſurie, or deuided the land amongſt
the Roman people, or let it out to farme rent: of all which Liuie hath manie
pregnant examples.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. XIII.
               
                  Craſſus taketh in all the maritimate cities that lie
to the Ocean: the legions are carried into
their wintering campes.
               
               
                  THE ſame time Pub.Caeſar. Craſsus, whom he had ſent with one legion
to the maritimate cities that laie to the Ocean, aduertiſed him
that al thoſe ſtates had yeelded themſelues to the people of Rome:
The wars being thus ended, and all Gallia being ſetled in peace,
there went ſuch a fame of this warre among other barbarous people,
that from nations beyond the Rhene there came ambaſſadours
to Caeſar, offering both hoſtages and obedience to whatſoeuer
he commanded them. But Caeſar willed them to repaire vnto him againe in the
beginning of the next ſommer, for as much as he then haſted into Lumbardie, after he
had placed his legions in their wintering campes.Of this ſupplication I wil ſpeake in the latter ende of the 4 booke. For theſe thinges, vpon the ſight of
Caeſars letters, a generall ſupplication was proclaimed in Rome for 15 daies together,
which honour before that time had happened to no man. And thus endeth the ſecond
Commentarie.
            
         
         
            
            OBSERVATIONS VPON
THE THIRD BOOKE OF CAESAR
HIS COMMENTARIES.
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               
                  THis Commentarie beginneth with an Accident, which
happened in the latter ende of the former ſommer;
wherein the Belgae had ſo leane a harueſt: and then it
proceedeth to the warre betweene Caeſar and the Veneti; Craſſus
and the Aquitani; Titurius Sabinus and the Curioſolitae: And Titus
Labienus, with the Treuiri.
            
            
               CHAP. I.
               
                  Sergius Galba, being ſent to cleere the paſſage of
the Alpes, was beſieged by the Seduni
and Veragri.
               
               
                  CAESAR taking his iourney into Italie,Caeſar. ſent Sergius Galba
with the twelfth legion, and part of the horſemen vnto the Nantuates,
Veragri & Seduni: whoſe territories are extended from
the riuer Rhone, and the lake Lemanus, vnto the tops of the
higheſt Alpes. The ende of this voyage was chiefely to cleare the
Alpes of theeues and robbers, that liued by the ſpoile of paſsengers
that trauelled betweene Italie and Gallia: Galba hauing order,
if he found it expedient to winter in thoſe partes, after ſome fortunate incounters
and the taking of ſome caſtles and holdes, he concluded a peace, and reſolued to place
two cohortes of his legion, amongst the Nantuates; and himſelfe to winter with the
other cohortes, in a towne of the Veragri, named Octodurus. This towne being ſited
in a narrow valley, and incircled about with mightie high hils, was deuided by a riuer
into two partes, whereof he gaue one part to the Galles, and the other he choſe for his
wintering campe, and fortified it about with a ditch and a rampier. After he had
ſpent many daies of wintering, and giuen order, that corne ſhould be brought thither
for prouiſion; he had intelligence vpon a ſudden, that the Galles, in the night time,
had all left that part of the towne that was allotted vnto them; and that the hils
which hung ouer the valley, wherein the towne ſtood, were poſſeſt with great multitudes
of the Seduni, and Veragri. The reaſons of this ſudden commotion were cheefly

the paucitie of the Roman forces, not making a compleat legion; for as much as two
cohorts wintered amongst the Nantuates: beſides many particulars, that were wanting
vpon neceſsarie occaſions. And to make them more contemptible in regard of
themſelues, the place affoorded ſuch aduantage, that they were perſwaded by reaſon
of the ſteepe decliuitie of the hill, that the Romans would not indure the brunt of the
firſt aſsault: beſides this, it greeued them exceedingly to haue their children taken
from them, vnder the title of hoſtages; and the Alpes, which nature had exempted
from habitation, and placed as boundes betweene two large kingdomes, to be ſeaſed
vpon by the Roman legions, and vnited to their Prouince.
               Vpon theſe aduertiſements, Galba not hauing as yet finiſhed the fortification of his
campe, nor made prouiſion of corne and forrage for the winter ſeaſon, in that he little
feared any motion of warre, being ſecured of their amitie, and obedience, both by hoſtages
and rendrie: he preſently called a councell of warre, to determine what courſe
was beſt to be taken. In which councell the mindes of many were ſo amazed, with the
terrour of ſo vnexpected a danger, when they beheld the hils peſtered with armed ſoldiers,
the paſſages taken and intercepted by the enemie, and no hope left of any ſuccour or reliefe, that they could thinke of no other waie for their ſafetie, then leauing
behind them their baggage and impediments, to ſallie out of their campe, and ſo to
ſaue themſelues by the ſame waie they came thither: notwithſtanding the greater part
concluded, to referre that reſolution to the laſt puſh; and in the meane time, to attend
the fortune of the euent, and defend the campe.
               
                  THE OBSERVATION.
                  
                     WHich aduiſe although at this time ſorted to ſmall effect; yet it better
ſuted the valour of the Romans, and ſauoured more of tempered magnanimitie,
then that former hazard, which argued the weakeneſſe of
their mindes, by their ouer haſtie and too forward reſolution. For as
it imported greater danger, and diſcouered a more deſperate ſpirit, to breake
through the thickeſt troupes of their enemies, and ſo by ſtrong hand to ſaue
themſelues by the helpe of ſome other fortune; ſo it manifeſted a greater apprehenſion
of terrour, and a ſtronger impreſſion of feare, which can affoord nothing
but deſperate remedies: for deſperate and inconſiderate raſhnes riſeth ſooner
of feare, then of any other paſſion of the mind. But ſuch as beheld the danger
with a leſſe troubled eie and qualified the terrour of death with the life of
their ſpirite, reſeruing extremitie of helpe to extremitie of perill, and in the
meane time attended what chances of aduantage might happen vnto them, vpon
any enterpriſe the enemie ſhould attempt; I ſay, they ſo gaue greater ſcope
to fortune and inlarged the boundes of changing accidents.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. II.
               
                  The enemie ſetteth vpon the wintering campe:
Galba ouerthroweth them.
               
               
                  THE councell being diſmiſſed,Caeſar. they had ſcarce time to put in execution
ſuch thinges, as were agreed vpon for their defence: but the
enemie at a watchword giuen aſſaulted the campe, on all ſides with
ſtones and dartes, and other caſting weapons: the Romans at firſt
when their ſtrength was freſh, valiantly reſiſted the brunt of the
charge; neither did they ſpend in vaine any weapon which they
caſt from the rampier; but what part ſoeuer of their campe ſeemed to be in greateſt
danger, and want of helpe, thither they came with ſuccour and reliefe; but herein
they were ouermatched. For the enemie being ſpent and wearied with fight, whenſoeuer
anie of them gaue place and forſooke the battell, there were alwaies freſh
combatants to ſupplie it: but the Romans by reaſon of their ſmall number, had no
ſuch helpe. For their extremitie in that point was ſuch, that no man was permitted
neither for wearineſſe nor woundes, to forſake his ſtation, or abandon his charge.
And hauing thus fought continually the ſpace of ſixe houres, when both ſtrength
and weapons wanted, the enemie perſiſting with greater furie to fill the ditch and
breake downe the rampier, and their hopes relying vpon the laſt expectation: P.
Sex. Baculus the Primipile of that legion, whom we ſaid to be ſo ſore wounded in
the Neruian battell, and Caius Voluſenus Tribune of the ſouldiers, a man of ſingular
courage and wiſedome, ranne ſpeedily to Galba and tolde him, that the only waie
of ſafetie was to breake out vpon the enemie, and to trie the laſt refuge in that extremitie.
Whereupon they called the Centurions, and by them admoniſhed the ſoldiers
to ſurceaſe a while from fighting, and onely to receiue ſuch weapons as were
caſt into the campe; and ſo to reſt themſelues a little and recouer their ſtrength:
and then at a watchword to ſallie out of their campe, and laie their ſafety vpon their
vertue; which the ſouldiers executed with ſuch alacritie and courage of ſpirite,
that breaking out at all the gates of the campe, they gaue no leaſure to the enemie to
conſider what was done, nor to ſatiſfie his iudgement touching ſo vnexpected a noueltie.
And thus fortune being ſuddenly changed, they ſlewe more then the third
part of 30000, and put the rest to flight, not ſuffering them to ſtaie vpon the hils
neere about them.
               
                  OBSERVATIONS.
                  
                     WHich ſtrange alteration liuely deſcribeth the force of noueltie,The force of nouelty turning the for tune of a battell. and
the effectuall power of vnexpected aduētures: for in the firſt courſe
of their proceeding, wherein the Romans defended the campe, and
the Galles charged it by aſſault, the victorie held conſtant with the
Galles, and threatned death and mortality to the Romans. Neither had they any

meanes to recouer hope of better ſucceſſe, but by trying another waie; which
ſo much the more amazed the Galles, in that they had vehemently apprehended
an opinion of victorie, by a ſet fight continuing the ſpace of ſixe houres,
without any likelihood of contrarietie, or alteration. Which practiſe, of fruſtrating
a deſſigne intended by an indirect and contrary anſwere, ſerued the Romans
oftentimes to great aduantage; as beſides this preſent example, in this
Commentarie we ſhall afterward read, how Titurius Sabinus defeated the Vnellos,
with the ſame ſtratagem; and ouerthrew them by eruption and ſallying out,
when they expected nothing but a defenſiue reſiſtance from the rampier. From
whence a commander may learne, to auoide two contrarie inconueniences, according
as the qualitie of the warre ſhall offer occaſion: firſt (if other thinges be
anſwerable, which a iudicious eie will eaſily diſcouer) that a ſallie made out at
diuers portes of a holde, will much mitigate the heate of a charge, and controll
the furie of an enemie. And on the other ſide, he that beſiegeth any place what
aduantage ſoeuer he hath of the defendant, may much better aſſure himſelfe of
good fortune, if he appoint certaine troupes in readines to receiue the charge
of any eruption, that the reſt that are buſily imploied in the aſſault may prouide
to anſwere it, without diſorder or confuſion. Which order, if the Galles had taken,
they had not in likelihood ſo often been deceiued.
               
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               
                  Galba returneth into the Prouince: the Vnelli
giue occaſion of a new warre.
               
               
                  THE enemie being thus defeated,Caeſar. Galba was vnwilling to trie
fortune any further; and the rather for that he wanted both
corne and forrage: and therefore hauing burned the towne, the
next daie he returned towardes the Prouince, and without let
or reſiſtance, brought the legion ſafe into the Nantuates; and
from thence to theSauoiens. Allobrogae, and there he wintered.
               After theſe thinges were diſpatched: Caeſar ſuppoſing for
manie reaſons, that all Gallia was now in peace, and that there was no further feare
of anie new warre, the Belgae being ouerthrowen, the Germans thruſt out, and the
Seduni amongſt the Alpes ſubdued and vanquiſhed; in the beginning of the winter,
as he went into Illyricum, hauing a great deſire to ſee thoſe nations: there grewe a
ſudden tumult and diſsention in Gallia vpon this occaſion. Pub. Craſsus wintering
with the ſeuenth legion in Aniou neare vnto the Ocean, and finding ſcarcitie of corne
in thoſe partes; he ſent out the Prefects of the horſemen, and Tribunes into the next
cities to demaund corne, and other prouiſions for his legion, of whom Titus Terraſidius
was ſent vnto theLe Perche. Venelli, Marcus Trebius to theCornoaille in Bretaine Curioſolitae, Q. Velanius, and
Titus Silius to theVannes. Veneti. Theſe Veneti were of greateſt authoritie amongst all
the maritimate nations in that coaſt, by reaſon of their great ſtore of ſhipping, with

which they did trafficke into Britanie, and exceeded all their neighbour ſtates in skill
and experience of ſea-faring matters; hauing the moſt part of ſuch as vſed thoſe ſeas,
tributaries to their ſtate: Theſe Veneti firſt aduentured to retaine Silius and Velanius,
hoping thereby to recouer their hoſtages which they had giuen to Craſſus. The finitimate
cities induced by their authoritie and example, for the ſame reaſon, laide hold
vpon Trebius and Terraſidius; and ſending ſpeedie ambaſſages one vnto another,
coniured by their Princes and chiefeſt magiſtrates, to approue their fact by common
conſent, and to attend all the ſame euent of fortune; ſolliciting alſo other cities and
ſtates, rather to maintaine that libertie, which they had receiued of their Anceſtors,
then to indure the ſeruile bondage of a ſtranger.
               
                  THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
                  
                     THe circumſtance in this hiſtorie, which noteth the ſudden breaking
out of warres, when the courſe of thinges made promiſe of peace:
ſheweth firſt,The weakenes of our iudgement in regard of the knowledge of future times. what ſmall aſſurance our reaſon hath of her diſcourſe,
in calculating the natiuitie of After-chances; which ſo ſeldome anſwere
the iudgment we giue vpon their beginnings, that when we ſpeake of happineſſe,
we finde nothing but miſerie: and contrariwiſe, it goeth often well with
that part, which our Art hath condemned to ill fortune. And therefore I do not
maruel, if when almoſt all nations are at oddes, and in our beſt conceites, threaten
deſtruction one to another, there happen a ſudden motion of peace; or if
peace be in ſpeech, ſoothing the world with pleaſing tranquilitie, and through
the vncertainty of our weake probabilities, promiſe much reſt after many troubles:
there follow greater wars in the ende, then the former time can truely
ſpeake of. Which being well vnderſtood, may humble the ſpirits of our hautie
polititians, that thinke to comprehend the concluſions of future times, vnder
the premiſſes of their weake proiectes, and predeſtinate ſucceeding ages, accorto
the courſe of the preſent motion: when an accident ſo little thought of,
ſhall breake the maine ſtreame of our iudgment, and falſifie the Oracles which
our vnderſtanding hath vttered. And it may learne them withall, how much it
importeth a wiſe commander, to preuent an euill that may croſſe his deſſigne,
(how vnlikely ſoeuer it be to happen) by handling it in ſuch manner, as though
it were neceſſarily to confront the ſame. For then a thing is well done, when it
hath in it ſelfe both the cauſes of his being; and the direct meanes to reſiſt the
repugnancie of a contrarie nature: and ſo hap what will, it hath great poſſibility
to continue the ſame.
               
               
                  THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
                  
                     THis practiſe of the Veneti may inſtruct a circumſpect Prince in caſes
of this nature, to haue a more watchfull eie ouer that Prouince or city,
which ſhall be found moſt potent and mightie amongſt the reſt, then
of any other inferiour ſtate of the ſame nature and condition: for as example of

it ſelfe is of great Authoritie,The Authority of exāple. making improbabilities ſeeme full of reaſon, eſpecially
when the intention ſhal ſympathize with our will; ſo when it ſhall happen
to be ſtrengthened with powerfull meanes, and graced with the Acte of ſuperiour
perſonages: it muſt needes be verie effectuall to ſtirre vp mens mindes, to
approue that with a ſtrong affection, which their owne ſingle iudgment did no
waie allow of. And therfore equalitie bringeth this aduantage to a Prince, which
differencie can not affoord, that albeit example doe ſet on foote any rebellious
motion, yet no ſupereminencie ſhall authoriſe the ſame.
               
            
            
               CHAP. IIII.
               
                  Caeſar hauing aduertiſement of theſe new troubles;
haſteth into Gallia and prepareth
for the warre.
               
               
                  ALL the maritimate ſtates being by this meanes drawne into
the ſame conſpiracie,Caeſar. they ſent a common ambaſſage vnto
Craſſus; that if he would haue his men againe, he muſt deliuer
vp the hoſtages, which he had taken from them. Whereof
Caeſar being certified by Craſsus, in as much as he was then a
great way diſtant from his Armie, he commanded Gallies and
ſhippes of warre to be built vpon the riuerLigeris. Loier, which runneth
into the Ocean; and that Gallie men, Mariners, and Shipmaſters ſhould be muſtered
in the Prouince: which being ſpeedely diſpatched, aſsoone as the time of the yeare
would permit him, he came into Gallia. The Veneti and the reſt of the confederacie,
vnderſtanding of Caeſars arriuall, and conſidering how haynous a fact they had committed,
in detaining the ambaſsadours and caſting them into yrons, whoſe name is
held ſacred and inuiolable amongst all nations: prepared accordingly to anſwere ſo
eminent a danger, & eſpecially ſuch neceſſaries, as pertained to ſhipping & ſea-fights.
               
                  THE OBSERVATION.
                  
                     FRom hence I may take occaſion,The groundes of that reuerent opinion which is held of ambaſſadors. briefely to touch the reuerent opinion,
which all nations, howe barbarous ſoeuer, haue generally
conceiued of the qualitie and condition of ambaſſadours: and what
the groundes are of this vniuerſall receiued cuſtome, which in all ages,
and times hath held Authenticall. And firſt we are to vnderſtand, that all
man kinde (as indued with the ſame nature and properties) are ſo linked together
in the ſtrict alliance of humane ſociety; that, albeit their turbulent and diſagreeing
paſſions (which in themſelues are vnnaturall, as proceeding from corruption
and defect) driue them into extreme diſcord and diſunion of ſpirit, and
breake the bonds of ciuill conuerſation, which otherwiſe we do naturally affect:

yet without a neceſſarie entercourſe and trafficke of ſocietie, we are not able to
keepe on foote the very diſcord it ſelfe, in tearmes of reaſon and orderly proceeding,
but all parts will be blended with diſordered confuſion, & go to wrack,
for want of theſe mutuall offices performed by meſſengers: ſo ſtreight are the
bondes of nature, and ſo powerfull are the lawes which ſhe enacteth. And therfore
if it were for no other end, which might ſort to the benefit of either partie,
(as there are many good vſes thereof) yet to holde vp the quarrell and keepe it
from falling, making war, according to the grounds of reaſon, the entercourſe of
meſſengers is not to be interrupted, nor their perſons to be touched with hateful
violence: but that which the common reaſon of nations hath made a law, ought
as religiouſly to be obſerued, as an Oracle of our owne beliefe. Secondly, for
as much as the ende of warre is, or at the leaſt ſhould be, peace: which by treatie
of mutuall meſſengers is principally to be confirmed, to the end that no people
may ſeeme ſo barbarous, as to maintaine a warre; which onelie intendeth
bloud, and propoſeth as the chiefeſt obiect, the death and mortality of mankind,
no way reſpecting peace and ciuill gouernment: ſuch as refuſe the entercourſe
of meſſengers, as the meanes of amitie and concord, are iuſtly condemned in
the iudgment of all nations, as vnworthie of humane ſocietie. Laſt of all, it is
an iniurie of great diſhonour, and deſerueth the reward of extreme infamie, to
reuenge the maſter his quarrell vpon a ſeruant, and puniſh ambaſſadours for the
faults of their ſtate: conſidering that their chiefeſt dutie conſiſteth in the faithfull
relation of ſuch mandates, as they haue receiued, which may as well tende
to the aduancement and honour of that cittie, to which they are ſent; as to the
diſhonour and ruine of the ſame, whereof the meſſengers take no notice. And
therefore whether we deſire warre or peace; the free libertie, and holy order of
ambaſſadours, is reuerently to be reſpected, and defended from brutiſh and vnnaturall
violence.
               
            
            
               CHAP. V.
               
                  The proceedings of either partie, in the entrance
of this warre.
               
               
                  THE Veneti conceiued great hope of their enterpriſe,Caeſar. by reaſon
of the ſtrength of their ſituation: for as much as all the paſsages
by land were broken and cut off, with armes and creekes
of the ſea; and on the other ſide, nauigation and entrance by
ſea was ſo troubleſome and dangerous, in that the Romans
were altogether vnacquainted with the chanels, and ſhelues of
the coaſt. Neither did they thinke that the Roman Armie
could long continue there without corne, which was not to be had in thoſe quarters.
And if it happened, that the courſe of thinges were carried contrarie to this probable
expectation; yet they themſelues were ſtrong in ſhipping: whereas the Romans had

none at all: Neither had they knowledge of the flats and ſhallowes, Portes and Ilands
of that coaſt, where they were to fight. And to conclude, they ſhould finde the vſe
of Nauigation in that narrow ſea, to be farre different from that, which they were accuſtomed
vnto,Lendriguer. Lyſieux. Nantes. Aurenche. Leondoul. Cities in little Britaine. in the vaſt and open Ocean. In this reſolution, they fortified their
townes, ſtored them with prouiſion, and brought all their ſhipping to Vannes; againſt
whom, Caeſar (as it was reported) would begin to make warre, taking the Oſiſimi,
Lexouij, Nannetes, Ambiuariti, Morini, Menapij, Diablintres, as conſorts and partakers
in this quarrell. Notwithſtanding theſe difficulties, many motiues ſtirred vp
Caeſar to vndertake this war: as namely, the violent detaining of the Roman knights:
their rebellion, after they had yeelded themſelues by rendrie, and giuen hoſtages of
their loialtie: the conſpiracie of ſo manie citties, which being now neglected, might
afterward incite other nations and ſtates to the like inſolencie. And therefore vnderſtanding,
that almoſt all the Galles were inclining to noueltie and alteration, and of
their owne nature, were quicke and readie to vndertake a warre; and further, conſidering
that all men by nature deſired libertie, and hated the ſeruile condition of bondage:
he preuented all further inſurrections of the other ſtates, with the preſence of
the Roman forces: and ſent Titus Labienus with the Caualrie, vnto theTriers. Treuiri,
that bordered vpon the Rhene: to him he gaue in charge, to viſit the men of Rhemes
and the reſt of the Belgae, to keepe them in obedience; and to hinder ſuch forces, as
might peraduenture be tranſported ouer the riuer by the Germains, to further this
rebellious humour of the Galles. He commanded likewiſe Pub. Craſsus, with 12 legionarie
cohortes, and a great part of the horſe to go into Aquitaine, leaſt there might
come any aide from thoſe nations. He ſent alſo Q. Titurius Sabinus with three legions,
vnto the Lexouij, Curioſolitae, Vnelli, to diſappoint any practiſe which rebellious
mindes might intend. And making D. Brutus chiefe Admirall of the nauie, he
gaue him in charge, to make towardes Vannes, with what ſpeede he could: and hee
himſelfe marched thitherward with the reſt of the foote forces.
               
                  THE OBSERVATION.
                  
                     IN the firſt booke, I obſerued the authoritie which the Roman leaders
had to vndertake a warre, without further acquainting the ſenat
with the conſequence thereof: in this place, let vs obſerue the care
and circumſpection, which the Generals had, not to vndertake a
troubleſome and dangerous warre vpon a humor, or any other ſlender motion:
but diligently waighing the circumſtances thereof, and meaſuring the perill and
hazard of the warre, with the good and conſequence of the effect; informed
their iudgments of the importance of that action; and ſo tried whether the benefit
would anſwere their labour. And thus we finde the reaſons particularly deliuered,
that moued Caeſar firſt to vndertake the Heluetian warre: and then the
cauſes which drew him on to the quarrell with Ariouiſtus: then followeth the
neceſſitie of that warre with the Belgae; and nowe the motiues which induced
him to this with the maritimate cities of Bretaine: and ſo conſequently of his
paſſage into Germanie, or what other enterpriſe he attempted: which he laieth

downe as the groundes and occaſions of thoſe warres, and could not be auoided
but with the loſſe and diſhonour of the Roman Empire.
                  Further, let vs obſerue the meanes he vſed to preuent the inclination of the
Galles, and to keepe them in ſubiection and peaceable obedience, by ſending
his men into diuers quarters of that continent; and ſo ſetling the wauering diſpoſition
of the further skirtes, with the waight of his Armie, and the preſence
of his legionarie ſouldiers, which he ſent readie to ſtifle all motions of rebellion
in the beginning, that they might not breake out to the preiudice and diminution
of the Roman Empire, and the good ſucceſſe of his proceedings: beſides the
aduantage, which he gained in the opinion of the enemie; whom he ſo little feared
concerning the vpſhot of that quarrell, that he had diſperſed the greateſt
part of his Armie vpon other ſeruices, the reſt being ſufficient to end that war.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VI.
               
                  The maner of their ſhipping, and their
ſea-fight.
               
               
                  THE ſcite,Caeſar. of almoſt all theſe cities was ſuch, that being built
in pointes and promontories, they could not at full ſea, which
happened alwaies twiſe in 12 houres, be approched by foot forces,
nor yet with ſhipping neither; for againe▪ in an ebbe, the
veſſalles were laid on the ground, and ſo left as a praie to the
enemy. And if the Romans went about to ſhut out the ſea,
with mounts which they raiſed equal to the wals of the town,
and were at the point of entering & taking it: yet the townſmen
hauing ſuch ſtore of ſhipping, would eaſily conuey, both themſelues and their
cariages, into the next townes, and there helpe themſelues with the like aduantage
of place. And thus they deluded Caeſar the greateſt part of the ſommer: for the Roman
fleete by reaſon of continuall windes and foule weather, durſt not aduenture
to put out of the riuer Loier into ſo vaſt a ſea, wherein the hauens and roades
were fewe, and farre distant one from another, and the tides great. The ſhipping of
the Galles was thus built and rigged: the keele was ſomewhat flatter then the Roman
ſhipping, the better to beare the ebbes, and ſhalowes of that coast: the foredecke
was altogether erect and perpendicular: the poupe was made to beare the hugeneſſe
of the billowes, and the force of the tempeſt. And in a word, they were altogether
built for ſtrength: for the ribbes and ſeates were made of beames of a foote
ſquare, faſtned with yron pins of an inch thicke: in ſteed of cables, they vſed chaines
of yron; and raw hides and skins for ſailes, either for want of linnen or ignorant of
the vſe thereof, or becauſe ſailes of linnen would hardly ſerue to carrie ſhips of that
burthen.
               The meeting and conflict of the Roman nauie, with this kinde of ſhips was ſuch,
that they onely excelled them in celeritie and ſpeedie nimblenes, with force of oares;
but in all other thinges, either concerning the nature of the place, or the dangers of
the foule weather, were farre inferiour vnto them: for the ſtrength of them was

ſuch, that they could neither hurt them with their beake-heads, nor caſt a weapon to
anie purpoſe into them, by reaſon of their altitude, and high built bulkes. And if
anie guſt chanced in the meane time to riſe, that forced them to commit themſelues
to the mercie of the weather, their ſhipping would better beare the rage of the ſea;
and with greater ſafetie ſhelter it ſelfe amongst flats and ſhallowes, without feare of
rockes or any ſuch hazard: of all which chances the Roman nauie ſtood continually in
danger.
               
                  OBSERVATIONS.
                  
                     ANd here,The cauſes of the ebbing and flowing of the ſea. let it not ſeeme impertinent to the argument which we
handle, conſidering the generall vſe which we Inſulairs haue of nauigation,
briefly to ſet downe the moſt eminent cauſes of the flowing
and ebbing of the ſea, as farre forth as ſhall ſeeme neceſſarie to
the knowledge of a ſouldier: which, albeit may fall ſhort of the true reaſons of
this great ſecret; yet for as much as they ſtand for true principles of regularitie,
and well approued rules in our Arte of nauigation, let vs take them for no
leſſe then they effect, and giue them that credit in our imagination, which tract
of time hath gained to thoſe forged circles in the heauens: that albeit their
chiefeſt eſſence conſiſteth in conceit and ſuppoſal; yet for as much as they ſerue
to direct our knowledge to a certainty, in that variety and ſeeming inconſtancie
of motion, we eſteeme of them as they effect, and not as they are.
                  Conſidering then the globe of the world, as it maketh a right ſpheare (for
in that poſition, the Naturaliſtes chiefly vnderſtand celeſtiall influence to haue
operation in this liquid element of the water) it is deuided by the Horizon and
Meridian into foure quarters: the firſt quarter is that, betweene the eaſt horizon
and the noone meridian, which they cal a flowing quarter: the ſecond, from
the noone meridian, to the weſt horizon; which they make an ebbing quarter:
the third, from the weſt horizon to the midnight meridian; which they likewiſe
call a flowing quarter: and againe, from the midnight meridian to the eaſt horizon,
the ſecond ebbing quarter: And ſo they make two flowing quarters,
and two ebbing quarters of the whole circuit of heauen. The inſtruments of
theſe ſenſible qualities, and contrarie effects, are the ſunne and the moone, as
they are caried through theſe diſtinct partes of the heauen. And although experience
hath noted the moone to be of greateſt power in warrie motions; yet
we may not omit to acknowledge the force, which the ſunne yeeldeth in this
miracle of nature.
                  Firſt therfore we are to vnderſtand, that when the moone or the ſunne begin
to appeare aboue the right horizon, and enter into that part of the heauen which
I tearmed the firſt flowing quarter, that then the ſea beginneth to ſwell: and as
they mount vp to their meridian altitude; ſo it increaſeth vntill it come to a
high floud. And againe, as thoſe lightes paſſing the meridian, decline to the
weſt, and runne the circuit of the ebbing quarter: ſo the water decreaſeth and
returneth againe from whence it came. Againe, as they ſet vnder the weſt horizon

and enter into the ſecond flowing quarter; ſo the ſea beginneth againe to
flow, and ſtill increaſeth vntill they come to the point of the night meridian:
and then againe, it refloweth, according as the ſunne and moone are carried in
the other ebbing quarter from the night meridian, to the eaſt horizon.
                  And hence it happeneth that in coniunction or new of the moone,Spring tides. when the
ſunne and the moone are caried both together in the ſame flowing, and ebbing
quarters; that then the tides and ebbes are very great: and likewiſe in oppoſition
or full of the moone, when theſe lightes are caried in oppoſite quarters, which
we haue deſcribed to be of the ſame nature, either ebbing or flowing; that then
in like manner the tides are great: foraſmuch as both theſe Planets, through
the ſymboliſing quarters wherein they are carried, doe ioyne their forces, to
make perfect this worke of nature in the ebbing and flowing of the ſea. And
contrariwiſe, in a quadrate aſpect (as the Aſtronomers call it) or quarter age of
the moone, when as the moone is caried in a flowing quarter; and at the ſame
inſtant, the ſunne doth happen to be in an ebbing or decreaſing quarter, as the
courſe of nature doth neceſſarily require: then are the tides leſſoned, as dailie
experience doth witneſſe.
                  And for as much as both the right horizon and the meridian alſo, deuide euerie
diurnall circle, which either the ſun or the moone maketh in their reuolutions,
into equall parts; it followeth that euery tide is continually meaſured with
the quantitie of 6 houres: and therfore that which Caeſar here ſaith, muſt needs
be true, that in the ſpace of 12 houres, there are alwaies 2 high tides. And leaſt
any man ſhould imagine, that euery inland citie, ſtanding vpon an ebbing and
flowing riuer, may take the computation of the tide according to this rule: let
him vnderſtand that this which I haue deliuered, is to be conceiued principally
of the ſea it ſelfe; and ſecondarily of ſuch portes and hauens, as ſtand either
neare or vpon the ſea: but where a riuer ſhall run many miles from the ſea, and
make many winding meanders, before it come to the place of calculation; it
muſt needs loſe much of this time before mentioned. And thus much I thought
conuenient to inſert in theſe diſcourſes touching the ebbing and flowing of the
ſea, as not impertinent to martiall knowledge.
                  Concerning the ſhipping of the Romans,The manner of their ſhipping. whereof poſteritie hath onely receiued
the bare names, and ſome fewe circumſtances touching the manner of
their Equipage, the Critickes of theſe times haue laboured to ſet foorth a fleet,
anſwerable to that, which the tearmes and title mentioned in hiſtorie ſeeme to
report: but yet the gaine of their voyage doth not anſwere their charge. For
manie men reſt vnſatisfied, firſt touching the names themſelues, whereof wee
finde theſe kindes,
                  Names

                        Longas.
                        Onerarias.
                        Actuarias.
                        Triremes.
                        Quadriremes.
                        Quinqueremes.
                     
                  
                  The firſt we may vnderſtand to be Gallies or ſhips of ſeruice: the ſecond ſhips

of burthen: the third, ſhips that were driuen forward with force of oares, and
the reſt ſounding according to their Names; for I dare not intitle them with
a more particular deſcription. Nowe whether theſe Names Longas and Actuarias,
were a ſeuerall ſorte of ſhipping by themſelues; or the generall
Names of the Quadriremes, Triremes, and Quinqueremes, for as much as euerie
kinde of theſe might be called both Longas and Actuarias, as it yet remaineth
in controuerſie: ſo it is not much materiall to that which wee ſeeke after.
But that which moſt troubleth our ſea-Critickes, is in what ſenſe they maie
vnderſtand theſe vocabularies, Triremes, Quadriremes, and Quinqueremes,
whether they were ſo tearmed in regard of the number of rowers, or watermen
that haled continually at an oare, as the cuſtome of the Gallies is at this
daie; or otherwiſe, becauſe a Trireme had three orders of oares on either ſide,
a Quadrireme foure, and a Quinquereme fiue: whereof they tooke their diſtinction
of Names.
                  Such as holde,Lib. 27. that a Trireme had on each ſide three rankes of oares, and ſo
conſequently, of a Quadrireme and Quinquereme; alleadge this place of Liuie,
to make good their opinion. In the warres betweene Rome and Carthage,
Laelius meeting with Adherball in the ſtraightes of Gibraltar, each of them
had a Quinquereme, and ſeauen or eight Triremes a piece, the current in that
place was ſo great that it gaue no place to Arte, but carried the veſſailes according
to the fall of the Billow: in which vncertaintie the Triremes of the Carthaginean,
cloſed with the Quinquereme of Laelius: which either becauſe ſhe
was pondere tenacior, as Liuie ſaith, or otherwiſe, for that pluribus remorum ordinibus
ſcindentibus vertices facilius regeretur; in regarde of the pluralitie of
bankes of oares, which reſiſted the billowe and ſteamed the current, ſhe ſunke
two of the Triremes, and ſo got the victorie. From hence they proue, that a
Quinquereme had plures remorum ordines, then a Trireme had; and therefore it
tooke the name from the pluralitie of bankes of oares, and not from the number
of men that rowed at an oare.
                  But the contrarie opinion doth interpret Ordo Remorum, to be a couple of
oares one anſwering another, on each ſide of the veſſaile, which we call a paire of
oares: So that a Quinquereme being far greater and longer then a Trireme, had
more paires of oares then a Trireme had, and thoſe oares were handled with fiue
men at one oare, according to the vſe of our Gallies at this daie.
                  But to leaue this,Their maner of ſea-fights. and come to their manner of ſea-fights, wee muſt vnderſtand
that the Romans, wanting the vſe of Artillerie and managing their ſhips
of warre with force of oares, failed not to make vſe of their Arte, in their conflictes
and incounters by ſea: for all their ſhippes of ſeruice, which we tearme
men of warre, carried a ſtrong beake-head of yron, which they called rostrum,
with which they ranne one againſt another, with as great violence and furie, as
their oares could carrie them. And herein Arte gaue great aduantage; for he
that could beſt skill to turne his ſhip, with greateſt celeritie, and ſo fruſtrate an
offer; or with ſpeedie and ſtrong agitation follow an aduantage: commonly got
the victorie.
                  In the battell,Lib. 2. de bello ciuili. which D. Brutus had with the Maſſilians, we reade that two

Triremes charging the Admirall, wherein Brutus was one at the one ſide, and
the other at the other; Brutus and his Marriners ſo cunningly handled the matter,
that when they ſhould come to the hurt, they ſpeedily in a trice of time,
wound themſelues from betweene them, and the two Triremes met with ſuch a
carriere one againſt another, that one brake her beakehead, and the other ſplit
with the blowe.
                  For this skill and fortune withall, Euphranor the Rodian was of great fame
in Caeſars time; although his ende found too true the ſaying of the Hiſtorian,
that Whom fortune honoureth with many good haps, ſhe oftentimes reſerueth
to a harder deſtinie; as other ſeamen beſides Euphranor, can truely witneſſe.
                  This firſt brunt being ended: when they came to grapple and boording one
of another, then the art and practiſes of their land ſeruices came in vſe: for they
erected turrets vpon their deckes, and from them they fought with engines and
caſting weapons, as ſlinges, arrowes, and piles; and when they entered, they
fought with ſword and target. Neither did the legionarie ſouldier finde any difference,
when he came to the point, betweene their fight at ſea and that at land:
ſauing that they could not be martialed in troupes and bandes, in regard wherof
the ſea ſeruice was counted more baſe, and diſhonourable; and the rather, in
as much as it decided the controuerſie, by ſlinges and caſting weapons: which
kinde of fight was of leſſe honour, then buckling at handy-blowes.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VII.
               
                  The battell continueth: and Caeſar ouercommeth.
               
               
                  THE maner of their fightes being this,Caeſar. as I haue deſcribed, neither
Brutus, nor any Tribune or Centurion in his nauie, knewe
what to doe or what courſe of fight to take: for the ſhipping of
the Galles was ſo ſtrong, that the beake-head of their Quinqueremes
could performe no ſeruice vpon them: and although they
ſhould raiſe turrets according to their vſe, yet theſe would not
equall in height the poupe of the enemies ſhipping, ſo that therein
alſo the Galles had aduantage: neither had they any meanes, whereby they might
foile ſo great a nauie, which amounted to the number of 230 ſhippes of warre. One
thing there was amongst their prouiſions which ſtood them in great ſteed: for the Romans
had prouided great ſharpe hookes or ſickles, which they put vpon great and long
poles, theſe they faſtened to the tackling which held the maine yarde to the maſt; and
then haling away their ſhip, with force of Oares, they cutte the ſaid tackling, and the
maine yard fell downe: Whereby the Galles, whoſe onely hope conſiſted in ſayling and
yare turning of their ſhips, loſt at one inſtant▪ both their ſailes and the vſe of their ſhipping:
And then the controuerſie fell within the compaſse of valour, wherein the Romans
exceeded the Gals; and the rather, inaſmuch as they fought in the ſight of Caeſar

and the whole Armie, no valiant act could be ſmothered in ſecret; for all the hilles
and clifts, which affoorded neare proſpect into the ſea, were couered with the Roman
Armie.
               Their maine yardes being cutte downe, and the Romans indeuouring with great
furie to boord them, failed not to take manie of their ſhips: which the Galles perceiuing,
and finding no remedie nor hope of reſiſtance, began all to flie, & turning their
ſhips to a forewind, were vpon a ſudden ſo becalmed, that they were able to make no
waie at all. Which fell out ſo fitly for the Romans, that of ſo great a nauie, verie few
through the helpe of the euening eſcaped to land, after they had fought the ſpace of 8
houres: with which battell, ended the warre with the Veneti, and the reſt of the maritimate
nations. For all ſort of people both young and olde, in whom there was either
courage, counſell, or dignitie, were preſent at this battell, and all their ſhipping
was taken and loſt; ſo that ſuch as remained, knew not whither to go, nor how to defend
their townes any longer: and therefore yeelded themſelues to Caeſar, in whom he
vſed the greater ſeueritie, that he might thereby teach all other barbarous people, not
to violate the law of nations: for he ſlew all the Senat with the ſword, and ſolde the
people for bondſlaues.
               
                  THE OBSERVATION.
                  
                     IN this battell I chiefly obſerue the good fortune,The force of industrie. which vſually attendeth
vpon induſtrie: for amongſt other prouiſions, which the diligence
of the Romans had furniſhed out to the vſe of this war, they had made
readie theſe hookes, not for this intent wherin they were imploied, but at all occaſions
& chances, that might happen, as ſeruice able complements rather then
principall inſtruments: and yet it ſo fell out, that they proued the only meanes,
to ouerthrow the Galles. Which proueth true the ſaying of Caeſar, that induſtrie
commaundeth fortune and buyeth good ſucceſſe, with extraordinary labour:
for induſtrie in action is as importunitie in ſpeech, which forceth an aſſent
beyond the ſtrength of reaſon; and ſtriueth through continuall purſuit, to
make good the motiues, by often inculcations; and at length findeth that diſpoſition,
which will eaſily admit whatſoeuer is required: In like manner diligence
and labourſome induſtrie, by circumſpect and heedefull cariage, ſeldome faile
either by hap or cunning, to make good that part wherein the maine point of
the matter dependeth. For euetie action is intangled with many infinite adherents,
which are ſo intereſſed in the matter, that it ſucceedeth according as it is
carried anſwerable to their natures. Of theſe adherentes, ſome of them are by
wiſedome, foreſeene; and directed to that courſe which may fortunate the action:
the reſt being vnknowne, continue without either direction or preuention,
and are all vnder the regiment of fortune; for as much as they are beyonde the
compaſſe of our wiſeſt reach, and ſtand in the waie either to aſſiſt or diſaduantage:
Of theſe, induſtrie hath greateſt authoritie; in as much as ſhe armeth her
ſelfe for all chances, whereby ſhe is ſaid to command fortune.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. VIII.
               
                  Sabinus ouerthroweth theLa Perche. Vnelli, with the
manner thereof.
               
               
                  WHILE theſe things happened in the ſtate of Vannes,Caeſar. L.
Titurius Sabinus entereth with his forces, into the confines
of the Vnelli, ouer whom Viridouix was made chiefe
commander, hauing drawne theRhone. Aulerci and theEureux. Eburonices,
with a great number of vagabondes and theeues
into the ſame conſpiracie: Sabinus incamping himſelfe in
a conuenient place, kept his ſouldiers within the rampier. But Viridouix, being lodged
within leſse then two miles of Sabinus his campe, brought out his forces daily, and
putting them in battell gaue him oportunitie to fight if he would: which Sabinus refuſed
in ſuch ſort, that he began not onely to be ſuſpected by the enemie of cowardice,
but to be taunted with the reprochfull ſpeeches of his owne ſouldiers; which opinion
of feare being once ſetled in the mindes of the enemie, he vſed all meanes to increaſe
it, and caried it ſo wel, that the enemie durſt approch the verie rampier of the campe.
The colour that he pretended was, that he thought it not the part of a Legate, in the
abſence of the Generall, to fight with an enemie of that ſtrength, but vpon ſome good
oportunitie, or in a place of aduantage. In this generall perſwaſion of feare, Sabinus
choſe out a ſubtile witted Gall, whom he perſwaded with great rewards, and further
promiſes, to flie to the enemie, and there to carrie himſelfe, according to the inſtructions,
which he ſhould giue him. This Gall, comming as a reuolter to the enemy, laide
open vnto them the feare of the Romans: the extremitie that Caeſar was driuen into
by the Veneti; and that the night before, Sabinus was about to withdraw his forces
ſecretly out of his campe, and to make all the haſte he could to relieue Caeſar. Vpon
which aduertiſement, they all cried out with one conſent, that this oportunity was not
to be omitted; but ſetting apart all other deuiſes, to go and aſſault the Roman campe.
Many circumſtances perſwaded the Galles to this reſolution; as firſt the lingering &
doubt which Sabinus had made, when he was offered battell: ſecondly the intelligence
which this fugitiue had brought: thirdly the want of victuals, wherein they had bin
negligent and vnaduiſedly careleſſe: fourthly the hope they conceiued of the warre of
Vannes; and laſtly, for that men willingly beleeue that which they would haue come
to paſse. The force of theſe motiues was ſo ſtrong, that they would not ſuffer Viridouix,
nor the reſt of the captaines, to diſmiſſe the councell vntill they had permitted
them to take Armes, and go to the Roman campe. Which being granted, they gathered
rubbiſh and fagots to fill vp the ditch, and with cheerefull harts, as though the victorie
were alreadie gotten, they marched to the place where Sabinus was incamped,
which was the toppe of a hill riſing gently from a leuell, the quantitie of 1000 paces:
hither the Gals haſted with all expedition; and to the intent the Romans might
not haue ſo much time, as to put on their armour, the Galles for haſte ran themſelues
out of breath.
               
                  
Sabinus incouraging his ſouldiers, gaue the ſigne of battell, and ſallying out at two
ſeuerall gates of his campe, it fell out that through the oportunitie of the place, the
wearines and vnexperience of the enemie, the valour of the Roman ſoldier and their
exerciſe in former battels, that the Galles could not indure the brunt of the firſt incounter;
but preſently tooke themſelues to flight, of whom verie few eſcaped. And ſo
it happened that at one time, Sabinus had newes of the ouerthrow at ſea; and Caeſar
of Sabinus victory by land. Vpon theſe victories, all the cities and ſtates yeelded themſelues
to Titurius: for as the Galles are prompt to vndertake a warre; ſo are they
weake in ſuffering, and impatient of the conſequents and calamities thereof.
               
                  OBSERVATIONS.
                  
                     THis practiſe of a counterfeit feare was often put in vſe by the Roman
leaders,The vſe which the Romans made of a counterfeit feare. Lib. 5. as well to diſappoint the expectation of an enemie, as to
draw them into an inconuenience, & ſo to defeat them of their greateſt
helpes in time of battell. Caeſar comming to ſuccour the campe
of Cicero made ſuch vſe of this Art, that he put to route a great Armie of the
Galles, with a handfull of men: which I will referre vnto the place, where it is
particularly ſet downe by Caeſar.
                  The chiefeſt thing in this place, which brought them to their ouerthrow,
was diſappointment: for it is a thing hardly to be digeſted in buſineſſes of ſmal
conſequence, to be fruſtrated of a ſetled expectation, when the minde ſhall diſpoſe
her ſelfe to one only intent, and in the vpſhot meete with a counterbuffe
to croſſe her purpoſes, and ſo defeat her of that hope which the ſtrength of her
reaſon hath entertained: how much more then in things of ſuch importance,
when we ſhall proceede in a courſe of victorie, and humour our conceites with
that we wiſh and would haue to happen; and in the end meete, either with bondage
or death; muſt our beſt wittes be appauled? hauing neither reſpite nor
means, to thinke how the euill may be beſt preuented. Which the wiſe Romans
well vnderſtood, and counted it no diſhonour to be reproched with ſhamefull
cowardice, by ſuch as knew not the ſecrets of wiſedome; while they in the meane
time foreſaw their good fortunes, ſhrowded vnder the cloake of a pretended
diſtruſt.
                  Let theſe examples inſtruct a leader, ſo to take the oportunitie of any ſuch
fortune, that in the execution he omit not the chiefeſt points of order and diſcipline,
as well for the better effecting of the deſſigne, as for his owne ſafety and
the ſecuritie of his Armie. For order is as the ſinewes and ſtrength of martiall
diſcipline, vniting the particular members into the firme compoſition of a well
proportioned bodie: and ſo it maketh it more powerfull then any number of
diſunited partes, how able or infinite ſoeuer. I might here alleadge infinite examples
to confirme this truth: but let the battell of Drux ſerue for all; wherein
the proteſtantes ouercharging the catholike Army, followed the retrait ſo hard,
that they quickly became maſters of the field: and then neglecting martiall diſcipline,
fell in confuſedly with the broken multitude, to make the victorie more

glorious by ſlaughter and mortalitie: the Duke of Guiſe all this while bouged
not a foot: but in vnexampled patience kept his regiment cloſe together, and
would not ſuffer them to reſcue their general that was taken, vntill the regiment
of the Prince of Condie was likewiſe diſperſed and broken; and then perceiuing
no difference of order, betweene the Victor Proteſtant, and the vanquiſhed Catholike;
he diſſolued that terrible cloud that had hung ſo long in ſuſpence, and
ſo changing the fortune of the daie, that he tooke the chiefeſt of their Princes
priſoners, with little or no loſſe of his owne men: ſo powerfull is order in the
deedes of Armes, and of ſuch conſequence in obtaining victorie. And thus we
haue firſt ſeene the inconueniences, which a counterfet feare well diſſembled,
may caſt vpon a credulous and vnaduiſed enemie, when pretence and appearance
hath brought them into an errour, which their owne credulitie doth afterward
auouch: and ſecondly, what ſtrength and ſafetie conſiſteth in order; and
how powerfull it is to throw downe, and to ſet vp.
               
            
            
               CHAP. IX.
               
                  The Proceedings of Craſſus in Aquitanie.
               
               
                  AT the ſame inſtant of time it happened alſo,Caeſar. that Pub. Craſſus
comming into Aquitania, (which both in regard of the large
extenſion of the countrey, as alſo for the multitude of the inhabitants,
was named the third part of Gallia) and conſidering
that he was to make warre in thoſe partes, where L. Valerius
Preconius the Legate was ſlaine, and the Armie ouer throwen;
and where Lucius Manilius was faine to flie with the loſſe of
his cariages; he thought that his affaires required no meane diligence: and therfore
hauing made prouiſion of corne, and muſtered many Auxiliarie forces, and ſent for
many valiant and prudent men from Tolouſe and Narbone, he caried his Army into
the confines of theEuocati. Sontiates, which was no ſooner knowne but they leuied great
forces both of horſe & foote, and with their horſe charged vpon the Romans in their
march: which being eaſily repelled, as they followed the retrait, the infanterie of
the Galles ſhewed it ſelfe in a valley as it laie in ambuſh. Theſe ſetting vpon the Romans
renewed the battell, and there the fight continued hot a long time; the Sontiates
being animated with the former victories, ſaw all the hope of Aquitanie relie
vpon their vertue: and the Romans on the other ſide, deſired to ſhew what they
were able to doe of themſelues, without their grand Captaine, and vnder the conduction
of a young ſouldier: At length the enemy ouerwaged with proweſſe, and
wearied with woundes, betooke themſelues to flight; of whom the Romans ſlewe a
great number. And then marched directlie to the towne of the Sontiates, and laid
ſiege vnto if; the ſiege grew hot on both ſides; the Romans approched the walles,
with vines, turrets and mounts: the towneſmen defended themſelues ſome time, by
ſallying out; ſometimes, by vndermining the mounts and fortifications, wherin the
Aquitani are very skilfull. But when they perceiued the induſtry of the Romans
to exceed all that they were able to do, they intreated Craſſus to accept their rendry:

which being granted, and al the armie intending the deliuery of their Armes; Adcantuanus
their chiefe magiſtrate, fled out in the meane time at an other port of the
citie, with 600. deuoted companions whom they called Soldurij: but as they attempted
to eſcape, the ſoldiers that kept that part of the fortification, as they ſignified
his cuaſion by a clamour and ſhout, the reſt be tooke themſelues to armes; and ſo repelled
him againe into the towne, where he deſired to bee taken in the number of the
ſubmiſſiue multitude. Craſſus hauing taken hoſtages of them, went into the confines
of the Vocontij.
               
                  THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
                  
                     THeſe skilfull and experienced men, which Craſſus ſent for out of all
the Cities in Aquitaine,Euocati. were thoſe, whom the Romans called Euocati:
ſuch as were free from warfare, and exempted by their lawes from giuing
their names in muſters, either by reaſon of their yeares, or the magiſtracy
which they had borne, or for ſome other cauſes, which gaue them that priuiledge:
And in that regard were ſent for by letters, intreating their aſſiſtance in
the cariage of that war, as men wel acquainted with the nature of ſuch buſineſſes.
Their places were nothing inferiour to the Centurions, for aduiſe and direction,
although they had no part in command or authority.
               
               
                  THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
                  
                     IN this fight we may further obſerue, their maner of defence againſt
Mountes, and Caualieros; which we find chiefly to bee mines. Ioſephus
in the Iewiſh warre ſaith, that the Romans hauing raiſed an exceeding
high mount, the Iewes vndermined the ſame with ſuch Art,
that as they digged vnderneath; they ſupported the mount with huge props and
planks, that it might not ſhrinke: and watching a time of greateſt aduantage,
they ſet all the timber worke, which vnderpropped the mount, on fire, which taking
fire with the helpe of brimſtone and pitch, the mount fell vpon a ſodaine,
to the great terrour and amazement of the Romans.
                  At the ſiege of Auaricum,
                     Lib. 7. de bello Gall. we find how the Galles by vndermining, did take
the earth from the mount, as faſt as it was caried vnto it by the Romans; and ſo
kept it from riſing, and made it vneffectuall. But if it were for the moſt parte
made of woode, or other combuſtible matter, they ſought then by all meanes
to burne it; as it happened at the ſiege of Maſſilia: and oftentimes when both
burning and vndermining failed, they confronted it, with an other mount within
the walles, to diſappoint the diſaduantage by equall conteſting of it; and ſo
made it vnprofitable. Concerning mines, this much may I ſaie, without preiudice
to that Art: that the chiefeſt points to be reſpected are theſe: Firſt, the true
diſtance to a deſſigned place, which is beſt got by inſtrument and helpe of
Geometrie, where other markes of certainty are wanting: ſecondlie, the
direction of the myne, that wee may not erre in our courſe which the compaſſe
affoordeth: thirdlie, the ſtrengthening of the mine with timber worke,

if neede require: laſtly, the countermining and croſſemeeting: All which parts
haue very many circumſtances, and require a larger diſcourſe, then may bee
thought pertinent for this place.
               
               
                  THE THIRD OBSERVATION.
                  
                     THe ſtrange contract betweene theſe Soldurij, and their chiefetaine,
may wel deſerue a place amongſt theſe obſeruations, eſpeciallie conſidering
the obligatorie conditions, which either party ſtood bound
to obſerue: for the Captaine was to make his Soldurij partakers of
all his happines in this life; in regard whereof, they were to take part of whatſoeuer
ill chance or diſaſter ſhoulde happen to befall him. If death, which is the
laſt end of all ſenſuall miſerie, tooke hold of their head, theſe deuoted were tied
voluntarilie to follow him the ſelfe ſame way: neither in any memory was there
ouer man found, that refuſed to die, if he to whom he was deuoted, chanced to
be ſlaine. Which bloudy league of amitie, as it was repugnant to the courſe of
nature, multiplying particular deſtinie to a generall calamitie: ſo was it dangerous
in a well ordered ſtate, if the ringleader were either ambitious, or ſought
to practiſe any thing contrarie to good gouernement: for hee himſelfe would
preſume much vpon the aſſiſtance of his Soldurij; and they on the other ſide,
muſt needs wiſh well to his attempts that were ſo intereſſed in his life & death.
               
            
            
               CHAP. X.
               
                  The Galles raiſe new forces, againſt Craſſus.
               
               
                  THe barbarous Galles were much troubled,Caeſar. that a towne of that
ſtrength ſhould ſo ſoone bee taken; and therefore they ſent ambaſſadours
into all quarters, coniured one with another, confirmed
their couenants with mutuall hoſtages, and leuied what
power they were able to make: ſending for aide out of Spaine,
and from other ſtates that bordered vpon Aquitaine; at the
comming of theſe forces they began to make warre, with a great
power, and with many ſoldiours of great fame. For they appointed ſuch leaders as
had ſeene the experience of Sertorius his warres, and were great in the opinion of
men, for their skill and knowledge in the arte militarie; theſe according to the custome
of the people of Rome, beganne to take places of aduantage, to fortifie their
campe, and to intercept the Romaines from free paſſage of conu
                     •
                  ies and neceſsary entercourſes.
Which when Craſſus perceiued, and conſidering withall that his owne
forces were ſo few, that hee could not well diſmember them vpon any ſeruice or aduantage;
and that the enemy went out at his pleaſure, kept the paſſages, and left notwithſtanding,
a ſufficient gariſon in his campe; by which meanes their corne and
prouiſion would in time grow ſcarce, and the enemy waxed euery daie ſtronger: he
thought it his beſt courſe not to linger any longer, but preſently to giue them battel.

The matter being referd to a councel of warre, when hee vnderſtoode that all men
were of the ſame opinion, he appointed the next daie to giue them battaile; and in
the dawning putting his men in a double battaile, and placing the Auxiliarie forces
in the middeſt, he attended to ſee what the enemy would doe. The Galles, although
they were perſuaded, that they might aduenture battel both in regard of their multitude
and ancient prowes of warre, as alſo in reſpect of the paucitie of the Romains;
yet they though it better to blocke vp the paſſages, and ſo cut off all cariages, and
conuoies of corne; and ſo the victory would follow without bloudſhed: and if the Romans
for want of corne ſhould offer to make a retreit, they would then ſet vpon them
as they marched, wearied with trauell, and heauilie laden with their burthens. This
reſolution being approued by the whole councell of the Galles, when the Romans imbattailed
their forces, they kept their men within their campe.
               
                  THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
                  
                     THis Sertorius had followed the faction of Marius and Cinna,Sertorius. and
when Sylla had ouerthrowne both the elder and yonger Marius, hee
fled into Spaine, and there maintained the quarrell on foote againſt
Pompeie and Metellus; and ouerthrew them in many battels: but in
the end was trecherouſly ſlaine by Perpanna at a banket. He was a man of great
ſpirit, and of admirable diſpatch; and vnder him were theſe captaines brought
vp, which Caeſar commendeth for their skil in armes.
               
               
                  THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
                  
                     IN hiſtories,Two meanes to atchieue victorie and to ouermaſter their enemies propounding to our conſideration the deedes and moniments
of former ages, we may obſerue two eſpeciall meanes, which the
great commanders of the world haue entertained to atchieue victory,
and ouermaſter their enemies: the firſt by cunning and wiſe cariage of a matter,
before it come to triall by blowes: the ſecond, by forceable meanes & waging
of battel; the one proceeding from wiſdom and the better faculties of the ſoule;
and the other depending vpon the ſtrength and ability of the body. Concerning
the firſt, it hath euer bin held more honorable, as better ſuting the worth of the
ſpirit and the diuine eſſence of our nature, ſo to direct the courſe of an action,
that the aduerſe part may be weakened by wit, and preuented in the proiects of
their better fortunes, by anticipation of meanes and occaſions, & ſo through
aduantages taken from their owne proceedings, to be driuen to that exigent,
which may determine of the controuerſie before they come to blowes, & conclude
the matter by tearmes of arte, taken from the directions of good prouidence.
For to ſpeake a truth,Tubalcaine by war and Naamah by the floud. the action of battel, as it is the laſt part in that facultie;
ſo it is the worſt in regarde of chriſtian duty, and better fitteth the progeny
of Lamech his ſecond wife, which the Diuines do note to be borne to the
ruine and deſtruction of mankind, then the children of grace, whoſe ioy conſiſteth
in peace and loue.
                  
                     
Caeſar in the firſt of the ciuill warres reſpected the ſame thing, but from other
grounds: for hauing ſhut vp Afranius, and Petreius in a place of diſaduantage,
and might haue cut them off without further trouble; yet foraſmuch as
he foreſaw the victorie comming towards him without blow or wound, he thus
anſwered his Captaines that were earneſt vpon the enemie: Cur etiam ſecundo
praelio aliquos ex ſuis amitteret? cur vulnerari pateretur optime de ſe meritos milites?
cur denique fortunam periclitaretur? And this courſe did theſe Galles take,
which vnder Sertorius had learned the Romaine Arte, and the Romaine induſtry;
and were now become ſo expert, that they had almoſt beaten the Romains
at their owne weapon. This firſt meanes is principally to be imbraced, as the
ſafeſt waie in theſe vncertaine and caſual euentes: for that which reſteth vpon
corporall ſtrength, and maketh execution the meanes to a concluſion, is verie
terrible euen to the better party, full of hazard and of little certaintie. For it
were a miracle of fortune neuer heard of yet, ſo to carrie a battaile vpon what
aduantage or meanes whatſoeuer, that the victor army ſhoulde buie ſo great a
fortune without bloudſhed or loſſe of men; and erect a Trophee to honour at
the ſole coſt of the enemy, without loſſe or expence of his owne treaſure. And
for the vncertaintie in a battell, who knoweth not what infinite chances and
changes may happen in euery ſmall moment of time, to turne the fortune of
the day to this or that party, and make both ſides vnconſtant in their affections,
by preſenting them interchangeably with hope and feare, ioy and ſorrow? and
therefore Caeſar thought it not beſt to tempt the waie-wardnes of fortune, when
by other meanes he might obtaine his deſires. This I ſay is chiefely to be imbraced,
if our meanes wil affoord vs that happineſſe: but howſoeuer I holde it
wiſedome ſo to entertaine this courſe of victorie, that we omit not the chiefeſt
helpes of furtherance when it commeth to blowes, but to thinke of this conqueſt
by arte and wit, as neceſſarie, if our meanes will ſerue vs to compaſſe it;
and of the other, as neceſſarie whether we will or no: for the hiſtorie maketh it
plaine, that when Brutus found himſelfe deſtitute of meanes to vndertake that
courſe of victorie, which proceedeth from prouidence and diſcreete cariage;
hee then betooke himſelfe neceſſarilie to the latter, and by the helpe of battell,
ſought to free himſelfe from thoſe diſaduantages, into which the Galles had
brought him.
               
               
                  THE THIRD OBSERVATION.
                  
                     I Obſerue further out of this place,Not to forgo an aduantage that what courſe ſoeuer be taken, a
diſcreet leader wil not eaſily forgo an aduantage, without great aſſurance
of a better fortune: nor change the certainty of a benefit, vpon
probabilities of other hopes, vntill it haue paid him the intereſt of
his expectation, and wrought that effect which it promiſed to performe. For ſo
he might forgo his fortune by preſuming too much vpon the fauour of future
chances, which are oftner ſeene to croſſe our purpoſes, rather then to further
the way which is taken.
               
               
                  
                  THE FOVRTH OBSERVATION.
                  
                     FVrther I obſerue, this double battell to be anſwerable to the paucity
of the Roman forces: for their vſuall manner was, to make a triple
battell, that the firſt might haue a ſecond, and a third helpe: but
where their number would not affoord that commoditie, they then
made two battels, that there might be the ſuccour of a ſecond ſupplie. But they
neuer fought with one ſingle battell, for ought that may bee gathered by their
hiſtories.
               
               
                  THE FIFT OBSERVATION.
                  
                     THe laſt thing which I obſerue,The place where ſuſpected forces are best beſtowed in battell. is the place, where Craſſus beſtowed
the Auxiliarie forces, in the diſpoſition of his troupes to battell;
which is here ſaid to be, in mediam Aciem: for as their Armies were
diuided into three battels; ſo euerie battell was deuided into three
partes; the two cornets, and the battell, wherein theſe Auxiliarie forces were in
this ſeruice beſtowed: of theſe he afterward ſaith, that in as much as he durſt
not put any confidence in them, he commanded them to ſerue the Romans in
time of battell, with ſtones and weapons, and to carrie earth and turfe to the
mount. The reaſon why ſuſpected troupes are placed in the battell, rather then
in either of the cornets, is, for that the battell hath not ſuch ſcope to fling out, or
take aduantage of place to doe miſchiefe, as the corners haue: for whereſoeuer
there hath beene ſet battels fought, the ſtrength of their armie conſiſted alwaies
in the cornets, as the two principall inſtruments of the battell; and as long as
theſe ſtood ſound, the victorie went alwaies certaine on that part: for the cornets
kept the enemie both from incompaſſing about the bodie of their Armie,
and had the aduantage alſo of charging vpon the open ſide of their aduerſarie.
At the battell of Cannas Hanniball put the weakeſt of his forces in the battell,
and aduancing them towards the enemie, left the two cornets behind: ſo that,
when the enemie came to charge vpon the battell, they eaſily beat them backe,
and as they followed the retrait fell in betweene the two cornets, wherein the
ſtrength of the Armie conſiſted, and being by them incompaſſed on each ſide,
were defeated and ouerthrowen. And thus we ſee the aduantage which a Generall
hath, when his two cornets ſtand firme; although the battell ſhrinke in the
incounter. Hanniball in the battell he had with Scipio in Africke, placed the
ſtrangers in the front and in the rereward, according peraduenture as he found
their number and the vſe of their Armes, which are circumſtances to be conſidered
in this caſe, and depend rather vpon the iudgment of a generall, then of
anie preſcription that can be giuen in this matter.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. XI.
               
                  Craſſus taketh the campe of the Galles: and
with their ouerthrow endeth that
warre.
               
               
                  CRASSVS vnderſtanding their drift,Caeſar. and finding his men
willing to ſet vpon their campe, incouraged his ſoldiers; and to
the contentment of all men, went directly to the place where they
were lodged: and as ſome began to fill vp the ditch; and others
with caſting weapons to beate the Galles from the rampier, he
commanded the Auxiliarie forces, of whom he had no great aſſurance,
to bring ſtones and weapons to the ſoldiers that fought, and
to carrie earth and turfe to the mount; that ſo they might make a ſhew of fighting.
And on the other ſide, as the enemy began valiantly to make reſistance, and to caſte
their weapon from the higher ground, to the great hurt of the Roman ſouldier; the
horſemen in the meane time riding about the campe of the Galles, brought worde to
Craſsus that the rampier at the Decumane port, was not fortified with ſuch diligence,
as they found it in other places, but would admit an eaſie entrance. Craſsus dealt earneſtly
with the commanders of the horſe, to incourage their men with great promiſes
and rewardes; and inſtructed them what he would haue done: they, according to
their inſtructions, tooke foure cohorts that were left in the campe, and carrying them
a further waie about, that they might not be diſcouered by the enemy; while all mens
eies and mindes were intent vpon the fight, they ſpeedely came to the place of the fortifications,
which the horſmen had found to be weake, which being eaſily broken down,
they had entered the campe before the enemie could well tell what was done. And
then a great clamour & ſhout being heard about that place, the Roman legions renuing
their force, as it falleth out alwaies in hope of victorie, began to charge them a
freſh with great furie: the Galles being circumuented on each ſide, and deſpairing of
their ſafetie, caſting themſelues ouer the rampier, ſought by flight to eſcape the danger.
But for as much as the country was open and champion, the horſemen purſued
them with that execution, that of 50000 there ſcarce remaineth the fourth part.
               
                  THE OBSERVATION.
                  
                     FRom this place Brancatio taketh occaſion to diſpute,Lib. 3. Auertimento ſecundo. how an enemie
that is ſtrongly incamped, and for ſome aduantage will not remoue,
may be diſlodged, whether he will or no. A point of great cōſequence,
in matter of warre: and therefore deſerueth due conſideration. Concerning
which he laieth this downe for a maxime, that all forts and ſtrong holds
are taken by the foot, and that campes and lodgings are taken by the head: By

which is meant, that he who purpoſeth to winne a fortreſſe well manned and
prouided, muſt firſt get the foot and take hold of the ditch; and then ſeaſe himſelfe
vpon the rampier, and ſo get the place: for he ſaith, that mounts and eminent
eleuations are of little vſe againſt fortreſſes or ſconſes, vnleſſe they ouertop
them; which may be eaſily preuented by raiſing the parapet of the fortreſſe in
front, and the curtaine in flanke, according as the enemy ſhall carie his mounts
aloft; and ſo they ſhall neuer come to ouertop the holdes. But all campes and
lodgings are taken by the head: That is, by mountes and eleuations, which by
the aduantage of their height command the champion. For he holdeth it impoſſible,
to raiſe a mount within the campe in ſo ſhort a time, to conteſt that,
which the enemie ſhall make without. This foundation being laide, he proceedeth
to diſcouer a waie, how to raiſe a mount maugre the enemie, which ſhall
diſlodge them by force of Artillerie, or murther them all within their trenches.
And this he taketh from Caeſar at the ſiege of Gergobia.Lib. de bello Gallico. The ſubſtance of the
matter conſiſteth in a double ditch, running like vnto the line which the Geometricians
call Helicall; by this double ditch, he maketh his approch to anie
place of moſt aduantage, where he maie in a night, raiſe a mount high enough
for the ordinance to plaie vpon any quarter of the campe. The cenſure of this
practiſe, I referre to our iudicious ſouldiers, which may, if it pleaſe them, take a
better view of the particularities of this ſtratagem in Brancatio himſelfe. This
much I dare affirme in the behalfe of theſe workes, that they were of high eſteeme
amongſt the Romans, when daily experience and exigents of hazard had
taught to finde out the readieſt meanes, both for ſecurity and victorie. And if
our ſouldiers could be brought to taſte the commoditie of theſe workes, either
by perſwaſion or impulſion, it were the beſt part of their warlike practiſes: but
our men had rather flie vpon deſperat aduentures, and ſeeke victory in the iawes
of death, then to cleare all hazard, with paines and diligence.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XII.
               
                  Caeſar vndertaketh the warre with the
Menapij and Morini.
               
               
                  AT the ſame time alſo,Caeſar. although the ſommer was almoſt at an
end, yet for as much as all Gallia was in peace, and theTerouine Morini
only with theCleue and Gueldres. Menapij ſtood out in armes, and had neuer either
ſent ambaſſadour, or otherwiſe treated of peace; Caeſar thinking
that warre might quickly be ended, lead his Armie into
their country. At his comming, he found them to carrie the wars
farre otherwiſe, then the reſt of the Galles had done: for vnderſtanding
that the greateſt nations of Gallia, which had waged battell with the Romans,
were beaten and ouerthrowen; and hauing whole continents of woods and bogs
in their territories, they conuaied both themſelues and their goods into thoſe quarters:

Caeſar comming to the beginning of the woods, began to fortifie his campe, not diſcouering
any enemy neare about him; but as his men were diſpearſed in their charges,
they ſuddenly ſallied out of the woods and aſſaulted the Romans; but being ſpeedely
driuen in againe with the loſſe of manie of them, as the Romans followed them farre
into the woods, had ſome few of their men ſlaine. The time that remained, Caeſar reſolued
to ſpend in cutting downe the woods; and leaſt the ſouldiers might bee taken
vnawares, while they were buſied in that worke, he cauſed them to place all the trees
which they cut downe, on either ſide of the Armie; that they might ſerue for a defence,
against ſudden aſſaultes. A great quantitie of ground was thus rid within a
few daies; ſo that their goods and cattell was taken by the Romans: but they themſelues
were fled into thicker woods. At which time there happened ſuch a continuall
raine, as forced them to leaue of the worke; and the ſouldiers could no longer indure,
to lie in tentes of skins: and therefore Caeſar, after he had waſted and ſpoiled their
country, burned their townes, and their houſes; he carried backe his Armie, and placed
them in ſuch citties to winter in, as were ſubdued by the late warres.
               
                  OBSERVATIONS.
                  
                     THe Iriſh rebels, hauing the like commoditie of woods and bogs,
doe entertaine the like courſe of warre, as the Morini did with Caeſar:
the meanes which he vſed to diſappoint them of that practiſe,
was to cutte downe the woods, which if it be thought monſtrous in
this age, or ridiculous to our men of warre; let them conſider that the Roman
diſcipline wrought greater effectes of valour, then can bee made credible by
the vſe of theſe times. For beſides their exquiſite diſcipline, which of it ſelfe was
able to frame patterns of vnexampled magnanimitie; their induſtrie was admirable
in the execution thereof, and carried it with ſuch vnceſſant trauell, that
the ſouldiers thought it great happines when they came to wage battell with the
enemie; and could haue meanes to quit their continuall trauell, with the hazard
of their liues. Neither let it ſeeme ſtrange, that the Romans vndertooke to
cut down the woods; but rather let vs admire their facilitie in ſo difficult a taske:
for as the hiſtorie witneſſeth: magno ſpacio paucis diebus confecto, incredibili celeritate:
a great quantitie of ground was rid in a few daies with incredible ſpeede.
And after the woods were cut downe, they tooke more paines in placing it on
each ſide of the legions, to hinder anie ſudden aſſault, then they did in cutting
it downe: which deſerueth as great admiration, as the former part. There is another
place in the ſixt booke of theſe Commentaries, which expreſſeth more
particularly the nature of ſuch warres, and may ſerue to acquaint vs with that
which Caeſar did in theſe difficulties.
                  The Eburones or the men of Liege, had the like commoditie of woods and
bogges, and made vſe of them in the warre they had with Caeſar: The matter
(ſaith hee) required great diligence, not ſo much in regard of the perill of the
whole Armie, (for there could no danger come from an enemie that was frighted
and diſperſed) as the ſafetie of euerie particular ſouldier, which in part did

pertaine to the welfare of the whole Armie. For the deſire of bootie caried manie
of the ſouldiers farre from the bodie of the Armie: and the woods being
full of vnknowne and ſecret paſſages, would not ſuffer them to go either thicke
together or cloſe imbattailed. If he deſired to haue the warre ended, and the race
of thoſe wicked men to bee rooted out, hee muſt of force make manie ſmall
companies, and deuide his men into many bodies: but if hee would haue the
maniples to keepe at their enſignes, as the diſcipline and cuſtome of the Roman
Army required; then the place was a ſhelter and defence to the enemie: neither
did they want courage to laie ambuſhments, and to circumuent ſuch as they
found alone, ſtragling from their companies. In theſe difficulties, there was as
much done as diligence could doe; prouiding rather to be wanting in the offenſiue
part (although all mens mindes were ſet on fire with reuenge) then to
hurt the enemie with the loſſe of the Roman ſouldier. Caeſar ſent meſſengers
to the bordering ſtates, to come out and ſacke the Eburones, and they ſhould
haue all the praie for their labour: that the life of the Galles rather then his legionarie
ſouldiers might be hazarded in thoſe woods; as alſo that, with ſo great a
multitude, both the race and name of that people might bee quite extinguiſhed.
                  There are many particularities in this relation, which concerne the true motion
of the Iriſh warres, which may be better obſerued by ſuch as know thoſe
warres by experience, then by my ſelfe that vnderſtand them onely by relation:
and therefore to preuent ſuch exceptions, as my rule ſhall make of the parallell
in theſe two caſes: I will leaue it to be done by themſelues. And thus endeth
the third Commentarie.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE FOVRTH COMMENTARIE.
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               
                  THe Vſipetes, and Tenchtheri are driuen to ſeeke newe
ſeates in Gallia; they driue the Menapij out of their territories:
but in the end are ouerthrowen by Caeſar. That
warre being ended, he made a bridge vpon the Rhene, and carried
his Armie ouer into Germanie. He taketh reuenge vpon the
Sicambri; and giueth libertie to the Vbij: returneth into Gallia,
and carrieth his Armie ouer into Britanie, with the occurrences of
that warre.
            
            
               CHAP. I.
               
                  TheThoſe of Zutpnen. Vſipetes, andOf Haſſia. Tenchtheri bring great multitudes
of peoples, ouer the Rhene into Gallia:
the nature of the
Sueui.
               
               
                  THE winter following,Caeſar. Pompeie and Craſsus being Conſuls, the
Vſipetes and Tenchtheri, two Germaine nations, paſſed ouer
the Rhene, with great multitudes of people; not far from the
place, where it falleth into the ſea. The reaſon of their flitting,
was the ill intreatie, which for manie yeares together they had
receiued of the Sueui, the greateſt & warlikeſt nation amongſt
the Germains. For theſe Sueui had one hundred Cantons or
ſhires, which yearely furniſhed their warres, with 1000 men a piece; and kept as manie
at home to maintaine both themſelues, and their Armies abroad: and theſe the
yeare following were in Armes; and the other ſtaied at home, and performed the
like dutie; and ſo by this meanes, they all continued their experience both of tillage,
and matter of warre. They liued chiefly vpon cattell and milke, and vſed much hunting,
which was the cauſe (what through the qualitie of their diet, their continuall
exerciſe, and libertie of life, being neuer tied to any diſcipline, nor vrged to any thing
againſt their diſpoſition) that they were ſtrong and of a large ſtature, vſing skins and
hides for their cloathing, which couered but part of their body, the reſt being naked.
Their horſmen oftentimes, in time of battell, forſooke their horſe, and fought on foot;

being taught to ſtand ſtill in one place, that when they would they might returne vnto
them. Neither was there any thing more baſe, or diſhoneſt in the courſe of their
life, then to vſe furniture for horſes: & would aduenture to charge vpon great troups
of horſe, that vſed Equipage, with a few of their owne qualitie. They admitted no
wine to be brought in vnto them, leaſt it might effeminate their warlike inclination,
or make them vnapt for labour. The greateſt honour in their opinion, was to haue
their bordering Territories lie waſt and deſolate: for ſo it would be thought, that manie
ſtates together, would not reſiſt, their conquering valour: and it was reported,
that the country laie waſt from them one waie 600 miles together.
               
                  THE OBSERVATION.
                  
                     BY this practiſe of the Sueui, it appeareth, how little a naked reſolution
of valour auaileth, when it wanteth the ornaments of moral
carriage and ciuill diſcretion, to make vſe of that greatneſſe which
proweſſe hath obtained: for notwithſtanding that they were a nation
both warlike, and of good abilitie, they were ſo vainly carried on with a conceit
of manhood, that it ſorted to no other ende, then to maintaine barbariſme
at home, and deſolation abroad; where as true valour is alwaies ſubordinate to
the preſeruation of common weales, and is as the defenſiue armes of ciuill ſocietie.
Which I haue the rather noted, in as much as it reſembleth an humour
that aboundeth in this age, eſpecially in the particular hauiour of our young galants,
whoſe naked valour reuelling it ſelfe onely in the lie and in the ſtabbe, for
want of other aſſiſtant vertues to temper the heat of ſo brittle a mettall, leadeth
them into ſuch inconueniences and diſordered actions, that it changeth the nature
thereof, into giddie headed raſhneſſe; and in lieue of vertues guerdon, is
repaide with irriſion.
               
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               
                  The motiues, inducing the Vſipetes to
come ouer the Rhene into
Gallia.
               
               
                  NEXT vnto theſe Sueui,Caeſar. inhabited the Vbij, a very ample and
potent ſtate: and through their entercourſe and trafficke with
marchants, ſomewhat more ciuill, then the reſt of the Germans.
With theſe, the Sueui had often waged battell: and albeit they
could not expell them out of their country, foraſmuch as their
ſtate was very great and populous; yet by continuall incurſions
they brought them vnder, and much weakned their eſtate. In the
ſame caſe were the Vſipetes and Tenchtheri: for hauing made head againſt the Sueui

for many yeares together, they were conſtrained in the end to forſake their poſſeſsions;
and wandering the ſpace of three yeares through the continent of Germanie, at last
they arriued where theGeldres and Cleeue. Menapij inhabited the bankes, on both ſides the riuer Rhene:
but being terrified with the arriuall of ſuch a multitude, they forſooke all their dwellings
beyond the riuer, and planted themſelues on this ſide of the water, to hinder the
Germans from further paſsage.
               The Vſipetes with their aſsociates, hauing tried all meanes, and not finding themſelues
able to paſse ouer by force, for want of boates; nor by ſtealth, by reaſon of the diligent
watch of the Menapij, fained a retrait to their olde habitation: and after three
daies iourney, their horſemen in one night ſpeedely returned againe, and ſlew the Menapij,
both vngarded and vnprouided. For they vpon the departure of the Germans,
feared not to returne ouer the riuer into their townes and houſes: theſe being ſlaine,
and their ſhipping taken, they got ouer the riuer, before the reſt of the Menapij had anie
notice of their comming: by which meanes they eaſily diſpoſſeſsed them of their
dwelling places, and liued that winter vpon the prouiſion they found there.
               Caeſar vnderſtanding of theſe thinges, and fearing the weakeneſse of the Galles, in
as much as they are ſudden and quicke in their reſolutions, and withall deſirous of noueltie:
he durſt no waie truſt their vnconſtancie; for it was their practiſe and cuſtome
to ſtaie trauellours and paſsengers, and inquire of them what they either heard or
knew, concerning anie thing that had happened; and the common people would flock
about marchants in faires and markets, and learne of them whence they came, and
what newes they brought from thence: and by theſe rumours and heareſaies they directed
the maine courſe of their actions; whereof they could not but repent themſelues,
being grounded vpon ſuch weake intelligence, as was vſually coined to pleaſe the multitude.
Which cuſtome being knowne, Caeſar to preuent a greater warre, haſted to his
Armie ſooner then he was woont to doe.
               
                  OBSERVATIONS.
                  
                     SVch as haue ſpent their time in the contemplation of nature, and
haue made diligent ſearch of the temperature & quality of climates
and nations, haue all with one conſent made choler the regent of
the French complexion; diſtinguiſhing the people, with ſuch attributes,
as the ſaide humour vſually breedeth. Neither haue theſe conditions,
which Caeſar ſo long agoe obſerued in the ancient Galles, anie diſreſemblance
from that, which the learned of this age haue deliuered, concerning the nature
of the ſaid inhabitants: but that irreſolute conſtitution, which breedes ſuch nouelties
and contrarieties of actions, continueth the ſame vnto theſe times, in the
inhabitants of that country, notwithſtanding the alteration of cuſtomes, and
people, or what els ſo long a time hath changed; which argueth the vnreſiſtable
power of celeſtiall influence, eſtabliſhing an vniformitie of nature, according
as the ſite of the place lieth capable of their powerfull aſpect.
                  The cauſe of the diuerſity in the temperature of nations, which are differenced

by North and ſouth, is not without apparant cauſe, attributed to their propinquitie,
or diſtance from the courſe of the ſunne, which diſtinguiſheth by heate
and cold the Northren and Southerne climates of the earth; and ſeparateth the
inhabitants thereof, by the dominion of their actiue qualities. But the reaſon
whie two nations which are both in the ſame climate, and vnder the ſame parallel,
receiuing the virtue of the celeſtial bodies, by the ſame downefal and rebound
of their beames, being differenced only by Eaſt and Weſt; are ſo much
diſunited in nature, and ſo vnlike in diſpoſition, is not ſo apparant: whether it be
as ſome haue imagined, for aſmuch as the all incloſing ſpheare, which remaineth
quiet and immoueable aboue the circuit of the firſt motor, hath his parts
diuerſly diſtinguiſhed with varietie of properties; which by continuall reference
and mutuall aſpect, are imprinted in the correſpondent quarters of the
earth; and ſo keepe a perpetuall reſidency of one and the ſame quality, in one
and the ſame place; and make alſo the varietie of faſhions in ſuch partes, as otherwiſe
are equall fauorites of the heauens maieſtie, by receiuing an equall
meaſure of light, heat and vertue; or whether the ſaide quarters of the earth
are in themſelues diuerſly noted, with ſeuerall qualities, which appropriate the
ſelfe ſame influence to their particular nature, and ſo alter it into many faſhions;
or whether there be ſome other vnknown cauſe: I wil leaue euery man to ſatisfie
himſelfe with that which ſeemeth moſt probable vnto him, and proceed to
the diſcouerie of this cholericke paſsion. Wherein I will indeuor to ſhew how
impatiencie, ſodaine reſolution, and deſire of noueltie, are naturall adiuncts
of this humor: And if Caeſar made vſe of this philoſophie in the managing of
that warre, let it not be thought impertinent to the knowledge of a Generall, to
enter into the conſideration of this learning. Wherein firſt, I muſt laie for a
maxime that which long experience hath made authenticall, that the motions
of the minde are either quicke or ſlow, according as the complexion is tempered,
either with heat or cold: for as the flegmaticall humor, is of a moiſt, cold
and heauy nature, begetting weake and groſſe ſpirits, and benumming the inſtruments
with a liueles diſability; ſo is the motion of the internall faculties,
proceeding likewiſe after a ſlow maner, according to the qualitie of the inſtruments,
whereby it moueth: and therefore men of this watriſh conſtitution, are
no way apt to receiue an impreſſion, nor to entertaine any ſenſible apprehenſion,
vnles it be beaten into them, with often and ſtrong repetitions; and then
alſo they proceede as ſlowlie in diſcourſing of the conſequence, and linger in
the choiſe of their reſolutions. On the contrary part, this flaua bilis, being of a
hote piercing nature, and reſembling the actiue vertue of the fire, doth ſo purifie
the inſtruments of ſenſe, and quicken the ſpirits with the viuacity of motion,
that they take the firſt impreſsion as perfectly, as if it had beene oftentimes preſented
vnto them, with many ſtrong circumſtances. And thence it happeneth,
that inaſmuch as the Species is ſo readily receiued, and poſſeſſeth the apprehending
facultie, with ſuch facility of entrance, that it moueth the other powers
of the ſoule, with as great efficacie at the firſt conception, as if it had beene
brought in with troupes of probabilities, and ſtrengthened with manifeſt arguments
of vndoubted truth: It followeth therefore (by reaſon of the ſubtile and

fit diſpoſition of the inſtrumentes, which proceedeth from heate the chiefeſt
qualitie in choler) that the obiect is at the firſt moment ſo ſtrongly ſetteled, in
the firſt receiuing facultie, that the other powers of the minde, with as great
ſpeede manifeſt their offices, concerning the apprehenſion; and deliuer a ſentence
anſwerable to the ſtrength of the firſt conception: which maketh them ſo
impatient of delaie, and ſo ſodainly to alter their former reſolutions, not ſuffering
the diſcourſiue power to examine the ſubſtance thereof, by conference of
circumſtances; nor to giue iudgment according to the courſe of our intellectual
court. It behooueth therefore euery man, in that vnſteady diſpoſition, eſpecially
in matter of moment, to be ſuſpicious of his owne credulity, and not to
giue place to reſolution, before his iudgement be informed, by diſcourſe of the
ſtrength or weakenes of the conceiued opinion.
                  But to leaue theſe ſpeculatiue meditations, to Philoſophers of learned conceit:
for as much as the right vſe of paſſions is either true wiſdome, or commeth
neereſt to the ſame; I will onely touch in a worde what degree of choler beſt befitteth
a ſoldier; or howe it auaileth, or diſaduantageth in matter of warre.
And firſt it cannot bee denied, that there is almoſt no paſſion, that doth more
eclips the light of reaſon, or ſooner corrupteth the ſinceritie of a good iudgement,
then this of anger, which we now ſpeake of: Neither is there any motion
that more pleaſeth it ſelfe in his owne actions, or followeth them with greater
heate in the execution. And if the trueth chance to ſhewe it ſelfe, and conuince
a falſe pretended cauſe, as the authour of that paſsion, it oftentimes redoubleth
the rage euen againſt truth and innocency. Piſo condemned a ſoldier
for returning from forraging, without his companion, being perſuaded that
he had ſlaine him: but at the inſtant of the execution, the other that was miſſing,
returned, and with great ioy of the whole army, they were caried to the generall,
thinking to haue much gratified him, with the manifeſtation of the truth:
but hee through ſhame and deſpight, being yet in the torture of his wrath, redoubled
his anger, and by a ſubtilty which his paſsion furniſhed him withall, he
made three culpable for that he found one innocent; the firſt, becauſe the ſentence
of death was paſt againſt him, and was not to bee recalled without the
breach of law: the ſecond, for that hee was the cauſe of the death of his companion:
and thirdly, the executioner, for not obeying his commandement.
                  Concerning matter of warre, as it conſiſteth of differenced partes; ſo hath
choler diuers effectes. In caſe of diſcourſe and conſultation, when as the powers
of the minde ought to bee cleere of all violent affections, it greatly darkeneth
the vnderſtanding, and troubleth the ſincerity of a good iudgement, as
Caeſar noted in his ſpeech to the ſenate concerning Cateline:Salust. and therefore a
commander muſt, by al meanes indeuor to auoid, euen the leaſt motions of ſo
hurtfull a paſsion; and ſeaſon his affections, with that grauity and conſtancy of
ſpirit, that no turbulent diſpoſition may, either hinder his vnderſtanding,
or with-hold his will from following that courſe, which reaſon appointeth,
as the beſt means to a fortunate ſucceſſe: alwaies remembring, that al his actions
are preſented vpon a ſtage, and paſſe the cenſure of many curious beholders,
which applaud graue and patient motions, as the greateſt proofe of true wiſdom;

and diſallow of paſsionate, and headſtrong affection, as derogating from the ſincere
cariage of an action, how iuſt ſoeuer otherwiſe it ſeemeth.
                  Concerning execution and furie of battaile, I take anger to be a neceſſarie
inſtrument to ſet valour on foote, and to ouerwage the difficulties of terrour,
with a furious reſolution: for conſidering that the nobleſt actions of
the minde, ſtande in neede of the impulſions of paſsions, I take anger to bee
the fitteſt meanes, to aduance the valiant carriage of a battaile: for as feare is
trecherous and vnſafe; ſo anger is confident and of an vnquenchable heate;
and therefore a Commaunder ought by all meanes, to ſuggeſt matter of anger
againſt an enemie, that his men may behold them with a wrathfull regard,
and thirſt after the daie of battell, to ſatiſfie their furie with the bloud of their
aduerſaries. If any vrge that it hath beene heretofore obſerued of the Galles,
that in the beginning of a battel they were more then men, and in the latter end
they were leſſe then women; and therfore a cholerick diſpoſition is not ſo fit for
ſeruice, as we ſeem to make it. I anſwere, that there is a difference between a diſpoſition
to choler, ſuch as was obſerued in the Galles, and the paſsion of anger,
wel kindled in the minde: for the firſt is ſubiect to alteration and contrarietie of
actions; but the other is furious, inuincible, neuer ſatisfied but with reuenge.
And ſo that of Ariſtotle is proued true, that anger ſerueth oftentimes as a weapon
to vertue; whereunto ſome anſwere very pleaſantly, ſaying, it is a weapon
of a ſtrange nature: for wee doe manage other weapons, and this doeth manage
vs; our hande guideth not it, but it guideth our hande; it poſſeſſeth vs,
and not wee it, as it happened in the raigne of Tyberius, amongſt the mutinous
legions at Vetera:
                     Tacit. 1. Anal. and therefore a Commaunder ought to take greate
heede, whome he maketh the obiect of that anger, which kindleth in his army:
for as it is a paſsion of terrible execution, and therefore needeth to bee wiſelie
directed; ſo is it dangerous in regarde of obedience, which was the only thing
which Caeſar required in his ſoldiors.
                  But to leaue this haſtie matter, and fall neerer that which we ſeeke after. I
may not omit the prognoſtication, which Caeſar made of the conſequence of
this accident, by the naturall diſpoſition of the people; the euent whereof
proued the trueth of his predictions; which ſheweth what aduantage a
learned general that hath bin ſomwhat inſtructed in the ſchoole of
nature, hath gained of him, whom only experience hath
taught the actiue rudiments of the war, & thinketh
of no further leſſon in that art, then
that which the office of a ſeriant
or lanceprizado
containeth.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. III.
               
                  Caeſar commeth to his armie, marcheth towards
the Germaines, and by the way treateth of
conditions of peace.
               
               
                  CAESAR being come to his armie,Caeſar. found that to haue happened
which he before ſuſpected: for ſome of the states of Gallia
had ſent meſſengers vnto the Germaines, to leaue the bankes of
Rhene, and to come further into the continent, where they
ſhould find ready, whatſoeuer they deſired. Whereupon the Germaines
began to make further incurſions, and to waſte the lande
as far as the confines of theLiege. Eburones. The Princes of the Galles
beeing called together, Caeſar thought it beſt to diſsemble what hee had diſcouered,
concerning their reuolt; and confirming their mindes with an approbation of their
loialtie, hee commanded certaine troupes of horſe to be leuied, and reſolued to make
warre vpon the Germains; and hauing made prouiſion of corne, hee directed his
march towards them. From whom as he was on the way, within a few daies iourney
of their campe, he receiued this meſſage: The Germains as they were not willing to
make warre vpon the Romains, ſo they would not refuſe to make triall of their manhood,
if they were iuſtly prouoked; for their ancient cuſtome was to anſwere an enemy
by force, and not by treaty; yet this much they woulde confeſſe, that they came
thither very vnwillingly, being driuen by violence out of their poſſeſsions. If the
Romaine people would accept of their friendſhip, and either giue them territories to
inhabite, or ſuffer them to keepe that which they had got by the lawe of armes, they
might proue profitable friends vnto them. They only yeelded to the Sueui, to whome
the Gods in feates of armes were inferior; any other nation they wold eaſily conquer.
               To this Caeſar anſwered what hee thought fit; but the purport of his ſpeech was,
that he could not make any league with them, if they continued in Gallia: neither
was it probable, that they that could not keepe their owne, would get poſſeſsions out
of other mens hands. Gallia had no vacant place to entertaine ſo great a multitude:
but if they would they might find a welcome, amongſt theColonia Agripina. Vbij, whoſe agents were
at that inſtant in his campe, complaining of the iniurie of the Sueui, and deſiring
aide againſt them; this much he himſelfe would intreat of the Vbij. The meſſengers
went backe with theſe Mandates, promiſing within three daies to returne againe
to Caeſar: in the meane time, they deſired him, not to bring his armie any neerer
their quarters; which requeſt Caeſar denied: for vnderſtanding that a fewe daies
before, a great part of their Caualrie were paſſed ouer the Moſa, he ſuſpected that
this delay imported nothing more then the returne of their horſemen.
               When Caeſar was come within twelue miles of their campe, their Ambaſſadors
returned; and meeting him on the way, entreated him earneſtly to march no further
towardes them: but being denied of their ſuite, they beſought him to ſende to
thoſe troupes of horſe, which marched before the army, that they ſhould not fight nor
make anie hoſtile incounter; and that he would giue them leaue to ſend meſſengers
to the Vbij, of whoſe entertainement they woulde willingly accept, if the Princes

and ſenate would ſweare faith & ſafe continuance vnto their people: Neither would
they require more then 3. daies, to negotiat this buſines. Caeſar conceiued this treatie
to import nothing elſe, then the returne of their horſemen that were abſent in
pillage, whom they expected within 3. daies; notwithſtanding hee promiſed them to
march but foure miles further that day, to a conuenient watring place: in the meane
time he ſent to the commanders of the horſe that were before, not to prouoke the enemy
to fight; and if they were ſet vpon to ſuſtaine the charge, vntil he came neerer
with the armie.
               
                  THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
                  
                     FIrſt we may obſerue his diſſēbling of the practiſe of the Galles, with
the Germans; & the incouragement which he gaue them in a faithful
and loial affection to the people of Rome, when he himſelfe knew
they had ſtarted from that duty, which both their honor and a good
reſpect of their friendes required: for he well vnderſtood that his preſence did
take away al ſcruple of any further motion in that kind; & therfore to haue obiected
vnto thē their errors, had not been to heale, but to diſcouer their wound:
only he tooke the way, to cut off their hopes of any practiſes, which they might
attempt againſt the Romaine people; and held them in the mean time in the apparance
of faithful friends, that they might not bee diſcouraged, by the detection
of their reuolt.
               
               
                  THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
                  
                     SEcondly, vpon this reſolutiō that there was no league to be made with
the Germans, if they continued on this ſide the Rhene; we may obſerue
how he entertained a treaty of peace, with ſuch conſents and denials, as
might manifeſt his readines to further what he made ſhew of, & not weaken the
meanes of his beſt aduantage. For as he was content they ſhould take a quiet
farewel of Gallia, and plant themſelues in the poſſeſsions of the Vbij; ſo was he
loath to yeeld to any condition, which might diſaduantage his forcible cōſtraint
or weaken his command, if perſwaſion failed: for he well knewe that powerfull
means to effect that which he required, would further the courſe of a peaceable
concluſion, and carry more authoritie in a parlee, then any other motiue, howe
reaſonable ſoeuer.
                  Moreouer wee may obſerue,Vincitur haud gratis iugulo qui prouocat hostem. howe carefull hee was not to impoſe vpon
the Germaines a neceſſity of fighting; but opened a paſſage (by propounding
vnto them the aſſociation of the Vbij) by which they might auoide
the hazarde of battaile. Which thing was alwaies obſerued by Commanders
of ancient times, who diligently ſearching into the nature of thinges,
founde that neither of thoſe noble inſtruments, whereby man worketh ſuch
wonders (I meane the hande and the tongue) had euer brought ſo many excellent
works to that type of perfection, vnles they had bin forced thereunto by

neceſſitie: and therefore wee are wiſely to handle the courſe of our actions,
leaſt while we ſtand too ſtrict vpon a violent guarde, we giue occaſion to the enemy,
by the way of Antiperiſtaſis, to redouble his ſtrength; and ſo furniſh
him with that powerfull engine, which Vetius Meſcius calleth vltimum and
maximum telum, the laſt and greateſt weapon; the force whereof ſhall better
appeare by theſe examples.
                  Some few of the Samnites,Liu. lib. 9. contrarie to the articles of peace between them
and the Romans, hauing made incurſions into the territories of the Ramaine
confederates; the ſenate of that ſtate ſent to Rome, to excuſe the fact, and to
make offer of ſatisfaction: But being reiected, Claudius Pontius generall of their
forces, in an excellent oration which he made, ſhewed how the Romans would
not harken to peace, but choſe rather to be reuenged by war: and therefore neceſsity
conſtrained them to put on armes: iuſtum eſt bellum (ſaith he) quibus neceſsarium,
& pia arma quibus, niſi in Armis, ſpes eſt.
                  
                  Caius Manlius,Liu. lib. 7. conducting the Roman legions againſt the Veij, part of the
Veian armie had entered the Romaine campe; which Manlius perceiuing, hee
haſted with a band of men to keepe the breach, and to ſhut in the Veij: which
they no ſooner perceiued, but they fought with that rage and fury, that they ſlew
Manlius; and had ouerthrown the whole campe, had not a Tribune opened thē
a paſſage, by which they fled away.
                  In like manner Camillus, the wiſeſt of the Romaine Captaines, beeing entered
into the citie of the Veij, that hee might take it with greater facilitie,
and diſarme the enemie of that terrible weapon of neceſsitie, hee cauſed
it to bee proclaimed, that no Veian ſhoulde bee hurt, that was founde vnarmed.
Whereupon euery man caſt away his weapon, and ſo the towne was taken
without bloudſhed.
                  Let a ſoldiour therefore take ſuch holde of occaſions, and oportunities that
are offered vnto him, that in time of battaile hee may ſeeme to caſt neceſsitie
vpon his own cauſe, and retaine it in his paie: conſidering how the power therof
altereth the workes of nature, and changeth their effects into contrary operations,
being neuer ſubiect to any ordinance or lawe; and yet making that lawful
which proceedeth from it.
               
            
            
               CHAP. IIII.
               
                  The Germans, contrary to their owne requeſt
made to Caeſar, ſet vpon the Romaine horſemen,
and ouerthrew them.
               
               
                  NOtwithſtanding the Germans requeſt,Caeſar. concerning the truce, aſſoone as
they ſaw the Romaine horſemen, which were in number 5000, (whereas
the Germans had not aboue 800. herſe) they charged vpon the Romains,
not expecting any hoſtile incounter, inaſmuch as their ambaſſadours
were newly departed from Caeſar, and had obtained that daie of truce; but

being ſet vpon, they made what reſistance they could. The Germans, according to
their vſuall cuſtome, forſooke their horſe, and fighting on foote, did eaſely put the
Romains to flight; who neuer looked backe, vntill they came into the ſight of the legions:
in that battell were ſlaine 74. Romaine horſemen. After this battel, Caeſar
thought it not ſafe, either to harken to anie conditions, or to receiue any meſſage
from them, that by fraud and deceit had ſonght for peace, and ment nothing but war:
And to attende any longer vntil their horſemen returned, was but to giue them
that aduantage againſt him, eſpecially conſidering the weakeneſſe of the Galles, amongſt
whom the Germans by this battel had gained great reputation; and therfore
he durst not giue them ſpace to thinke vpon it.
               
                  OBSERVATIONS.
                  
                     THis cunning of the Germans offereth occaſion to ſpeake ſomewhat,
concerning that maine controuerſie of policie, which is, whether
the actions of Princes and great commanders, are alwaies to bee attended
with integrity, and faithful accompliſhment thereof. Wherin
I wil only ſet down ſuch arguments, and grounds of reaſon, which vertue and
morall honeſty on the one part, (for we wil make it no queſtion to a Chriſtian
minde) and the daily practiſe of ſtates men on the other ſide, alleadge, to make
good their contrary aſſertions.
                  The great Polititians of the world, that commend vertue in a ſhew, and not
in eſſe and being, and ſtudy to maintaine their ſtates onely with humane reaſon,
not regarding the authority of diuine ordinance, ſet this downe as a maxime in
their Art; That he, that is to negotiate a matter, and meaneth to bring it to an
ende ſorting to his contentment, muſt in all reſpects bee like qualified, both in
iudgement and diſpoſition, as the party is, with whom he dealeth: otherwiſe he
cannot be ſufficiently prepared, to hold himſelfe ſtrong in the matter, which he
vndertaketh. For a wraſtler that cōmeth with meere ſtrength to incounter an other
that hath both ſtrength & cunning, may beſhrew his ſtrength that brought
him thither, to be caſt by skil, and be laught at, as an vnworthy chāpion for ſerious
ſports: in like maner in this vniuerſall confuſion of infidelitie, wherein ſubtilty
flieth at ſo high a pitch, he that thinketh with ſimplicitie of ſpirit to winde
through the labyrinths of falſhood, and auoide the ſnares of deceit, ſhall finde
himſelfe too weake for ſo difficult a taske, and beſhrew his honeſty, if he regard
his commodity: for it is the courſe that euery man taketh, which muſt bring vs
to the place, to which euery man goeth: and he that oppoſeth himſelfe againſt
the current of the world, may ſtand alone in his own conceit, and neuer attaine
that which the world ſeeketh after. Foraſmuch therfore, as craft and deceit are ſo
general, it behooueth a man of publike negotiations, to carry a mind apt & diſpoſed
to theſe qualities. This was ſignified by that, which anciēt writers report of
Achilles, who was ſent to Chiron the Centaure, half a man & half a beaſt, to be
inſtructed in the rudimēts of princely cariage; that of the brutiſh part, he might
learn to ſtrengthen himſelf, with force & courage; & of the humane ſhape, ſo to

manage reaſon, that it might bee a fit inſtrument to anſwere or preuent, what
ſoeuer mans wit might forge to ouerthrow it. Neither ought a priuate man to
wonder at the ſtrangeneſſe of theſe poſitions; conſidering that the gouernment
of kingdomes, and Empires is caried with another bias, then that which concerneth
particular affaires in a well ordered ſtate: wherein truth-breakers and
faithleſſe-diſſemblers are worthely condemned, inaſmuch as they neceſſarilie
enforce the ruine thereof. But theſe that ſit at the helme of gouernment, and
are to ſhape the courſe of a ſtate, according to the variation of times and fortunes,
deriue their concluſions from other principles, whereof inferiour ſubiects
are no more capable, then men are able to vnderſtande the workes of the
Godes: and therefore they are called arcana imperij, to bee reuerenced rather,
then lookt into.
                  To conclude, the affaires of particular perſons are of ſo ſhort extenſion, and
incircled in ſo ſmall a compaſſe, that a meane capacitie may eaſily apprehend
the aduantages or inconueniences, which may enſue vppon the contract: and
therefore it is requiſite they ſhould ſtande to the aduenture, and their iudgement
is worthely taxed with the loſſe: but the buſineſſes of a common weale
are, both ſubiect to ſo many caſualties of fortune, and relie vpon ſuch vnexpected
accidents, that it is impoſſible for any ſpirit, howe prouident ſoeuer, to
foreſee the iſſue, in that variety of chances. Beſides that, euery particular ſubiect
is much intereſſed in the fortune of the euent, and may iuſtly, chalenge an
alteration of the intended courſe, rather then ſuffer ſhipwracke through the errour
of their Pilot: And ſo the ſafety of the ſtate doth balance out the loſſe of
credit in the Gouernor.
                  On the other ſide, ſuch as zealouſly affect true honour, affirme vertue to be
the ſame both in prince and people; neither doth condition of ſtate, or calling,
or the qualitie of publike or priuate buſineſſes, alter the nature and eſſence of
goodnes: for to depriue the toung of truth and fidelitie were to breake the bond
of ciuill ſocietie, which is the baſis and ground plot of all ſtates and commonweales.
They doe not denie but that a wiſe Prince maie ſo carrie a treatie, that
he maie ſeeme to affect that moſt which he leaſt intendeth; or anſwere doubtfully
concerning the propoſitions; and that he maie vſe with great honour the
practiſes and ſtratagems of warre, when the fortune of both parties conſiſteth
vpon their owne induſtrie: but to breake any couenants agreed vpon, may well
get a kingdome, but neuer honourable reputation.
                  And thus they contend concerning the meanes, whereby a ſtate is continued
in happie gouernment: whereof this much I dare ſay by the warrant of this hiſtorie,
that he who falſifieth his words vpon aduantage, howſoeuer he regardeth
his honour, had neede to paie them home in regard of his owne ſafetie: for if
they once recouer the loſſe, and get any aduantage againſt thoſe truth-breakers,
they will finde as little fauour, as the Germans did with Caeſar.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. V.
               
                  Caeſar marched directly to the campe of the
Germans, and cut them all in pieces, and
ſo ended that warre.
               
               
                  VPON theſe conſiderations,Caeſar. Caeſar manifeſting his reſolution to
the Legates, and Queſtor; there happened a very fortunate accident.
For the next daie, very early in the morning, moſt of
the Princes and chiefeſt of the Germans came vnto Caeſar into
his campe, to excuſe their fraudulent practiſe; and withall to
continue their petition of truce. Whereof Caeſar was exceeding
glad, and cauſed them to be kept in hold; and at the ſame inſtant,
brought his Armie out of the campe, commanding his horſemen to follow the legions,
becauſe they had beene daunted with ſo late an ouerthrow: And making a triple battell,
marched ſpeedely eight miles, and ſo came vpon the Germans, before they had notice
what had happened; and being terrified with our ſudden arriuall, and the departure
of their owne leaders, knew not whether it were their beſt courſe, to bring forth
their forces, or to defend their campe, or otherwiſe to ſeeke their ſafety by flight. Which
tumult and feare was no ſooner perceiued by the Roman ſouldier, but calling to mind
their perfidious trecherie, they brake into the campe, and were at firſt a little reſiſted;
in the meane time, the women and children fled euery one awaie: which Caeſar perceiuing,
ſent his horſemen to purſue them. The Germans hearing the clamour and
ſchrichings behinde their backes, and ſeeing their friends purſued and ſlaine, did caſt
awaie their weapons, and fled out of the campe, and comming to the confluence of the
Maſe and the Rhene, ſuch as had eſcaped caſt themſelues into the riuer; where, what
through feare, and wearineſſe, and the force of the water, were all drowned. In this
conflict the Romans loſt not a man: the number of the enemie was 430000 with women
and children. To them, whom he had retained in his campe, he gaue leaue to depart;
but they fearing the crueltie of the Galles, deſired that they might continue
with the Romans: which Caeſar agreed vnto.
               
                  OBSERVATIONS.
                  
                     THis relation affoordeth little matter of warre, but onely a ſeuere reuenge
of hatefull trecherie: notwithſtanding I will hence take occaſion,
to diſcouer the offices of the Queſtor and the Legates; and
ſhew what place they had in the Armie. And firſt concerning the
Queſtor, we are to vnderſtand, that he was elected by the common voice of the
people, in the ſame court, which was called to creat the Generall. His office
was, to take charge of the publike treaſure, whether it came out of their Aerarium,
for the paie of the Armie; or otherwiſe was taken from the enemie. Of

him the ſouldiers receiued their ſtipend both in corne and money; and what other
bootie was taken from the enemie, he either kept them, or ſolde them, for
the vſe of the common-weale.
                  The Legates were not choſen, by the people, but appointed by the Senat, as
aſſiſtants & Coadiutors to the Emperor, for the publike ſeruice, and were altogether
directed by the Generall, in whoſe abſence they had the abſolute command:
and their number was for the moſt part vncertaine; but proportioned
according to the number of legions in the Armie.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VI.
               
                  Caeſar maketh a bridge vpon the Rhene, and
carrieth his Armie ouer into
Germanie.
               
               
                  THE German warre being thus ended:Caeſar. Caeſar thought it neceſſarie,
to tranſport his Armie ouer the Rhene into the continent
of Germanie, for manie cauſes: whereof this was not the leaſt,
that ſeeing the Germans were ſo eaſily perſwaded, to bring their
colonies and their vagrant multitudes into Gallia: he thought
it good to make knowen vnto them, that the Roman people
could, at their pleaſure, carrie their forces ouer the Rhene into
Germanie. Moreouer, thoſe troupes of horſe, which were abſent at the late ouerthrow
of the Germans, were fled into the confines of the Sicambri; to whom, when Caeſar
ſent meſſengers to demand them to be ſent vnto him, they anſwered, that the Roman
Empire was limited by the Rhene: and if the Germans were interdicted Gallia, why
ſhould Caeſar challenge any authority in their quarters? Laſtly, the Vbij, who amongſt
all the reſt of the Germans had only accepted of Caeſars friendſhip, and giuen pledges
of their fidelitie, had made earneſt ſuit vnto him, to ſend them aid againſt the Sueui;
or at the leaſt to tranſport his Armie ouer the Rhene: for the name and opinion of the
Roman Armie was ſo great, and of ſuch fame, what with Ariouiſtus ouerthrow, and
this laſt ſeruice, that it ſounded honourable amongſt the furtheſt nations of Germany.
For theſe reaſons, Caeſar reſolued to paſse the Rhene: but to carrie his Armie ouer by
boate, was neither ſafe, nor for the maieſtie of the people of Rome. And albeit it ſeemed
a matter of great difficultie, by reaſon of the breadth, ſwiftnes, and depth of the
riuer, to make a bridge; yet he reſolued to trie what he could doe, otherwiſe he determined
not to paſse ouer at all: and ſo he built a bridge after this maner.
               At two foote diſtance, he placed two trees of a foot and halfe ſquare, ſharpened
at the lower end, and cut anſwerable to the depth of the riuer: theſe he let downe into
the water with engines, and droue them in with commanders, not perpendicularly,
after the faſhion of a pile, but gable wiſe and bending with the courſe of the water:
oppoſite vnto theſe he placed two other trees, ioyned together after the ſame faſhion,
being 40 foote diſtant from the former, by the dimenſion betweene their lower parts

in the bottome of the water, and reclining againſt the courſe of the riuer: theſe two
paire of couples thus placed, he ioyned together with a beame of two foote ſquare, equall
to the diſtance betweene the ſaid couples, and faſtened them at each ende on either
ſide of the couples, with braces and pins: whereby the ſtrength of the worke, and
nature of the frame was ſuch, that the greater the violence of the ſtreame was, and the
faſter it fell vpon the timber worke, the ſtronger the bridge was vnited in the couplings
and iointes. In like manner, he proceeded with couples, and beames, vntill the
worke was brought vnto the other ſide of the riuer: and then he laide ſtraight planks
from beame to beame, and couered them with hurdles; and ſo he made a floore to the
bridge. Moreouer, on the lower ſide of the bridge, he droue downe ſupporters, which
being faſtened to the timber worke, did ſtrengthen the bridge againſt the force of the
water; and on the vpper ſide of the bridge, at a reaſonable diſtance, he placed piles to
hinder the force of trees or boates, or what els the enemie might caſt downe to trouble
the worke: within ten daies, that the timber began to be cut downe and carried, the
worke was ended, and the Armie tranſported. Caeſar, leauing a ſtrong garriſon at either
end of the bridge, went into the confines of the Sicambri.
               
                  OBSERVATIONS.
                  
                     IT ſhall not be amiſſe, to enter a little into the conſideration of this
bridge; as wel in regard of the ingenious Architecture therof, as alſo
that we may ſomwhat imitate Caeſar, whom we may obſerue to inſiſt
with as great plenty of wit & eloquēce, in preſenting vnto vs the ſubtilty
of his inuentiō in ſuch maner of handy works, as vpon any other part of his
actiōs; as this particular deſcription of the bridge, may ſufficiētly witnes: beſides
the fortifications at Aleſia, and the intrenchments in Britanie, for the ſafetie of
his ſhipping, with many other workes, which he might well record, as the greateſt
deſſignes of an heroick ſpirit, and the wonderfull effectes of magnanimous
induſtrie; that ſucceeding ages might not boaſt either of Arte or prowes, which
his vertue had not expreſſed; or otherwiſe might wonder at that worth, which
they themſelues coulde not attaine vnto: And to that purpoſe hee entertained
Virtuuius, the father of architecture, and as worthilie to bee imitated in that
facultie, as his maiſter Caeſar is in feates of armes. By whoſe example a great
commander may learne howe much it importeth the eternitie of his fame, to
beautifie his greateſt deſſignes with arte; and to eſteeme of ſuch as are able to
intreat the Mathematicall muſes, to ſhew themſelues vnder the ſhape of a ſenſible
forme; which albeit through the rudeneſſe of the matter, fall farre ſhort of
the truth of their intellectuall nature, yet their beautie expreſſeth ſuch a maieſtie
of Arte, that no time will ſuffer the memorie thereof to periſh.
                  The workmanſhip of this bridge conſiſted chiefely in the oblique ſituation
of the double poſtes, whereof the firſt order bending with the ſtreame, and the
lower ranke againſt the ſtreame, when they came to be coupled together with ouerthwart
beames, which were faſtened in the couplings with braces, which
he nameth Fibulas; the more violent the ſtreame fell vpon the worke, the faſter

the iointes of the building were vnited, as may better appeare by a modell of
that making, then can be expreſſed by any circumſtance of wordes.
                  I might hence take occaſion to ſpeake of the diuerſitie of bridges, and of the
practiſes which antiquitie hath deuiſed to tranſport Armies ouer riuers: but inaſmuch
as it is a common ſubiect for all that vndertake this militarie taske, and
hath beene handled by Lipſius,Lib. de Machi. vpon the occaſion of this bridge; I will refer the
reader to that place; and only note the ſingular diſpoſition of this action, in as
much as Caeſar made the meanes correſpondent to that end which he intended.
For conſidering that the chiefeſt end of his paſſage was, to let the Germans vnderſtand,
that the power of the Roman Empire was not boūded with the Rhene;
and that a riuer could not ſo ſeparate their Territories, but that they were able to
ioine both the continents together, and make a common roade waie, where it
ſeemed moſt vnpaſſable: he thought it beſt to paſſe ouer his Army by a bridge,
that ſo the Germans might know the power of his forces, and alſo conceit their
Territories, as vnited vnto Gallia; or to be vnited at the pleaſure of the Romans,
with a firme Iſthmus & plaine paſſage by foot, which in times paſt had alwaies
been ſeparated by a mightie riuer. Neither would a tranſportation by boat haue
wrought that effect, for as much as the daily vſe thereof was ſo familiar to the
Germans, that it nothing altered their imagination, of an vnacceſſible paſſage:
but when they ſaw ſo ſtrange a thing attempted, and ſo ſuddenly performed,
they would eaſily vnderſtand, that they were not ſo farre off, but that they might
be ouertaken; and ſo direct their demeanour accordingly.
                  Let this ſuffice therfore to proue, that a paſſage ouer a riuer by a bridge, is
more honourable, ſafe, and of greater terror to the enemy, then any other way
that can be deuiſed; eſpecially if the riuer carrie any depth, ſuch as the Rhene is
otherwiſe, if it haue either ſhallowes or foordes, whereby men may wade ouer,
without any great incombrance, it were but loſt labour to ſtand about a bridge;
but rather to thinke of it, as of a place incombred with ſuch hindrances, as men
often meete with in a march.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VII.
               
                  Caeſar taketh reuenge vpon the Sicambri: giueth
libertie to the Ʋbij; and returneth againe
into Gallia.
               
               
                  THE Sicambri,Caeſar. vnderſtanding that Caeſar was making a bridge
ouer the Rhene, prepared themſelues to flie; and at the perſwaſion
of the Vſipetes, forſooke their country, and conuaied
ſelues and their poſſeſsions into woods, and ſolitarie deſartes.
Caeſar continuing a few daies in their quarters, hauing ſet on
fire their villages and houſes, and burned vp their corne and
prouiſion; he came to the Vbij, promiſing them aide againſt the
Sueui: by whom he vnderſtood, that aſsoone as the Sueui had intelligence, that he

went about to make a bridge, calling a councell according to their maner, they ſent
vnto all quarters of their ſtate, that they ſhould forſake their townes, and carie their
wiues and children, and all that they had, into the woods: and that all that were able
to beare Armes, ſhould make head in one place, which they appointed to bee the
midſt of their countrey, and there they attended the comming of the Romaines, and
were reſolued in that place to giue them battell. Which when Caeſar vnderſtood, hauing
ended all thoſe thinges, in regard whereof he came into Germanie, which was
chiefely to terrifie the Germans, to be reuenged vpon the Sicambri, to ſet the Vbij at
libertie; hauing ſpent in all 18 daies beyond the Rhene, as well in regard of his owne
honour, and the good of the common-weale: he returned into Gallia, and brake vp the
bridge.
            
            
               CHAP. VIII.
               
                  Caeſar thinketh of a voiage into Britanie: he enquireth
of marchants, concerning the nature
of that people.
               
               
                  ALTHOVGH the ſommer was almoſt ſpent,Caeſar. and that in thoſe
partes the winter haſteneth on a pace, inaſmuch as all Gallia inclineth
to the North; notwithſtanding he reſolued to go ouer
into Britanie; foraſmuch as he vnderſtood, that in all the former
wars of Gallia, the enemie had receiued moſt of their ſupply
from thence. And although the time of the yeare would not ſuffer
him to finiſh that warre; yet he thought it would be to good
purpoſe, if he went only to view the Iland, to vnderſtand the qualitie of the inhabitants,
and to know their coaſt, their portes, and their landing places; whereof the
Galles were altogether ignorant: for ſeldome any man, but marchants, did trauell
vnto them. Neither was there any thing diſcouered but the ſea-coaſt, and thoſe regions
which were oppoſite vnto Gallia: And therefore calling marchants together from
all quarters, he neither could vnderſtand of what quantitie the Iland was, what nations,
or of what power they were that inhabited it; what vſe or experience of warre
they had; what lawes or cuſtomes they vſed; nor what hauens they had to receiue a
nauie of great ſhipping.
               
                  OBSERVATIONS.
                  
                     AS the Germans had oftentimes ſtirred vp motions of rebellion amongſt
the Galles, by ſending their ſuperfluous multitudes into
their kingdome; ſo the Britaines had vpheld moſt of their warres,
by furniſhing them with ſuch ſupplies, as from time to time they
ſtood in neede of. So that if Caeſar, or the Roman people, would reſt ſecure of
their quiet and peaceable gouernment in Gallia, as they had chaſtiſed the inſolencie

of the Germans, & ſent them backe againe, with greater loſſe then gaine;
ſo was it neceſſarie to make the Britains know, that their aſſiſtance in the warre
of Gallia would draw more buſineſſes vpon them, then they were well able to
manage. For as I haue noted in my former diſcourſes, the cauſes of an vnpeaceable
gouernment are as well externall and forraine, as internall and bred in the
bodie; which neede the helpe of a Phiſition, to continue the bodie in a perfect
ſtate of health, and require as great a diligence to qualifie their malicious operations,
as any internall ſickneſſe whatſoeuer.
                  In the ſecond Commentarie, I briefely touched the commoditie of good
diſcouerie; but becauſe it is a matter of great conſequence, in the fortunate cariage
of a warre, I will once againe by this example of Caeſar, remember a Generall
not to be negligent in this dutie. Suetonius in the life of our Caeſar reporteth,
that he neuer vndertooke any expedition, but he firſt receiued true intelligence
of the particular ſite, and nature of the country, as alſo of the maners
and qualitie of the people; and that he would not vndertake the voiage into Britanie,
vntill he had made perfect diſcouerie by himſelfe, of the magnitude and
ſituation of the Iland. Which Suetonius might vnderſtand by this firſt voiage,
which Caeſar would needes vndertake in the latter end of a ſommer, although it
were as he himſelfe ſaith, but to diſcouer.
                  It is recorded by auncient writers, that thoſe demigods that gouerned the
world in their time, gaue great honor to the exerciſe of hunting, as the perfect
image of warre in the reſemblance of all parts, and namely in the diſcouerie and
knowledge of a country; without which all enterpriſes, either of ſport in hunting,
or earneſt in warres were friuolous and of no effect. And therefore Zenophon
in the life of Cyrus, ſheweth that his expedition againſt the king of Armenia,
was nothing but a repetition of ſuch ſportes, as he had vſed in hunting. Howſoeuer,
if the infinite examples regiſtred in hiſtorie, how by the dexteritie of ſome
leaders it hath gained great victories, & through the negligence of others, irrecouerable
ouerthrowes; are not ſufficient motiues to perſwade thē to this duty:
let their owne experience in matters of ſmall moment, manifeſt the weakeneſſe
of their proceedings, when they are ignorant of the chiefeſt circumſtances of
the matter they haue in hand. But let this ſuffice in the ſecond place, to proue
the neceſſitie of good diſcouerie; and let vs learne of Caeſar, what is principally
to be inquired after in the diſcouerie of an vnknowne country; as firſt the quantitie
of the land: ſecondly, what nations inhabite it: thirdly, their vſe of warre:
fourthly, their ciuill gouernment: and laſtly, what hauens they had to receiue a
nauie of great ſhipping. All which circumſtances are ſuch principall Arteries
in the bodie of a ſtate, that the diſcouerie of any one of theſe demaundes would
haue giuen great light, concerning the motion of the whole bodie.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. IX.
               
                  Caeſar ſendeth C. Voluſenus, to diſcouer the coaſt
of Britanie; and prepareth himſelfe for
that voiage.
               
               
                  CAESAR ſent out Caius Voluſenus,Caeſar. Teroanne, or Monſtrell. with a gallie to diſcouer
what he could concerning theſe thinges; and to returne againe
vnto him very ſpeedely: he himſelfe marched in the meane time,
with all his forces, vnto the Morini; foraſmuch as from thence
laie the ſhorteſt cut into Britanie. Thither he commanded that
ſhippes ſhould be brought from all the maritimate cities of that
quarter, and namely that fleete, which he had built the yeare before
for the warre at Vannes. In the meane time his reſolution being knowen, and
carried into Britanie by merchants and others, manie priuate ſtates of that Iland ſent
ambaſſadours vnto him, promiſing him hoſtages of their loialtie, and ſignifying their
readineſse to ſubmit themſelues to the Roman Empire. To theſe he made liberall promiſes,
exhorting them to continue in that obedience; and ſo ſent them backe againe:
And with them he ſent Comius, whom he had made king of Arras, whoſe wiſdome
and vertue he held in good account, and knew it to be of great authoritie in thoſe Regions:
to him he gaue in charge to go to as many of the ſtates as he could, and perſwade
them to accept of the friendſhip of the Roman Empire, and that Caeſar himſelfe would
preſently follow after.
               Voluſenus, hauing taken what view of the country he could; for he durſt not go
on ſhore to commit himſelfe to the barbariſme of the enemy; after fiue daies returned
to Caeſar: and while he ſtaied in thoſe places for the furniſhing of his fleete, the Morini
ſent meſsengers vnto him, excuſing their former faultes, and manifeſting their
readineſse to obey his mandates. Caeſar not willing to leaue any enemy behinde him,
or to neglect his voiage into Britanie, for ſuch ſmall matters; hee willingly accepted
of their ſubmiſsion, hauing firſt receiued manie hoſtages of them, and hauing made
readie eightie ſhippes of burthen, which he thought ſufficient to tranſport two legions,
he deuided the Galleies to the Queſtor, the Legates and the commanders of the
horſe. There were alſo eighteene ſhippes of burthen more, which laie windbound at a
port eight miles off, and them he appointed for the horſemen: the reſt of the Armie he
committed to Q. Titurius Sabinus, and L. Arunculeius Cotta, commanding them to
go to the confines of the Menapij: and appointed P. Sulp. Rufus, a Legate, to keepe
the port, with a ſufficient garrizon.
            
            
               
               CHAP. X.
               
                  Caeſar ſaileth into Britanie, and landeth
his men.
               
               
                  THESE thinges being thus diſpatched: hauing a good winde
in the third watch,Caeſar. he put out to ſea, commanding his horſmen
to imbarke themſelues at the further port, which was but ſlowlie
performed: hee himſelfe arriued vpon the coaſt about the
fourth houre of the daie, where he found all the cliftes poſseſſed
with the forces of the enemie. The nature of the place was ſuch,
that the hils laie ſo ſteepe ouer the ſea, that a weapon might
eaſily be caſt, from the higher, ground vpon the lower ſhore: and therefore he thought
it no fit landing place; notwithſtanding he caſt anker vntill the reſt of the nauie were
come vp vnto him. In the meane time▪ calling a councell of the Legates and Tribunes,
he declared vnto them what aduertiſements he had receiued by Voluſenus, and told
them what he would haue done; and withall admoniſhed them that the courſe of militarie
affaires, and eſpecially ſea matters, that had ſo ſudden and an vnconſtant motion,
required all thinges to be done at a becke, and in due time. The Councell being
diſmiſſed, hauing both wind and tide with him, he waighed anker, and ſailed eight
miles from that place, vnto a plaine and open ſhore. The Britaines perceiuing the Romans
determination, ſent their horſe and chariots before, and the reſt of their forces
followed after, to the place where the Romans intended to land. Caeſar found it exceeding
difficult to land his men, for theſe reſpectes: the ſhips were ſo great, that they
could not be brought neere vnto the ſhore: the ſouldiers in ſtrange and vnknowne
places, hauing their hands laden with great and heauie weapons, were at one inſtant
to go out of the ſhippe, to withſtand the force of the billow, and to fight with the enemie;
whereas the Britaines either ſtanding vpon the ſhore, or making ſhort ſallies into
the water, did boldly caſt their weapons in knowen and frequented places, and managed
their horſes as accuſtomed to ſuch ſeruices.
               The Romans being terrified with theſe thinges, and altogether vnskilfull of this
kinde of fight, did vſe the ſame courage, as they were woont to doe in land ſeruices:
which when Caeſar perceiued, he cauſed the Galleies, that were both ſtrange to the
Britaines, and readier for vſe, to be remoued from the ſhippes of burthen, and to bee
rowed vp and downe, and laide againſt the open ſide of the enemie; that from thence
with ſlinges, engines & arrowes, the enemy might be beaten vp from the water ſide;
which ſtood the Romans in good ſteede: for the Britaines, being troubled with the
ſtrangeneſſe of the Galleies, the motion of their Oares; and the vnuſuall kinde of engines;
were ſomewhat diſmaied, and began to retire backe, and giue waie to the Romans:
but the ſoldiers ſtill lingering, and eſpecially for feare of the depth of the ſea, the
Eagle-bearer of the tenth legion deſiring the Gods, that it might fall out happely to
the legion: If you will (ſaith he) forſake your Eagle, O ye ſouldiers, and betraie it to

the enemy, for mine owne part I will do my duty both to the common weale, and to
my Imperator, and hauing ſpoken this, with a loud voice, hee caſt himſelfe into the
ſea, and caried the Eagle towarde the enemy; the Romaines exhorting one another,
not to ſuffer ſuch a diſhonour to be committed, they all leaped out of the ſhip: which
when others that were neere at hande perceiued, they followed them with as great
alacritie, and preſſed towards the enemy to incounter with them. The fight on both
partes was very eager, the Romaines not being able to keepe any order of battell, nor
to get any firme footing, nor to follow their enſignes, foraſmuch as euery man kept
with thoſe enſignes, which he firſt met withal, were wonderfully troubled: But the
enemy acquainted with the flats and ſhallowes, as they beheld them from the ſhore to
come ſingle out of their ſhips, putting ſpurs to their horſe, woulde ſet vpon them incombred
and vnprepared, and many of them would ouerlay a few; others would get
the aduantage of the open ſide, and caſt their weapons amongſt the thickest troupes
of them: which when Caeſar perceiued, he cauſed the ſhipboates and ſmaller veſſels
to be manned with ſoldiours, and where he ſawe neede of helpe, he ſent them to reſcue
ſuch as were ouercharged. As ſoone as the Romaines got footing on the firme
land, they made head together and charged the enemy, and ſo put them to flight; but
they were not able to follow them, nor take the Iland at that time, for want of horſemen,
which thing was only wanting to Caeſars fortune.
               
                  THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
                  
                     VPon this circumſtance of landing, I may iuſtly take occaſion to
handle that controuerſie, which hath beene often debated by our
Engliſh Captaines, which is, whether it be better in queſtion of an
inuaſion, and in the abſence of our ſhipping, to oppoſe an enemy
at his landing vpon our coaſt; or quietly to ſuffer him to ſet his men on ſhore,
and retire our forces into ſome inland place, and there attend to giue him battell?
It ſeemeth that ſuch as firſt ſet this queſtion on foot, and were of an opinion,
that we ought not by any meanes to encounter an enemy at his landing; for
ſo wee might much endanger our ſelues and our countrey; did ground themſelues
vpon the authority of Monſieur de Langey, not obſeruing the difference
betweene an Iland and a continent. For where he ſetteth down that poſition, he
plainly aimeth at ſuch Princes, as border one vpon an other in the ſame continent:
but where their territories are diſioyned by ſo great a barre as the Ocean,
and haue not ſuch meanes to ſuppriſe one an other, it were meere folly to hold
good that rule, as ſhall better appeare by the ſequell of this diſcourſe. Wherein
I will firſt laie downe the reaſons, that may be vrged to proue it vnſafe to oppoſe
an enemy at his landing, not as beeing vrged by that party; for I neuer
hearde any probable motiue from them which might induce any ſuch opinion,
but ſet down by ſuch as haue looked into the controuerſies, both with experience
and good iudgement.
                  And firſt, it may be obiected, that it is a hard matter to reſiſt an enemy at his
landing, as well in regard of the vncertaintie of place, as of time: for beeing
ignorant in what place hee will attempt a landing, wee muſt either defende all

places of acceſſe, or our intentions wil proue meere friuolous; and to performe
that, it is requiſite that our defenſiue forces be ſufficient, according to the particular
qualitie of euery place ſubiect to danger: which conſidering the large
extenſion of our maritimate parts, and the manie landing places on our coaſt,
will require a greater number of men, then this Iland canne affoord. And although
it coulde furniſh ſuch a competent number, as might ſeeme in ſome
ſort ſufficient; yet the vncertainty of the time of the enemies arriuall, would
require that they ſhould be lodged, either vpon or neere the places of danger,
manie daies at leaſt, if not many weekes, before the inſtant of their attempt,
which woulde exhauſt a greater maſſe of treaſure, then could bee well affoorded
by the ſtate.
                  Secondly, it may be obiected, that all our landing places are of ſuch diſaduantage,
for the defendantes; that it were no ſafetie at all to make heade againſt
him at the landing: for in aſmuch as ſuch places are open and plaine,
they yeelde no commodity to ſhelter the defendantes from the fury of the artillerie,
wherewith the enemy will plentifullie furniſh their long boates and landing
veſſailes; which beating vpon the beach (for moſt of our landing places
are of that quality) will ſo ſcatter them, that no man ſhall bee able to indure the
inconuenience thereof.
                  The thirde obiection may ariſe from the diſparitie both of numbers,
and condition of the forces of either partie: for the firſt it muſt needes bee
granted, that the defendantes being to garde ſo many places at once, cannot
furniſh ſuch numbers to euerie particular place for defence, as the aſſailants
may for offence. Concerning the qualitie of the forces, it is without
queſtion, that a great and potent Prince, (for ſuch a one it muſt bee, that vndertaketh
to inuade the territories of ſo abſolute and well obeied a Princeſſe as
her Maieſtie is) woulde drawe out the floure of his ſolderie whereſoeuer; beſides
the gallant troupes of voluntaries, which do commonly attend ſuch ſeruices.
Now theſe being thus qualified, and drawne into one head, and being to
make as it were but one body: how can it be reaſonably imagined (the time and
place of their attempt being vncertaine) that the defendants ſhould equal them
with forces of like vertue and experience?
                  Theſe are the reaſons, which may be drawne from the diſaduantage, which
they haue that go about to oppoſe an enemy at his landing: the reſt that haue
beene vrged, by ſuch as maintaine this opinion, are either impertinent to the
queſtion, or taken altogether from falſe grounds. But before I proceede to the
anſwere of theſe reaſons, I will lay this downe for a principle. That it is impoſſible
for any forraine Prince how puiſſant ſoeuer, to make ſuch a preparation as
ſhal be fitting to inuade a ſtate ſo populous, and reſpectiue of their ſoueragine,
(notwithſtanding the pretenſes deuiſed to diſſemble the ſame) but it muſt of neceſſitie
be diſcouered, before it can bee made able to put any thing in execution:
which I might enlarge by particularizing the infinite equipage, which
is required for ſo great a fleete. But I will reſt my ſelfe in the example of the
yeere 88. which proueth the diſcouery of the pretended inuaſion, before it could
come to execution.
                  
                     
Concerning therefore the firſt obiection: it cannot indeed bee denied, but
the place of the enemies landing will be doubtfull,Anſwere to the first obiection. and therefore our care muſt
generally extend it ſelfe to all places of acceſſe: but that our defenſiue forces
are not ſufficient in a competent maner to garde all ſuch places, according as
the neceſſitie of them ſhall require, that is the point in queſtion. To prooue
that our forces are ſufficient: wee muſt neceſſarily enter into particularities,
wherein I will take Kent for a preſident, as not altogether vnacquainted with the
ſtate thereof; which, if I deceiue not my ſelfe, is a ſhore of as large extenſion
vpon the maritimate partes, as any other within this kingdom, for the breadth
thereof enlarging it ſelfe from the point of Neſſe by Lyd, which is the vttermoſt
skirt vpon the coaſt of Suſſex, vnto Margate vppon the coaſt of Eſſex; is by
computation about twenty foure miles: but notwithſtanding this large circuit,
who knoweth not that the ſixt part thereof is not ſubiect to the landing of ſuch
an enemy, as wee ſpeake of, partly in regarde of the hugeneſſe of the cliffes,
which do incloſe a great part of that skirt; and partly in regard that much of that
quantitie, which may be landed vpon, hath ſuch eminent and difficult places
neere adioyning, as an armie that ſhoulde put it ſelfe there on ſhore, ſhoulde
find it ſelfe being oppoſed but by a ſmall force, ſo ſtraitened, as they would not
eaſily find a way out, without apparant ruine of their whole forces. Further it
cannot be denied, but that generally along the coaſt of Kent, there are ſo many
rocks, ſhelues, flats, and other impediments, that a nauie of great ſhips canne
haue no commodity to anchor neere the ſhore: and for the moſt part the coaſt
lieth ſo open to the weather, that the leaſt gale of wind will put them from their
Anchor: all which particularities duly conſidered, it wil appeare that this large
skirt of Kent will affoord a far leſſer part fit for the landing of an army, then was
thought of at the firſt. And were it that ſo publike a treatiſe as this is, would admit
with good diſcretion ſuch an exact relation, as falleth within my knowledge
concerning this point, I would vndertake to make it ſo euident, by the particular
deſcription both of the number, quantity and qualitie of the places themſelues;
as no man of an indifferent iudgement would imagine our forces to
be inſufficient, to affoord euery of them ſuch a ſafe and ſure garde, as ſhall bee
thought requiſite for the ſame. But foraſmuch as it is vnfitting to giue ſuch particular
ſatisfaction in this publike diſcourſe, giue me leaue, ſubmitting my ſelfe
alwaies to better iudgements, to giue a generall taſte of that meanes as woulde
ſecure all places, with a competent number of men.
                  Hauing ſhewed you before the circuit of the maritimat parts of Kent, I would
obſerue this order: firſt, to make a triple diuiſion of all ſuch forces, as ſhall be
appointed for this ſeruice; as for example, I wil ſuppoſe the number to be 12000
of which I would lodge 3000. about the point of Neſſe, and 3000. about Margate,
& 6000. about Foulkſton, which I take to be as it were the center: for my
greateſt care ſhould be ſo to diſpoſe of them, as they might not only ſuccor one
an other in the ſame ſhire, but as euery ſhire bordereth one vpon an other; ſo
they ſhould mutually giue helpe one vnto an other, as occaſion ſhould bee offered:
as if the enemy ſhoulde attempt a landing about Neſſe, not onely the
6000. lodged as before, ſhoulde march to their ſuccours, but ſuch alſo of the

Suſſex forces as were neere vnto that part; and ſo likewiſe of the reſt: by which
you may ſee how great a force would in few houres bee aſſembled, for the renforcing
of any of theſe out skirts; and the rather, foraſmuch as the one halfe
of the whole forces are thus lodged in the center of the ſhire, which is neerer
to all parts then any other place whatſoeuer. There woulde alſo in the quartering
of them, an eſpeciall care bee had to the places of daunger, as might bee
anſwerable to the importance thereof: for my meaning is not to lodge them
cloſe together, but to ſtretch them out along the coaſt by regiments and companies,
as the country might affoord beſt oportunity, to entertaine them.
                  Now concerning the latter part of this obiection, which vrgeth the vncertainty
of time, when the enemy ſhall make his approches: I holde it moſt requiſite
that our defenſiue forces ſhould be drawne into a heade, before the enemy
ſhould be diſcouered neere our coaſt ready to put himſelfe on ſhoare: for
it were a groſſe abſurdity to imagine, that companies coulde vppon ſuch a ſodaine
be aſſembled, without confuſion; and make ſo long a march, with ſuch
expedition, as the neceſſity of the occaſion would require. Nowe for that huſbanding
reſpect of her Maieſties coffers, which is vrged to ſuch extremity, as it
would be vnſupportable for this ſtate to beare: as I doubt not but good intelligence
would much qualifie that ſuppoſed immoderate expence; ſo I aſſure my
ſelfe, that men of ſound iudgement, will deeme it much out of ſeaſon to diſpute
about vnneceſſary thrift, when the whole kingdome is brought in queſtion of
being made ſubiect to a ſtranger:

                        Vt iugulent homines ſurgunt de nocte latrones,
                        Non expergeſceris, vt te ipſum ſerues?
                     
the enemy (peraduenture) hath kept 30000. men in paie 2. months before, to
make hauocke of our countrey, and to bring vs into perpetuall thraldome; ſhal
we thinke it much to maintaine ſufficient forces vppon our coaſt, to aſſure our
ſelues, that no ſuch enemy ſhall enter into our countrey? the extremity of this
charge woulde bee qualified by our good eſpiall, which would proportion our
attendance, with the neceſſity which is impoſed vpon vs to bee carefull in buſineſſes
of this nature. Let this ſuffice therefore to proue, that our forces are ſufficient
to keepe the ſea coſt; and that the vncertainty of time, when the enemy
will make his attempts, ought not to hinder vs from performing that dutie,
which the care and reſpect of our Prince and countrey impoſeth vpon euerie
good ſubiect, which is the ſubſtance of the firſt reaſon, which I ſet downe in the
beginning of this diſcourſe.
                  Now concerning the ſecond reaſon, which vrgeth the diſaduantage of the
place,The anſwere to the ſecond reaſon. in regarde of the fury of the enemies artillery. True it is, that ſuch places
as yeelde the enemy commodity of landing, are for the moſt parte plaine
and open, and affoord naturally no couert at all. What then? ſhall a ſoldiour
take euery place as hee findeth it, and vſe no arte to qualifie the diſaduantages
thereof? or ſhall a man forgo the benefit of a place of aduantage rather, then
hee will relieue with induſtry the diſcommoditie of ſome particular circumſtance?
I make no queſtion but an ingenious commander, being in ſeaſonable
time lodged with conuenient forces vpon any of thoſe places, yea vppon the

beach it ſelfe, which is vnapt to make defenſible, as anie place whatſoeuer;
woulde vſe ſuch induſtrie as might giue ſufficient ſecuritie to his forces, and
ouerwaie the enemie with aduantage of place; eſpecially conſidering that this
age hath affoorded ſuch plentifull examples of admirable inuentions in that behalfe:
but this cannot be done, if our forces doe not make head before the inſtant
of the enemies attempt, that our commanders may haue ſome time to
make readie ſtore of Gabions, handbaskets, with ſuch moueable matter as ſhal
be thought fit for that ſeruice.
                  Neither let this trouble anie man, for I dare auouch it, that if our forces
are not drawne into a heade before the enemie bee diſcouered vppon
the coaſt, although wee neuer meane to oppoſe their landing, but attende
them in ſome inlande place, to giue them battaile; our Commanders will
bee farre to ſeeke of manie important circumſtances, which are requiſite in a
matter of that conſequence. And therefore let vs haue but a reaſonable time to
bethinke our ſelues of theſe neceſſaries, and we will eaſilie ouercome all theſe
difficulties, and vſe the benefit of the firme lande to repell an enemie, weakened
with the ſea, toſſed with the billow, troubled with his weapons, with manie
other hinderances and diſcouragementes, which are preſented vnto him
both from the land and the ſea. He that ſaw the landing of our forces in the Iland
of Fiall, in the yeere 97. can ſomewhat iudge of the difficulty of that matter:
for what with the working of the ſea, the ſteepneſſe of the cliffes, the troubleſomnes
of their armes, the ſoldiors were ſo incombred, that had not the enemie
beene more then a coward, he might wel with 200. men haue kept vs from entering
any part of that Iland.
                  Concerning the thirde obiection,The anſwere to the third reaſon. this briefelie ſhall bee ſufficient,
that wee are not ſo much to regarde that our forces doe equall them in number,
as to ſee that they bee ſufficient for the nature of the place, to make
it good againſt the enemies landing: for wee knowe that in places of aduantage
and difficult acceſſe, a ſmall number is able to oppoſe a great; and wee
doubt not but all circumſtances duelie conſidered, wee ſhall proportionablie
equall the enemie, both in number and qualitie of their forces: alwaies
preſuppoſed, that our ſtate ſhall neuer bee deſtitute of ſufficient forces trained,
and exerciſed in a competent maner, to defende their Countrey from
forraine enemies. For the neglect thereof, were to drawe on ſuch as of
themſelues are but too forwarde, to make a praie of vs; and to make vs vnapt,
not onelie to oppoſe an enemies landing, but to defende our ſelues
from beeing ouerrunne, as other nations liuing in ſecurity, without due regarde
thereof, haue beene.
                  And this much concerning the anſwere to thoſe three reaſons, which
ſeeme to prooue that an enemie is not to bee reſiſted at his landing. Nowe
if we do but looke a little into the diſcommodities, which follow vpon the landing
of an enemy, we ſhall eaſilie diſcouer the dangerouſneſſe of this opinion:
as firſt, we giue him leaue to liue vpon the ſpoile of our countrey, which cannot
be preuented by any waſting, ſpoiling, or retiring of our prouiſions, in ſo plentiful
a countrey as this is, eſpecially conſidering that wee haue no ſtrong townes

at all to repoſe our ſelues vpon. Whereof wee neede no further teſtimonie,
then is deliuered vnto vs out of the ſeuenth booke of theſe Commentaries, in
that war, which Caeſar had with Vercingetorix.
                  Secondly obedience, which at other times is willingly giuen to Princes, is
greatly, weakened at ſuch times; whereby all neceſſary meanes to maintaine a
war is hardly drawn from the ſubiect. Thirdly, oportunity is giuen to malecontents
and ill diſpoſed perſons, either to make head themſelues, or to flie to the enemy.
Fourthly, the madnes to aduenture a kingdom vpon one ſtroke, hauing it
in our diſpoſition to do otherwiſe, with many other diſaduantages, which the oportunity
of any ſuch occaſion would diſcouer.
               
               
                  THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
                  
                     THe worde imperator,
                     Of the name Imperator. which the Eagle-bearer attributeth to Caeſar,
was the greateſt title that could be giuen to a Romaine leader:
and as Zonaras in his ſecond Tome ſaith, was neuer giuen but vpon
ſome great exploite, and after a iuſt victorie obtained; and then
in the place where the battaile was fought, and the enemie ouerthrowne,
the Generall was ſaluted by the name of Imperator, with the triumphant
ſhoute of the whole armie; by which acclamation, the ſoldiours gaue teſtimonie
of his worth; and made it equiualent with the moſt fortunate Commaunders.
                  This ceremonie was of great antiquitie in the Romaine Empire, as appeareth
by manie hiſtories,3. Annal. and namelie by Tacitus, where hee ſaith, that
Tyberius gaue that honour to Bleſus, that hee ſhould be ſaluted Imperator by
the legions; which hee ſheweth to bee an ancient dignitie belonging to great
Captaines, after they had foiled the enemy, with an eminent ouerthrowe. For
euerie victorie was not ſufficient, whereby they might chalenge ſo great an
honour, but there was required (as it ſeemeth) a certaine number of the enemies
to be ſlaine. Apian in his ſecond booke ſaieth, that in olde time, the
name of Imperator was neuer taken, but vpon great and admirable exploits:
but in his time 10000 of the enemy being ſlaine in one battell, was a ſufficient
ground of that honour. Cicero ſaith, that 2000 ſlaine in the place, eſpeciallie
of Thracians,Phil. 14. Spaniards or Galles, did worthely merit the name of Imperator.
Howſoeuer it ſeemeth by the ſame author, that there was a certain number
of the enemy required to be ſlaine,Lib. 2. epist. 9. where he ſaith, Se inſta victoria Imperatorem
appellatum.
                  
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. XI.
               
                  The Britains make peace with Caeſar, but breake it
againe, vpon the loſſe of the Romain ſhipping.
               
               
                  THE Britaines being ouerthrowne in this battaile;Caeſar. aſſoone as
they had recouered their ſafety by flight, they preſently diſpatched
meſſengers to Caeſar to intreate for peace, promiſing hoſtages
and obedience, in whatſoeuer he commanded. And with
theſe ambaſſadors returned Comius of Arras, whom Caeſar had
ſent before into Britanie. Caeſar complained, that, whereas they
ſent vnto him into Gallia to deſire peace, notwithstanding at
his comming they made warre againſt him, without any cauſe or reaſon at all; but
excuſing it by their ignorance, he commanded hoſtages to be deliuered vnto him:
which they preſently performed in parte; and the reſt being to bee fet further off,
ſhoulde likewiſe be rendered within a ſhort time; in the meane while, they commanded
their people to returne to their poſſeſsions, and their Rulers and Princes came
out of all quarters to commende themſelues and their ſtates to Caeſar. The peace being
thus concluded; foure daies after that Caeſar came into Britanie, the eighteen
ſhippes which were appointed for the horſemen, put out to ſea with a gentle winde,
and approaching ſo neere the coast of Britanie, that they were within viewe of the
Romaine campe: there aroſe ſuch a ſodaine tempest, that none of them were able to
holde their courſe, but ſome of them returned to the porte from whence they
came; otherſome were caſt vpon the lower part of the Ilande, which lieth to the
Weſt warde; and there caſting anchor tooke in ſuch ſeas, that they were forced to
commit themſelues againe to the ſea, and direct their courſe to the coaſt of Gallia.
The ſame night it happened, that the moone being in the full, the tides were verie
high in thoſe ſeas; whereof the Romaines being altogether ignorant, both the Gallies
which were drawne vp vpon the ſhore were filde with the tide, and the ſhippes
of burthen that laie at anchor, were ſhaken with the tempeſt, neither was there
anie helpe to be giuen vnto them: ſo that many of them were rent, and ſplit in peeces;
and the reſt loſt both their anchors, Gables and other tackling: and by that
meanes became altogether vnſeruiceable. Whereat the whole armie was exceedinglie
troubled; for there was no other ſhipping to recarrie them bcke againe:
Neither had they anie neceſſaries to newe furniſh the olde: and euerie man knew
that they muſt needes winter in Gallia; for as much as there was no prouiſion of corn
in thoſe places where they were. Which thing beeing knowne to the Princes of
Britanie, that were aſſembled to confer of ſuch thinges as Caeſar had commanded
them to performe, when they vnderſtood that the Romaines wanted both their
horſemen, ſhipping, and prouiſion of corne, and coniecturing of the paucitie of their
forces, by the ſmall circuit of their camp; and that which was more important then
all the reſt, that Caeſar had tranſported his ſoldiours without ſuch neceſſarie cariages,
as they vſed to take with them: they thought it their beſt courſe to rebell,
and to keepe the Romaines from corne and conuoies of prouiſion, and ſo prolong the
matter, vntil winter came on. For they thought that if theſe were once ouerthrown

and cut off from returning into Gallia, neuer any man would afterward aduenture
to bring an army into Britanie: therefore they conſpired againe the ſecond time, and
conuaied themſelues by ſtealth out of the campe, and got their men priuily out of the
fields, to make head in ſome conuenient place againſt the Romans.
               
                  THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
                  
                     COncerning the ebbing and flowing of the ſea, and the cauſes thereof;
it hath already beene handled in the ſecond booke, to which I
will adde this much, as may ſerue to ſhew, how the Romaines became
ſo ignorant of the ſpring tides, which happen in the full and
new of the moone. It is obſerued by experience, that the motion of this waterie
element is altogither directed by the courſe of the moon, wherin ſhe exerciſeth
her regency, according as ſhee findeth the matter qualified for her influence.
And for aſmuch as all mediterrean ſeas, and ſuch gulfes as are incloſed in ſinues
and boſomes of the earth, are both abridged of the liberty of their courſe, and
through the ſmallnes of their quantity, are not ſo capable of celeſtiall power;
as the Ocean it ſelfe: it conſequently followeth, that the Tuskane ſeas, wherwith
the Romains were chiefly acquainted, were not ſo anſwerable in effect to the operation
of the moon, as the maine ſea, whoſe bounds are ranged in a more ſpacious
circuit; and through the plenteous abundance of his parts, better anſwereth
the vertue of the moone. The Ocean therfore being thus obedient to the
courſe of the celeſtial bodies, taking hir courſe of flowing from the North, falleth
with ſuch a currant between the Orcades, and the maine of Noruegia; that ſhe
filleth our channel between England and France, with great ſwelling tides; and
maketh her motion more eminent in theſe quarters, then in any other partes of
the world. And hence it happeneth, that our riuer of Thames, lying with her
mouth ſo ready to receiue the tyde as it commeth, and hauing withall a plaine
leuelled belly, and a very ſmal freſh currant, taketh the tide as far into the land, as
any other known riuer of Europe. And for this cauſe the Romans were ignorant
of the ſpring tides in the ful of the moone.
               
               
                  THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
                  
                     SVch as either by their own experience, or otherwiſe by obſeruation of
that which hiſtory recordeth, are acquainted with the gouernment of
common weales, are not ignorant with what difficulty a nation, that either
hath long liued in liberty, or bin gouerned by cōmanders of their own choſing,
is made ſubiect to the yoake of bondage, or reduced vnder the obediēce of
a ſtranger. For as we are apt by a naturall inclination to ciuill ſocietie; ſo by the
ſame nature wee deſire a free diſpoſition of our ſelues and poſſeſsions, as the
cheefeſt end of the ſaide ſociety. And therefore in the gouernment of a ſubdued
ſtate, what loſſe or diſaduantage happeneth to the victor, or how indirectlie

ſoeuer it concerneth the bond of their thraldome, the captiue people behold it
as a part of their aduerſaries ouerthrow; and conceiue thereupon ſuch ſpirites,
as anſwere the greatnes of their hope, and ſort with the ſtrength of their will,
which alwaies maketh that ſeeme eaſie to be effected which it deſireth. And this
was the reaſon, that the Britaines altered their reſolution of peace, vpon the loſſe
which the Romans had receiued in their ſhipping.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XII.
               
                  Caeſar new trimmeth his late ſhaken nauie: the Britaines
ſet vpon the Romans as they harueſted;
but were put off by Caeſar.
               
               
                  CAESAR although he had not diſcouered their determination,
yet coniecturing of the euent by the loſſe of his ſhipping, and
by their delay of giuing vppe hoſtages; hee prouided againſt all
chances: for he brought corne daily out of the fields into his camp;
and tooke the huls of ſuch ſhips as were moſt diſmembred, and
with the tymber and braſſe thereof hee mended the reſt that
were beaten with the tempeſt, cauſing other neceſsaries to bee
brought out of Gallia. Which being handeled with the great induſtrie and trauell of
the ſouldiers, he loſt onely twelue ſhippes, and made the other able to abide the ſea.
               While theſe thinges were in action, the ſeuenth legion being ſent out by courſe, to
fetch in corne, and little ſuſpecting any motion of warre; as part of the ſouldiers continued
in the field, and the reſt went and came betweene them and the campe; the ſtation
that watched before the gate of the campe, gaue aduertiſement to Caeſar, that the
ſame way which the legion went, there appeared a greater duſt then was vſually ſeene.
Caeſar ſuſpecting that which in deede was true, that the Britaines were entered into
ſome new reſolution, he tooke thoſe two cohorts which were in ſtation before the port,
commanding other two to take their place, and the reſt to arme themſelues, and preſently
to follow him, and went that waie, where the duſt was deſcried. And when
he had marched ſome diſtance from the campe, he ſaw his men ouercharged with the
enemie, and ſcarce able to ſuſtaine the aſſault, the legion thronged together on a heape,
and weapons caſt from all partes amongst them. For when they had harueſted all other
quarters, there remained one piece of corne, whither the enemie ſuſpected the
Romans would at laſt come; and in the night time conuaied themſelues ſecretly into
the woods, where they continued, vntill the Romans were come into the field, and as
they ſaw them diſarmed, diſperſed and occupied in reaping; they ſuddenly ſet vpon
them, and ſlaying ſome few of them, rowted the reſt and incompaſſed them about
with their horſemen, and chariots. Their manner of fight with chariots, was firſt to
ride vp and downe and caſt their weapons, as they ſaw aduantage; and with the terrour
of their horſes & ratteling of their wheeles, to diſorder the companies; and when

they had wound themſelues betweene anie troupes of horſe, they forſooke their chariots
and fought on foot: in the meane time the guiders of their chariots would driue
a little aſide, and ſo place themſelues, that if their maiſters needed anie helpe, they
might haue an eaſie paſsage vnto them. And thus they performed in all their
fightes, both the nimble motion of horſemen, and the firme ſtabilitie of footmen; and
were ſo readie with daily practiſe, that they could ſtaie in the decliuitie of a ſteepe
hill, and turne ſhort or moderate their going, as it ſeemed beſt vnto them; and runne
along the beame of the coach and reſt vpon the yoake, or harneſse of their horſes, and
returne as ſpeedely againe at their pleaſure. The Romans being thus troubled, Caeſar
came to reſcue them in verie good time: for at his comming, the enemie ſtood ſtill;
and the ſouldiers gathered their ſpirits vnto them, and began to renew their courage
that was almoſt ſpent. Caeſar, thinking it an vnfit time, either to prouoke the enemy,
or to giue him battell; he continued a while in the ſame place: And then returned
with the legions into the campe. While theſe thinges were a doing, and the Romaines
thus buſied; the Britaines that were in the field, conuaied themſelues all awaie.
               
                  THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
                  
                     BY this wee plainely finde, that there were vſually two cohortes
(which according to the rate of 120 in a maniple, amounted to
the number of 720 men) which kept the daie watch before the
gate of the campe, and were alwaies in readineſſe vpon any ſeruice.
The commoditie whereof appeareth by this accident, for conſidering that the
aduertiſement required haſte and ſpeedie recourſe, it greatly furthered their
reſcue to haue ſo manie men readie to march forward at the firſt motion, that
they might giue what helpe they could, vntill the reſt of their fellowes came in.
               
               
                  THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
                  
                     THeir manner of fight with chariots, is very particularly deſcribed by
Caeſar, and needeth not to bee ſtood vpon any longer: onely I obſerue,
that neither in Gallia, nor any other country of Europe, the
vſe of chariots is neuer mentioned: but they haue euer beene attributed,
as a peculiar fight, vnto the eaſterne countries, as ſutable to the plaine
and leuell ſituation of the place, whereof we finde often mention in the ſcripture:
which may ſerue for an argument to Geffrey of Monmouth, to proue the
Britaines deſcent from Troie in Aſia, where we likewiſe finde mention of ſuch
chariots.
               
               
                  
                  THE THIRD OBSERVATION.
                  
                     THirdly we may obſerue, the diſcreete or moderate temper of his
valour, and the meanes he vſed to make his ſouldiers confident in
his directions: for notwithſtanding the Britaines had exceedingly
vrged him, to make hazard of a preſent reuenge; yet finding it an
vnfit time, (inaſmuch as his men had beene ſomewhat troubled, with the furie
of the Britaines) hee thought it beſt to expect ſome other oportunitie. And againe,
to auoid the inconueniences of a fearefull retrait, he continued a while
in the ſame place, to imbolden his men with the ſight of the enemie. And this
manner of proceeding wrought a full perſwaſion in his ſouldiers, that his actions
were directed with knowledge, and with a carefull reſpect of their ſafetie;
which gaue his mē reſolution when they were caried vpon ſeruice, being aſſured
that what ſeruice ſoeuer they were imploied vpon, was moſt diligently to bee
performed, as a matter much importing the fortunate iſſue of that warre: wheras
if they had perceiued that headſtrong furie, which carrieth men on with a deſire
of victorie, and neuer looketh into the meanes wherby it may be obtained,
had directed the courſe of their proceedinges, they might with reaſon haue
drawne backe from ſuch imploiments, and valewed their ſafetie aboue the iſſue
of ſuch an enterpriſe. And hence ariſeth that confident opinion, which the ſoldiers
haue of a good Generall; which is a matter of great importance in the
courſe of a warre.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XIII.
               
                  The Britaines make head, with their forces; and
are beaten by Caeſar: his returne into
Gallia.
               
               
                  AFTER this;Caeſar. for manie daies together, there followed ſuch
tempeſts and foule weather, that both the Romans were conſtrained
to keepe their campe, and the Britaines were kept
from attempting any thing againſt them: But in the meane
time, they ſent meſsengers into all quarters, publiſhing the
ſmall number of the Roman forces, and amplifying the greatneſſe
of the bootie, and the eaſie means offered vnto them of
perpetuall libertie, if they could take the Roman campe. Shortly vpon this, hauing
gathered a great companie, both of horſe and foote; they came to the place where the
Romans were incamped. Caeſar (although he foreſaw the euent by that which before
had happened, that if the enemie were beaten backe, he would auoide the danger by
flight) yet hauing ſome 30 horſe, which Comius of Arras had carried with him, at his

comming into Britanie; he imbattailed his legions before his campe; and ſo gaue them
battell. The enemie not being able to beare the aſſault of the Roman ſouldiers, turned
their backes and fled: the Romans followed them, as farre as they could by running on
foote; and after a great ſlaughter, with the burning of their townes farre and neare,
they returned to their campe. The ſame daie the Britaines ſent meſſengers to Caeſar,
to intreat for peace; whom he commanded to double their number of hoſtages, which
he commanded to be carried into Gallia. And foraſmuch as the Aequinoctium was at
hand; he thought it not ſafe to put himſelfe to the winter ſea, with ſuch weake ſhipping:
and therefore hauing got a conuenient time, he hoiſed ſaile a little after midnight,
and brought all his ſhips ſafe vnto the continent. Two of theſe ſhips of burthen,
not being able to reach the ſame hauen, put in ſomewhat lower into the land: the ſoldiers
that were in them being about 300, being ſet on ſhore, and marching towardes
their campe: the Morini, with whom Caeſar at his going into Britany had made peace,
in hope of a bootie, firſt with a few of their men ſtood about them, commanding them
vpon paine of death to laie downe their weapons; and as the Romans, by caſting themſelues
into an Orbe, began to make defence, at the noiſe and clamour amongst them,
there were ſuddenly gathered together about 6000 of the enemy. Which thing being
knowen, Caeſar ſent out all the horſemen to relieue them: in the meane time the Romans
ſuſtained the force of the enemie, and fought valiantly the ſpace of foure houres;
and receiuing themſelues ſome few woundes, they ſlew many of the enemie. After the
Roman horſemen came in ſight, the enemie caſt awaie their weapons and fled, and a
great number of them fell by the horſemen.
               
                  OBSERVATIONS.
                  
                     OF al the figures which the Tactici haue choſen to make vſe of in militarie
affaires; the circle hath euer beene taken for the fitteſt, to be applied
in the defenſiue part, as incloſing with an equall circuit on all
partes whatſoeuer is contained within the circumference of that
Area: and therefore Geometrie tearmeth a circumference a ſimple line, for as
much as if you alter the ſite of the parts, and tranſport one arch into the place
of another; the figure notwithſtanding will remaine the ſame, becauſe of the equall
bending of the line, throughout the whole circumference. Which propertie,
as it proueth an vniformitie of ſtrength in the whole circuit, ſo that it cannot
be ſaid that this is the beginning, or this is the end; this is front, or this is
flanke. So doth that, which Euclide doth demonſtrate in the 3 of his Elements,
concerning the ſmall affinitie betweene a right line, and a circle (which being
drawen to touch the circumference, doth touch it but in a point only) ſhew the
greatnes of this ſtrength in regard of any other line, by which it may be broken.
Which, howſoeuer they ſeeme, as ſpeculatiue qualities, conceiued rather by intellectuall
diſcourſe, then manifeſted to ſenſible apprehenſion; yet foraſmuch
as experience hath proued the ſtrength of this figure, in a defenſiue part, aboue
any other maner of imbattailing; let vs not neglect the knowledge of theſe naturall
properties, which diſcouer the cauſes of this effect: neither let vs neglect

this part of militarie knowledge, being ſo ſtrong a meanes to maintaine valour,
and the ſinew of all our abilitie: for order correſpondent to circumſtances, is
the whole ſtrength and power of an Armie. Neither ought there any action in
a well ordered diſcipline, to be irregular, or voide of order: and therefore the
Romans did neither eate nor ſleepe, without the direction of the Conſull, or
chiefe commander; otherwiſe their valour might rather haue beene tearmed
furie then vertue: but when their courage was ranged with order, and diſpoſed
according to the occurrences of the time; it neuer failed as long as the ſaid order
continued perfect.
                  It appeareth therfore, how important it is for a commander to looke into the
diuerſitie of orders for imbattailing, and to waigh the nature thereof; that hee
may with knowledge apply them to the quality of any occaſion. The Romans
tearmed this figure Orbis, which ſignifieth a round body both with a concaue,
and a conuex ſurface: in reſemblance whereof, I vnderſtand this Orbe of men
imbattailed to be ſo named; which might peraduenture conſiſt of fiue or more
or fewer rankes, incloſing one another after the nature of ſo manie circles, deſcribed
about one Center: ſo that either the middeſt thereof remained voide, or
otherwiſe contained ſuch cariages, and impediments, as they had with them in
their march. This forme of imbattailing was neuer vſed, but in great extremitie:
for as it was the ſafeſt of all other; ſo it gaue ſuſpition to the ſouldiers of exceeding
danger, which abated much of their heat in battell, as wil herafter appeare
by the teſtimonie of Caeſar himſelfe, in the fift Commentarie, vpon the occaſion
which happened vnto Sabinus and Cotta.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XIIII.
               
                  THE next daie,Caeſar. Caeſar ſent Titus Labienus a Legate, with thoſe legions
which he had brought out of Britanie, againſt the reuolted Morini; who
hauing no place of refuge becauſe their bogs & fens were dried vp, where
they had ſheltered themſelues the yeare before, they all fell vnder the
power of his mercie. Q. Titurîus, and A. Cotta the Legats, who had led the legions
againſt the Menapij, after they had waſted their fieldes, cut vp their corne, burned
their houſes, for the Menapij were all hid in thicke woods; they returned to Caeſar:
theſe thinges being thus ended, Caeſar placed the wintering campes of all his legions amongst
the Belgae; to which place two only of all the cities in Britanie, ſent hoſtages
vnto him: the reſt neglecting it. Theſe wars being thus ended: vpon the relation of
Caeſars letters, the ſenate decreed a ſupplication for the ſpace of 20 daies.
               
                  OBSERVATIONS.
                  
                     IN the ende of the ſecond Commentarie, we reade of a ſupplication
granted by the ſenate, for 15 daies; which was neuer granted to anie
man before that time; ſince the firſt building of the citie; but foraſmuch
as in this fourth yeare of the warres in Gallia, it was augmented from 15

vnto 20 daies, I thought it fit to referre the handling thereof, vnto this place.
We are therfore to vnderſtand, that whenſoeuer a Roman Generall had carried
himſelfe well in the warres, by gaining a victorie, or enlarging the boundes of
their Empire; that then the ſenate did decree a ſupplication to the Gods, in the
name of that captaine. And this dignitie was much ſought after, not onely becauſe
it was a matter of great honour, that in their names the Temples of their
Gods ſhould be opened, and their victories acknowledged, with the concourſe
and gratulation of the Roman people: but alſo becauſe a ſupplication was commonly
the forerunner of a triumph, which was the greateſt honour in the Roman
gouernment:Li. 15. fami. Cicero. And therfore Cato nameth it the prerogatiue of a triumph.
And Liuie in his 26 booke ſaith, that it was long diſputed on in the ſenate, how
they could denie one that was there preſent to triumph, whoſe abſence they had
honoured, with ſupplication, and thankeſgiuing to the Gods, for things happily
effected? The maner of the Ceremonie was; that after the Magiſtrate had publikely
proclaimed it with this forme or ſtile, quod bene & faeciliter rempublicam
adminiſtraſſet; the Roman people cloathed in white garmentes and crowned
with garlands, went to all the temples of the Gods, and there offered ſacrifices,
to gratulate the victorie in the name of the Generall. In which time they were
forbidden all other buſineſſes, but that which pertained to this ſolemnity. It ſeemeth
that this time of ſupplication, was at firſt included within one or two daies
at the moſt, as appeareth by Liuie in his third booke, where he ſaith, that the
victorie gained by two ſeuerall battels, was ſpitefully ſhut vp by the ſenat in one
daies ſupplication: the people of their owne accord keeping the next daie holie
and celebrating it with greater deuotion then the former.
                  Vpon the victorie which Camillus had againſt the Veij, there were granted
foure daies of ſupplication; to which there was afterward a daie added, which
was the vſuall time of ſupplication vnto the time that Pompei ended the warre,
which they called Mithridaticum; when the vſuall time of fiue daies was doubled,
and made 10, and in the ſecond of theſe Commentaries, made 15, and now
brought to 20 daies. Which ſetteth foorth the incitements and rewardes of wel
doing, which the Romans propounded both at home and abroad, to ſuch as indeuoured
to enlarge their Empire, or manage a charge, to the benefit of their
common-wealths. And thus endeth the fourth Commentarie.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE FIFT COMMENTARIE
OF THE WAR, WHICH CAESAR
MADE IN GALLIA.
            
               THE ARGVMENT.
               
                  CAeſar cauſed a great nauie to be built in Gallia: he caried
5 legions into Britany, where he made war with the Britains,
on both ſides the riuer Thames: at his returne into
Gallia, moſt of the Galles reuolted; and firſt the Eburones vnder
the conduction of Ambiorix, ſet vpon the campe of Q. Titurius
the Legate, whom they circumuented by ſubtilty; and then
beſieged the campe of Cicero: but were put by, and their Armie
ouerthrowen by Caeſar.
            
            
               CHAP. I.
               
                  Caeſar returneth into Gallia: findeth there great
ſtore of ſhipping made by the ſouldiers, and commandeth
them to be brought to the
hauen Iccius.
               
               
                  LVCIVS Domitius,Caeſar. and Appius Claudius, being Conſuls; Caeſar at
his going into Italie, gaue order to the Legats to build as manie ſhips
that winter, as poſsibly they could; commanding them to be built of
a lower pitch then thoſe which are vſed in the mediterranean ſea, for
the ſpeedier lading & vnlading of thē, and becauſe the tides in theſe
ſeas were verie great: and foraſmuch as he was to tranſport great
ſtore of horſe, he commanded them to be made flatter in the bottome them ſuch as were
vſuall in other places, and all of them to be made for the vſe of Oares, to which purpoſe
their low building ſerued verie conueniently. Other neceſsaries and furniture for rigging,
he gaue order to haue it brought out of Spaine. Caeſar after the aſſembly of the
ſtates in Lombardie, and that he ſet free Illiricum from the incurſions of the Piruſtae,
he returned into Gallia; where he found 600 ſhips built, by the extraordinarie induſtrie
of the ſouldiers, notwithſtanding the penurie and want of all neceſſarie matter,
with 28 Gallies ready furniſhed, which in a few daies might be lanched: hauing commended
the ſoldiers and ouerſeers of the worke, he commanded them to be brought to
the port called Iccius, from whence he knew the paſsage into Britanie, was not aboue
thirtie mile ouer.
               
                  
                  THE OBSERVATION.
                  
                     THis Iccius Portus Floide thinketh to be Caleis; others take it to bee
Saint Omer, partly in regard of the ſituation of the place, which being
in it ſelfe verie lowe, hath notwithſtanding very high bankes,
which incompaſſe the towne about; and in times paſt was a verie
large hauen. To this maie be added the diſtance from this towne, to the next
continent of the Iland of Britany; which Strabo maketh to containe 320 ſtadia,
which agreeth to the French computation of 13 leages. Caeſar maketh it thirtie
mile: this is the hauen, which Pliny calleth Britannicum portum Morinorum.
                  
               
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               
                  Caeſar ſaileth into Britanie: landeth his forces,
and ſeeketh the enemie.
               
               
                  CAESAR hauing prepared all things in readineſse,Caeſar. he left Labienus
in the continent with three legions, and 2000 horſe, both
to keepe the hauen and make prouiſion of corne; and alſo to obſerue
the motion of the Galles: and with fiue legions and the like
number of horſe, as he left in the continent, about ſun-ſetting he
put out to ſea, with a ſoft ſouth winde, which continued vntill
midnight; and then ceaſing, he was carried with the tide vntill
the morning, when he perceiued that the Iland laie on his left hand: and againe, as the
tide changed, hee laboured by rowing to reach that part of the Iland, where he had
found good landing the yeare before: wherein the ſouldiers deſerued great commendation;
for by ſtrength and force of Oares, they made their great ſhips of burthen to
keepe waie with the Galleies. About high noone, they arriued in Britanie, with all
their ſhips: neither was there any enemie ſeene in that place; but as afterward Caeſar
vnderſtood by the captiues, the Britains were there with a great power; but being
terrified with the infinite number of ſhipping, which they diſcouered from the
ſhore (for there were in all aboue 800) they forſooke the ſhore, and hid themſelues in
the vpland countrie. Caeſar hauing landed his men, and choſen a conuenient place to
incampe, aſsoone as he vnderſtood by the captiues where the enemy laie, in the third
watch of the night, he marched towards them; leauing ten cohortes and 300 horſe,
for a garizon to his ſhipping: which he the leſse feared, becauſe it lay at anchor in a ſoft
and open ſhore: he marched that night about 12 mile before he found the enemie: The
Britaines ſending out their horſe, and chariots to a riuer that ran betweene them and
the Romans, and hauing the aduantage of the vpper ground; began to hinder the Romans,
and to giue them battell, but being beaten backe with our horſemen, they conuaied
themſelues into a wood. The place was ſtrongly fortified both by art and nature,
and made for a defence (as it ſeemeth) in their ciuill wars: for all the entrances were

ſhut vp with great trees, laid ouerthwart the paſſages. And the Britaines ſhewed
themſelues out of the wood but here and there, not ſuffering the Romans to enter
the fortification: but the ſoldiors of the ſeauenth legion, with a Teſtudo which they
made, and a mount which they raiſed, tooke the place and droue them all out of the
woods, without any loſſe at all; ſauing ſome fewe wounds which they receiued. But
Caeſar forbad his men to follow after them, with any long purſuit, becauſe hee was
both ignorant of the place, and a great part of that daie being ſpent, he would imploy
the reſt thereof in the fortification of his campe.
               
                  OBSERVATIONS.
                  
                     CAeſar, hauing taken what aſſurance of peace he could with the Galles,
both by carrying the chiefeſt of their Princes with him, and by leauing
three legions in the continent, to keepe the vulgar people in
obedience: he imbarked al his men at one place, that they might be
all partakers of the ſame caſualties, and take the benefit of the ſame aduentures,
which being neglected the yeare before, drew him into many inconueniences
for want of horſe, which being imbarked at an other hauen met with other chā
                     ces,
and ſaw other fortunes; and neuer came to him into Britanie: The place of
landing in this ſecond voiage, was the ſame where he landed the yeere before;
and by the circumſtances of this hiſtory, may agree with that which tradition
hath deliuered of Deale in Kent, where it is ſaid that Caeſar landed. In the firſt
yeere we finde, that he neuer remoued his campe from the ſea ſhore, where he
firſt ſeated himſelfe; although his men went out to bring in corne, as far as they
might wel returne againe at night: but now hee entered further into the Iland,
and within twelue miles march came vnto a riuer, which muſt needs be that of
Canturbury, which falleth into the ſea at Sandwich.
                  In that he ſaith that the garizon of his ſhipping conſiſted of ten cohortes,
which I haue ſaid to be a legion: we muſt vnderſtande, that Caeſar left not an
entire legion in that garizon; but he tooke ten cohorts out of his whole forces,
peraduenture two out of euerie legion, and appointed them to take the charge
of his ſhipping.
               
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               
                  Caeſar returneth to his nauies to take order for
ſuch loſſes as had happened by tempeſt
the night before.
               
               
                  THE next daie earlie in the morning, hee deuided his forces into 3. companies,
and ſent them out to purſue the enemy:Caeſar. but before they had marched
any farre diſtance, and came to haue the rereward of the enemy in
vewe; there came newes from Q. Atrius, with whom he left the ten

cohorts, and the charge of the ſhipping, that the night before there was ſuch a tempeſt
at ſea, that the whole nauy was either ſore beaten or cast on ſhore; and that neither
anchor nor Gable coulde holde them, nor yet the Sailers indure the force of the
weather; and that there was great loſſe in the ſhipping, by running againſt one another,
in the violence of the tempest. Vpon theſe newes; Caeſar cauſed the legions to be
called backe againe, and to ceaſe for that time, from following the enemy any further,
he himſelfe returned to the nauy, where he found 40. ſhips loſt, and the reſt not
to be repaired but with great induſtry and paines: firſt therefore he choſe ſhipwrites
and Carpenters out of the legions, and cauſed others to bee ſent for out of Gallia; and
writ to Labienus to make ready what ſhipping he could. And although it ſeemed a
matter of great difficulty and much labour; yet he thought it beſt, to hale vp all the
ſhips on ſhore, and to incloſe them within the fortification of his campe: in this buſineſſe
he ſpent ten daies, without intermiſſion either of night or day, vntill hee had
drawn vp the ſhips, and ſtrongly fortified the camp; leauing the ſame garriſon which
was there before to defend it.
               
                  THE OBSERVATION.
                  
                     WHerein we may behold the true image of vndanted valour, and the
horrible induſtry (as Tully tearmeth it) which hee vſed to preuent
fortune of her ſtroke in his buſines, and comprehende caſualties
and future contingents, within the compas of order and the bounds
of his owne power, being able in tenne daies ſpace, to ſet almoſt eight hundred
ſhips from the hazarde of winde and weather; and to make his campe
the Roade for his nauie, that ſo he might reſt ſecure of a meanes to returne at
his pleaſure.
               
            
            
               CHAP. IIII.
               
                  The Britains make Caſsiuellaunus generall in this
warre: the Iland, and the maners of the
people deſcribed.
               
               
                  CAESAR returning to the place from whence hee came,Caeſar. founde
far greater forces of the Britans there aſsembled, then he left whē
he went to the nauie. And that by publike conſent of the Britaines,
the whole gouernment of that war was giuen to Caſsiuellaunus,
whoſe kingdom lay deuided from the maritimate ſtates,
with the riuer Thames, beginning at the ſea, & extending it ſelfe
80. mile into the Iland. This Caſsiuellaunus, made continuall war
with his neighbor ſtates: but vpon the comming of the Romans, they all forgot their
home-bred quarrels, and caſt the whole gouernment vpon his ſholders, as the fitteſt to
direct that war.
               
                  
The inner part of Britanie is inhabited, by ſuch as memory recordeth to be borne
in the Iland; and the maritimate coaſt by ſuch as came out of Belgia, either to make
incurſions or inuaſions; and after the war was ended, they continued in the poſſeſſions
they had gained, and were called by the name of the cities from whence they
came: the countrey is very populous, and well inhabited with houſes, much like
vnto them in Gallia. They haue great ſtore of cattell, and vſe braſſe for money, or
yron ringes waighed at a certaine rate. In the mediterranean partes there is found
great quantity of Tyn, and in the maritimate parts yron: their braſſe was brought
in by other nations. They haue all ſorts of trees that they haue in Gallia, excepting
the figge and the Beech. Their religion will not ſuffer them to eate, either Haire,
Hen, or Gooſe; notwithstanding they haue of all ſorts, as well for nouelty as variety.
The country is more temperate, and not ſo colde as Gallia. The Ilande lieth triangle
wiſe, whereof one ſide confronteth Gallia, of which ſide that angle, wherein Kent
is pointed to the Eaſt, and the other angle to the South: this ſide containeth about
500. mile. Another ſide lieth toward Spaine and the Weſt, that waie where Ireland
lieth, being an Ilande halfe as big as England; and as farre diſtant from it as Gallia:
in the midway between England & Ireland, lieth an Iland called Mona, beſides many
other ſmaller Ilands, of which ſome write that in winter time for 30. daies together,
they haue continuall night, whereof we learned nothing by inquirie, only we
found by certaine meaſures of water, that the nights in England were ſhorter then
in the Continent. The length of this ſide, according to the opinion of the inhabitants,
containeth 700. mile. The thirde ſide lieth to the North and the open ſea, ſauing
that this angle doth ſomwhat point towards Germanie; this ſide is thought to contain
800. miles: And ſo the whole Iland containeth in circuit 2000. miles. Of al the inhabitants,
they of Kent are moſt curteous and ciuill; al their countrey bordering vpon
the ſea, and little differing from the faſhion of Gallia, Moſt of the inlande people
ſow no corne, but liue with milke and fleſh, clothed with skins, and hauing their faces
painted with a blew colour, to the end they may ſeeme more terrible in ſight: they
haue the haire of their head long, hauing al other parts of their body ſhauen, ſauing
their vpper lip. Their wiues are common to ten or twelue; eſpecially brethren with
brethren, and parents with children; but the children that are borne, are put vnto
them, vnto whom the mother was firſt giuen in mariage.
               
                  OBSERVATIONS.
                  
                     IN the deſcriptions of the ancient Britains, we may firſt obſerue their
pedegree, according to the Haraldry of that time: wherein we muſt
vnderſtand that in thoſe ages, the Ntiaons of the worlde thought
it no ſmall honor, to deriue their deſcent from a certaine beginning,
and to make either ſome of their Gods, or ſome man of a famous memorie, the
father of that progenie, and founder of their ſtate; that ſo they might promiſe
a fortunate continuance to their gouernment, being firſt laide and eſtabliſhed
by ſo powerfull a meanes. But if this failed, they then bragged of antiquitie,
and caſt all their glory vpon the fertility of their ſoile, being ſo ſtrong and fruitful,
that it yeelded of it ſelfe ſuch a people, as they were: and ſo we read howe
the Athenians, for as much as they were ignoraunt from whence they came,

ware an Oaken leafe, in token that they were bred of the earth where they dwelled.
And hereupon alſo grew the controuerſie, betweene the Egyptians and the
Scythians, concerning antiquity: wherein the Egyptians ſeemed to haue great
aduantage, becauſe of the fertility and heat of their countrey; whereas the Scythians
inhabited a colde climate, vnfruitfull and an enemy to generation. Of
this ſort were the Britains, that inhabited the mediterranean part of the Ilande:
who not knowing from whence they came; nor who firſt brought them thither,
ſatisfied themſelues with that common receiued opinion, that they were borne
and bred of the earth. The ſea coaſt was poſſeſt by ſuch as came out of the continent
and retained the names of the cities from whence they came, as a memoriall
of their progenitors.
                  The forme of the Iland is very well deſcribed, and meaſured out, according
to the ſcale of our moderne Geographers. For concerning the difference of
longitude between the Eaſterne angel of Kent, and the furtheſt point of Cornewal,
they make it eight degrees; which in a maner iumpeth with Caeſars dimenſuration:
the other ſides are ſomewhat longer; and therefore. Tacitus in the life
of Agricola, compareth it to a Carpenters Axe, making that ſide which bordereth
vpon France to reſemble the Edge; and the other two ſides to incline by
little and little, one towardes an other; and ſo make the Ilande narrower at the
top, according to the forme of that inſtrument. Hee ſetteth downe the whole
compaſſe of the Iland, according to the manner of the ancient Geographers,
who by the quantity of the circuit, did vſually iudge of the content, not conſidering
that the Area of euery figure dependeth as well of the quantity of the
angle, as the length of the ſide. Concerning the temperature of Britanie, in
regard of the colde winters in France, we muſt vnderſtand that Britanie hath euer
beene found of a more temperate conſtitution, in regarde of ſharpe and
colde winters, then any other countrey lying vnder the ſame parallell: whether
the cauſe thereof may bee imputed to the continuall motion of the ſea about
the Iland, which begetteth heat, as ſome haue imagined; or to the ſite thereof,
in regard of other Continents from whence the winde alwaies riſeth, and carieth
with it the nature of the countrey by which it paſſeth; and ſo the Ilande hauing
no other continent lying North to it, from whence the winde may riſe, but
all for the moſt part vpon the South, hath no ſuch colde windes to diſtemper it,
as other parts of Germany, which are vnder the ſame parallel; but the Southern
wind, which is ſo frequent in Britany, tēpereth the ayre, with a mild diſpoſition,
and ſo keepeth it warme; or whether it be ſome other vnknowne cauſe, our Philoſophers
reſt vnſatisfied. But as touching Gallia, it may bee ſaide, that foraſmuch
as it beareth more to the South, then this Iland doth, the aire thereof by
reaſon of the continuall heate, is of a farre purer diſpoſition; and ſo pierceth
more then this groſſer aire of Britany, & carieth the cold further into the pores;
and ſo ſeemeth ſharper and of a far colder diſpoſition.
                  This Iland, which Caeſar nameth Mona, is known at this time by the name of
Man, and lieth betweene Cumberland and Ireland. Ptolemie calleth it Monaeda,
Tacitus calleth Angleſey by the name of Mona, peraduenture from the nomination
of the Britains, who calleth it Tyr mon, the land of Mon.
                  
                     
Concerning thoſe places, where the night continueth in the midſt of winter
for 30. daies together, they muſt be ſited 6. degrees beyond the circle Articke,
and haue a day in ſummer of like continuance, according to the rules of Aſtronomy.
In that he found the nights in Britanie ſhorter then in the continent, we
muſt vnderſtand it to be only in ſummer: for the more oblique the horizon is,
the more vneuen are the portions of the diurnall circles which it cutteth; and
the neerer it commeth to a right horizon, the neerer it commeth to an equality
of daie and night: and hence it happeneth, that in ſummer time, the nights in
France are longer then here in England; and in winter ſhorter. The like wee
muſt vnderſtand of all Sotherne and Northerne countries.
                  To conclude, I may not omit the ciuility of the Kentiſh men, and their curteous
diſpoſition, aboue the reſt of the Britains, which muſt be imputed to that
ordinarie courſe which brought ciuility vnto all other nations: of whom ſuch
as were firſt ſeated in their poſſeſſions, and entertained ſocietie, were the firſt
that brought in ciuill conuerſation, and by little and little were purified, and ſo
attained to the perfection of ciuill gouernment. So we find that firſt Aſſirians
and Babilonians (as neereſt to the mountaines of Armenia where the Arke reſted,
and people firſt inhabited) reduced their ſtates into common weales, of
monarchies of exquiſite gouernment, floriſhing with al maner of learning and
knowledge; when as yet other countries laie either waſte, or ouerwhelmed with
Barbariſme. From thence it flowed into Egypt; out of Egypt into Greece; out
of Greece into Italie; out of Italie into Gallia; and from thence into England:
where our Kentiſhmen firſt entertained it, as bordering vpon France; and frequented
with marchants of thoſe countries.
               
            
            
               CHAP. V.
               
                  Diuers skirmiſhes betweene the Romans
and the Britaines.
               
               
                  THE Caualrie of the enemy and their chariots,Caeſar. gaile a ſharpe
conflict to the Romaine horſemen, in their march: but ſo, that
the Romaines got the better euery way, driuing them with
great ſlaughter to the woods and hils, and looſing alſo ſome of
their owne men, beeing too venturous in the purſuit. The
Britaines after ſome intermiſsion of time, when the Romans
litle thought of them, & were buſied in fortifying their cāpe,
came ſodainly out of the woods and charged vpon thoſe that kept ſtation before the
campe. Caeſar ſent out two the thickest cohorts of two legions, to ſecond their fellowes:
theſe two cohortes ſtanding with a ſmall alley betweene them, the other
that were firſt charged, being terrified with that ſtrange kinde of fight, boldelie
brake through the chiefeſt of the enemy, and ſo retired in ſafetie to their fellowes.
That daie Quintus Laberius Durus a Tribune of the ſoldiours, was ſlaine; the
Britaines were repelled with moe cohortes, which Caeſar ſent to ſecond the former.

And for aſmuch as the fight happened in the vewe of all the campe, it was plainly
perceiued, that the legionarie ſoldiors, being neither able for the waight of their
armor, to follow the enemy as he retired, nor yet daring to go far from his enſigne;
was not a fit aduerſarie to conteſt this kind of enemy: and that the horſemen likewiſe
fought with no leſſe danger, inaſmuch as the enemy would retire backe of purpoſe,
and when they had drawne them a little from the legions, they woulde then
light from their chariots and incounter thē, with that aduantage, which is between
a footeman and a horſeman. Furthermore, they neuer fought thicke and cloſe together,
but thin and in great diſtances, hauing ſtations of men to ſuccour one another,
to receiue the wearie, and to ſend out freſh ſupplies.
               
                  OBSERVATIONS.
                  
                     VPpon this occaſion of their heauie armour, I will deſcribe a legionarie
ſoldior in his compleat furniture, that we may better iudge
of their maner of warfare, and vnderſtand wherein their greateſt
ſtrength conſiſted. And firſt we are to learne, that their legionarie
ſoldiors were called Milites grauis armaturae, ſoldiors wearing heauie armour, to
diſtinguiſh them from the Velites, the Archers, ſlingers, and other light armed
men. Their offenſiue armes were, a couple of Piles, or as ſome wil, but one Pile,
and a Spaniſh ſword, ſhort and ſtrong, to ſtrike rather with the point then with
the edge. Their defenſiue armes were, a helmet, a corſlet, and boots of braſſe,
with a large Target; which in ſome ſort was offenſiue, in regarde of that vmbonem
which ſtucke out in the middeſt thereof. The Pile is deſcribed at large
in the firſt booke, and the Target in the ſecond: the ſworde (as Polybius witneſſeth)
was ſhort, two edged, yerie ſharpe, and of a ſtrong point: and therefore
Liuie in his 22. Booke ſaieth, that the Galles vſed verie long ſwordes
without pointes; but the Romaines had ſhort ſwordes, readier for vſe; theſe
they called Spaniſh ſwordes, becauſe they borrowed that faſhion from the
Spaniarde. The olde Romaines were ſo girt with their ſwordes, as appeareth
by Polybius, and their monuments in Marble, that from their left ſhoulder it
hung vpon their right thigh, contrary to the vſe of theſe times, which as I haue
noted before, was in regard of their target, which they caried on their left arme:
this ſworde was hung with a belt of leather, beſet with ſtuds as Varro noteth, and
theſe were their offenſiue weapons.Lib. 4.
                  
                  Their Helmet was of braſſe,Pli. lib. 10. adorned with three Oſtrich feathers of a cubite
in length, by which the ſoldiour appeared of a large ſtature, and more
terrible to the enemie, as Polybius ſaieth in his 6. booke. Their breſt plate was
either of braſſe, or Iron, ioynted together after the maner of ſcales, or platted
with little ringes of yron: their bootes were made of barres of braſſe, from
the foote vp to the knee. And thus were the legionarie ſoldiours armed, to
ſtand firme rather then to vſe any nimble motion, and to combine themſelues
into a bodie of that ſtrength which might not eaſilie recoile, at the oppoſition
of anie confrontment; for agilitie ſtandeth indifferent to helpe either a retreit

or a purſuit, and nimble footed ſoldiors are as readie to flie backe, as to march
forward; but a waighty body keepeth a more regular motion, and is not hindered
with a common counterbuffe: ſo that whenſoeuer they came to firme buckeling,
and felt the enemy ſtand ſtiffe before them, ſuch was their practiſe, and
exerciſe in continual workes, that they neuer fainted vnder any ſuch taske; but
the victorie went alwayes cleere on their ſide. But if the enemy gaue waie
to their violence, and came not in but for aduantage, and then as ſpeedilie
retired, before the counterbuffe were well diſcharged; then did their nimbleneſſe
much helpe their weakeneſſe, and fruſtrate the greateſt parte of the Romaine
diſcipline. This is alſo proued in the ouerthrowe of Sabinus and Cotta,
where Ambiorix finding the inconuenience of buckeling at handy blowes,
commaunded his men to fight a far off; and if they were aſſaulted, to giue
backe; and to come on againe as they ſaw occaſion: which ſo wearied out the
Romaines, that they all fell vnder the execution of the Galles. Let this ſuffice
therefore to ſhew, how vnapt the Romans were to flie vpon any occaſion, when
their armour was ſuch, that it kept them from al ſtarting motions, and made thē
ſutable to the ſtaied and wel aſſured rules of their diſcipline, which were as certaine
principles in the execution of a ſtanding battaile; and therefore not ſo fit
either for a purſuit, or a flight.
                  Concerning the vnequall combat betweene a horſeman and a footeman, it
may be thought ſtrange, that a footeman ſhoulde haue ſuch an aduantage againſt
a horſeman, beeing ouermatched, at leaſt with a Sextuple proportion
both of ſtrength and agilitie: but wee muſt vnderſtande, that as the horſe is
much ſwifter in a long cariere; ſo in ſpeedie and nimble turning at hand, wherein
the ſubſtance of the combate conſiſteth, the footeman farre exceedeth the
horſeman in aduantage, hauing a larger marke to hit by the Horſe, then the other
hath. Beſides, the horſeman ingageth both his valour, and his fortune
in the good ſpeede of his horſe, his woundes and his death doe conſequentlie
pull the rider after, his feare or furie maketh his maiſter either deſperate or
ſlowe of performance, and what defect ſoeuer riſeth from the horſe, muſt bee
anſwered out of the honour of the rider. And ſurely it ſeemeth reaſonable,
that what thing ſoeuer draweth vs into the ſocietie of ſo great a hazard, ſhould
as much as is poſſible, be contained in the compaſſe of our owne power. The
ſword which we manage with our owne hand, affoordeth greater aſſurance then
the harquebuſe, wherein there are many partes belonging to the action, as the
pouder, the ſtone, the ſpring, and ſuch like; whereof if the leaſt faile of his part,
we likewiſe faile of our fortune: but howe probable ſoeuer this ſeemeth, this is
certaine, that in the courſe of the Roman wars, the horſe were euer defeated by
the foot, as is manifeſtly proued in the firſt of theſe bookes.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. VII.
               
                  Caeſar giueth the Britains two ſeuerall
ouerthrowes.
               
               
                  THE next daie, the enemie made a ſtand vpon the hils a far off
from the campe,Caeſar. and ſhewed themſelues not ſo often; neither
were they ſo buſie with our horſemen, as they were the day before:
but about noone, when Caeſar ſent out three legions, and
al his Caualry to get forrage, vnder the conduction of the Caius
Trebonius a legate, they made a ſodaine aſsault vpon the forragers,
and fell in cloſe with the Enſignes, and the legions. The
Romans charged very fiercely vpon them, and beate them backe; neither did they
make an end of following them, vntill the horſemen truſting to the ſuccour of the
legions which were behinde them, put them all to flight, with the ſlaughter of a
great number of them; neither did they giue them reſpite either to make head, to
make a ſtand, or to forſake their chariots. After this ouerthrow, all their Auxiliarie
forces departed from them; neither did they afterward contend with the Romans
with any great power. Caeſar vnderſtanding their determination, caried his
armie to the riuer Thames, and ſo to the confines of Caſſiuellaunus, which riuer
was paſſable by foot but in one place only, and that very hardly; at his comming hee
found a great power of the enemy to be imbattailed on the other ſide, and the banck
fortified with many ſharpe ſtakes, and many other alſo were planted couertly vnder
the water. Theſe things being diſcouered to the Romans by the Captiues and fugitiues;
Caeſar putting his horſe before, cauſed the legions to followe ſodainlie after,
who notwithſtanding they had but their heades cleere aboue the water, went with
that violence, that the enemy was not able to endure the charge, but left the bancke
and betooke themſelues to flight.
               
                  THE OBSERVATION.
                  
                     THis attempt of Caeſar ſeemeth ſo ſtrange to Brancatio, that hee
runneth into as ſtrange concluſions, concerning this matter, as firſt
that he that imitateth Caeſar, may doubt of his good fortunes: for
his proceeding in this point, was not directed by any order of war;
and that a great commander hath nothing common with other leaders: but eſpecially,
he crieth out at the baſeneſſe of the Britains, that woulde ſuffer themſelues
ſo cowardly to be beaten. But if wee looke into the circumſtances of the
action, we ſhal find both Art & good direction therein; for being aſſured by the
fugitiues, that the riuer was paſſable in that place, & in that place onlie, he knew
that he muſt either aduēture ouer there, or leaue Caſſiuellaunus for an other ſū
                     mer,
which was a very ſtrong inducement to vrge him to that enterpriſe. The

difficultie wherof was much relieued by good direction, which conſiſted of two
pointes, firſt, by ſending ouer the horſemen in the front of the legions, who
might better indure the charge of the enemie, then the footmen coulde, that
were vppe to the necke in water; and withall, to ſhelter the footmen from the
furie of the enemie. Secondly, he ſent them ouer with that ſpeede, that they
were on the other ſide of the water, before the enemie coulde tell what they attempted:
for if he had lingered in the ſeruice, and giuen the enemie leaue to
find the aduantage which he had by experience, his men had neuer bin able to
haue indured the hazard of ſo dangerous a ſeruice. It is hard to coniecture at the
place, where this ſeruice was performed; for ſince the building of London
bridge, manie foordes haue beene ſcoured with the current, and fall of the water,
which before that time carried not ſuch a depth as now they doe.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VII.
               
                  The concluſion of the Brittiſh warre: Caeſar
returneth into Gallia.
               
               
                  CAſsiuellaunus hauing no courage to contend anie longer, diſmiſſed
his greateſt forces, and retaining onely foure thouſand chariots,
obſerued their iourneies, keeping the wood countries, and
driuing men and cattell out of the fields into the woods, for feare
of the Romans; and as their horſemen ſtraied out either for
forrage or bootie, hee ſent his chariots out of the woods by vnknowne
waies, and put their horſemen to great perill: in regard
whereof, the horſemen durſt neuer aduenture further then the legions, neither was
there anie more ſpoile done in the countrey, then that which the legionarie ſouldiers
did of themſelues. In the meane time, the Trinobantes, being almoſt the greateſt ſtate
of all thoſe countries (from whom Mandubratius had fled to Caeſar into Gallia, for
that his father Imanuentius holding the kingdome, was ſlaine by Caſsiuellaunus) ſent
Ambaſſadours to Caeſar, to offer their ſubmiſsion, and to intreat that Mandubratius
might be defended from the oppreſsion of Caſsiuellaunus, and ſent vnto them to take
the kingdome. Caeſar hauing receiued from them fortie pledges, and corne for his
Armie, ſent Mandubratius vnto them. The Trinobantes, being thus kept from the
violence of the ſouldiers, the Cenimagni, Seguntiaci, Anacalites, Bibrocaſſi, yeelded
themſelues to Caeſar. By theſe he vnderſtood, that Caſſiuellaunus his towne was
not farre off, fortified with woods and bogges, and well ſtored with men and cattell.
The Britaines call a towne a thicke wood, incloſed about with a ditch and a rampier,
made for a place of retrait when they ſtood in feare of incurſions from the borderers.
Thither marched Caeſar with his Armie, and found it well fortified both by arte and
nature: And as he aſſaulted it in two ſeuerall places, the enemie vnable to keepe it,
caſt himſelfe out of the towne by a backe waie, and ſo he tooke it. Where he found great
ſtore of cattell, and ſlew manie of the Britaines.
               
                  
While theſe thinges were a doing, Caſsiuellaunus ſent meſſengers into Kent, wherin
there were foure ſeurall kinges, Cingetorix, Caruilius, Taximagulus, and Segonax,
them he commanded with all the power they could make, to ſet vpon the campe
where the nauie was kept. Theſe kinges comming to the place, were ouerthrowne by
a ſallie which the Romans made out vpon them, manie of them being ſlaine, and Cingetorix
taken priſoner. This battell concurring with the former loſſes, and eſpecially
moued thereunto with the reuolt of the forenamed cities, Caſsiuellaunus intreated
peace of Caeſar by Comius of Arras. Caeſar being determined to winter in the continent,
for feare of ſudden commotions in Gallia, and that the ſummer was now farre
ſpent, and might eaſilie be lingered out, hee commanded pledges to be brought vnto
him, and ſet downe what yearely tribute the Britaines ſhould paie to the Romans: the
hoſtages being taken, he caried backe his Armie to the ſea, imbarked his men and arriued
ſafe with all his ſhips vpon the coaſt of Gallia.
               
                  THE OBSERVATION.
                  
                     ANd thus ended the warre in Britanie, which affoordeth little matter
of diſcourſe, being indeede but a ſcambling warre, as wel in regard
of the Britaines themſelues, who after they had felt the ſtrength of
the Roman legions, would neuer aduenture to buckle with them in
any ſtanding battel, as alſo in regard that there were no ſuch townes in Britany
as are recorded to haue been in Gallia, which might haue giuen great honour
to the warre, if there had been any ſuch to haue been beſieged, and taken in by
Caeſar. And although Tacitus ſaith, that Britanie was rather viewed then ſubdued
by Caeſar, being deſirous to draw that honour to his father in law Agricola;
yet we finde here, that the Trinobantes, which were more then either the
skirt, or the heart of Britanie, (for our Hiſtorians doe vnderſtand them to haue
inhabited that part, which lieth as farre as Yorkeſhire and Lancaſhire) were
brought vnder the Roman Empire by Caeſar: who was the firſt that euer laide
tribute vpon Britanie, in the behalfe of the people of Rome; or caſt vpon them
the heauie name of a ſubdued people.
               
            
            
               
               TO THE WOORTHIE
KNIGHT SIR ROBERT
DRVRIE.
               
                  SIR, my purpoſe was to haue concluded
theſe diſcourſes, with the ende of
the Brittiſh warre: reſeruing the latter
part of this fift booke, for an entrance
vnto ſuch obſeruations, as may be gathered
from the ſixt and ſeauenth Commentaries,
which I intend to make a ſecond part of this worke:
but your deſire to ſee the errours of Sabinus and
Cotta diſcouered, and the famous fight of Q. Cicero
in his wintering campe, hath brought them forth
ſomwhat before their time, annexing that to the firſt
part which was meant for the latter. If my labour
ſhall be found too weake to deſerue well of militarie
deſsignes; yet I thinke it verie well imploide in that
it pleaſeth you to giue it the reading, and ſo reſt
               
                  Readie to doe you ſeruice,
C. EDMVNDS.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. VIII.
               
                  Caeſar diſpoſeth his legions into their wintetering
campes.
               
               
                  AFTER he had put his ſhips in harbour,Caeſar. and held a councell
of the Galles atEither Cambraz, Amiens or S. Quintin Samarobrina; foraſmuch as that yeare by
reaſon of the drought there was ſome ſcarcitie of corne in Gallia;
he was conſtrained to garizon his Armie, and to diſperſe
them into more cities then he had done the years before. And 1
he gaue one legion to Caius Fabius, to be led among the Morini;
another to Q. Cicero, to be carried to the Neruij; another
to L. Roſcius, to be conducted to the Eſſui; a fourth he commanded to winter amongst
the men of Rheimes, in the marches of the Treuiri vnder T. Labienus; three he placed
in Belgia, with whom hee ſent Marcus Craſſus his Queſtor, L. Munatius Planus,
and C. Trebonius Legates; he ſent one legion, that which he had laſt inrolled, beyond
the riuer Po in Italie, with fiue cohortes, vnto the Eburones, the greateſt part of
whoſe countrie lieth betweene the Maze and the Rhene; with them he ſent Q. Titurius
Sabinus, and Lucius Arunculeius Cotta. By diſtributing his legions in this maner,
he thought to remedie the ſcarcitie of corne; and yet the garrizons of all theſe legions,
excepting that which Roſcius carried into a quiet and peaceable part, were contained
within the ſpace of 100 mile: and vntil his legions were ſettled, and their wintering
campes fortified, he determined to abide in Gallia.
               
                  THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
                  
                     I Haue heard it oftentimes contradicted by ſome, that vnderſtand not
the waight of a multitude, when it was ſaid, that an Armie keeping
head continually in one part of a kingdome, was more burthenſome
to the common-wealth in regard of the expence of victuals, then
when it was diſperſed into particular cities and families, before the time of the
muſter and inrolement: for (ſay they) in the generall account of the publike
weale, it differeth nothing, whether a multitude of 30000 men be maintained
with neceſſarie prouiſions in one intire body together, or diſperſed particularly
throughout euerie part of the countrie: foraſmuch as euerie man hath but a
competent quantitie allotted vnto him, which hee cannot want in what ſort or
condition of life ſoeuer he be ranged; neither doth the charge of a multitude
grow in regard they are vnited together, but in regard they amount to ſuch a
multitude whereſoeuer. But ſuch as looke into the difference with iudgement,
ſhall finde a maruellous inequalitie, both in regarde of the portion of victuals
which is ſpent, and the meanes whereby it is prouided: for firſt we muſt vnderſtand,

that an armie lying continually in one place, falleth ſo heauie vpon that
part, that it quickly conſumeth both the fatte and the fleſh (as they ſay) and leaueth
nothing vnſpent, which that part can affoord them; and without further
ſupply of prouiſions, would in a ſmall time come to vtter deſtruction. This want
then muſt be relieued by taking from the plentie of other bordering quarters, to
furniſh the wants of ſo great a multitude: wherin there cannot be obſerued that
proportion of moderate taking, to vittaile the Armie with a ſufficient competencie,
but the partiall reſpect which the purueiers, and vittailers will haue to
their priuat commodity, wil quickly make an inconuenience either in the countrey,
from whence it is taken; or in the Armie, for which it is prouided; according
as the errour may beſt aduantage their particular, what diſcipline ſoeuer
be eſtabliſhed in that behalfe. Whereas on the contrarie part, when euerie
particular man of that multitude ſhal be billeted in a ſeueral family, throughout
all parts of the kingdome, the charge will be ſo inſenſible, in regard of the expence
of the ſaid families, that the country will neuer feele any inconuenience.
And if euerie houſholder that had receiued into his houſe one of the ſaid army,
ſhould giue a true account of that which riſeth aboue his ordinary expence; by
the addition of one man, it would fall farre ſhort of that treaſure, which is neceſſarily
required, to maintaine the ſaide number of men vnited together into
one bodie. Neither doth the difference conſiſt in the quantitie of vittailes, which
euerie man hath for his portion, whether they be diſperſed or vnited; but in the
maner of prouiſion, and the meanes which is vſed to maintaine them: wherein
euery maſter or ſteward of a familie, endeuoureth to make his prouiſions at the
beſt hand, & ſo to husband it, that it may ſerue for competencie, and not for ſuperfluitie;
and by that means, the general plenty of the country is maintained,
& the cōmon-wealth floriſheth by well directed moderation. But in the victualing
of an army, there is no ſuch reſpect had, which may any way aduantage the
publike good; for there the gaine of the purueier riſeth by experience & ſuperfluous
waſting, rather then by thrift and ſauing frugalitie: and ſo the common-wealth
is weakned by the il husbanding of that great portion of vittaile, which is
allowed for ſo great a multitude. And if they ſhould haue ſuch varietie of viands
in an Armie, as they haue when they are in ſeuerall families, it were vnpoſſible
it ſhould continue any time together. And therefore the Romans, notwithſtanding
the exactneſſe of their diſcipline, could affoord their armies no other prouiſion
but corne, and larde, as well in regard of the commoditie which that
kinde of diet affoorded them in the courſe of their warres, as alſo for the good
of that countrey, wherein they were reſident. And if it ſo fell out, that the extremitie
of the ſeaſon, or any other cauſe, had brought a dearth into the lande,
there was no readier waie to helpe that inconuenience, then by diſperſing their
Armies into diuers quarters; which Caeſar diſpoſed with that care, that they
might be as neere together as they could.
               
               
                  
                  THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
                  
                     COncerning the choice of their ſouldiers and their maner of inrolement,
I had rather referre the reader to Polybius, then enter into
the particular diſcourſe of that action; which was carried with ſuch
grauitie and religious ceremonies, as might beſt ſerue to poſſeſſe
their mindes of the waight and conſequence of that buſineſſe: but for as much
as the largeneſſe of their Empire, and the neceſſitie of their occaſions would
not admit, that the enrolment ſhould ſtill be made at Rome amongſt the citizens,
as it appeareth by this legion which was inrolled beyond the riuer Po; it
conſequently followeth, that ſuch Ceremonies, which were annexed to the
place, were altogether omitted: and therefore I cannot ſpeake of that which
the olde Romans did in that part of their diſcipline, as a thing continued vnto
Caeſars time. But he that deſireth to ſee the maner of their choiſe, with ſuch complements
as might adde both a reuerent reſpect, and a Maieſtie to the worke; let
him reade Polybius of that argument.
               
            
            
               CHAP. IX.
               
                  Ambiorix attempteth to ſurpriſe the campe of
Sabinus and Cotta; and failing, practiſeth
to take them by
guile.
               
               
                  FIFTEENE daies after the legions were ſettled in their
wintering campes,Caeſar. there began a ſudden tumult and rebellion
by the meanes of Ambiorix, and Catiunculus, who, hauing receiued
Sabinus & Cotta into their confines, and brought them
in corne to the place, where they laie; at the inducement of
Induciomarus of Triers, they ſtirred vp their people to rebellion:
and ſuddenly ſurpriſing thoſe that were gone abroad to get
wood, came with a great power to aſsault the campe. But when our men had tooke
Armes, and were got vppe vpon the rampier, and had ouermatched them in a skirmiſh
of horſe, which made a ſallie out of the campe vpon the Galles: Ambiorix
deſpairing of good ſucceſſe, withdrew his men from the aſsault; and then after their
manner, they cried vnto vs, that ſome of our companie ſhould come and ſpeake with
them: for they had ſomewhat to diſcouer touching the publike ſtate, whereby they hoped
all controuerſies might be ended. Whereupon Caius Carpineius a Roman horſeman,
and one of Titurius his familiar friendes, and one Iunius a Spaniard, who

diuers times before had beene ſent by Caeſar to Ambiorix; were ſent out to treat
with them. Ambiorix firſt acknowledged himſelfe much indebted to Caeſar; for
manie curteſies, in that by his meanes hee was freed from a penſion which hee paied
to the Aduatici; and for that both his own ſonne, and his brothers ſonne, whom
the Aduatici had held in priſon vnder the name of hoſtages, were by Caeſar releaſed
and ſent home againe. And touching the aſsault of the campe, hee had done
nothing of himſelfe, but by the impulſion of the state, among whom ſuch was his
condition, that the people had as great authoritie ouer him, as he himſelfe had in regard
of the people: who were likewiſe inforced to this warre, becauſe they could not
withſtand the ſudden inſurrection of the Galles, whereof his ſmall meanes might be
a ſufficient argument. For his experience was not ſo little, to thinke himſelfe able
with ſo ſmall a power to ouerthrow the people of Rome; but it was a generall appointment
throughout all Gallia, vpon this daie to aſsault all Caeſars garrizons, to the end
that one legion might not giue reliefe vnto another: Galles could not eaſily denie the
requeſt of Galles, eſpecially when it concerned their publike libertie. Nowe hauing
ſatiſfied that duetie which he owed to his countrey, hee had reſpect to Caeſar and his
benefites, in regard whereof, he admoniſhed them, and praied Titurius for the hoſpitalitie
that had beene betweene them, that he would looke to the ſafetie of himſelfe,
and his ſouldiers. There were a great number of Germaines that had alreadie paſsed
the Rhene, and would be here within two daies: and therefore let them aduiſe themſelues,
whether they thought it good before the next borderers perceiued it, to depart
with their ſoldiers out of their wintering places, either to Cicero or Labienus, of whō
the one was not paſt fiftie mile off; and the other a little further: for his owne part,
he promiſed them this much, and confirmed it by oath, that they ſhould haue ſafe
paſsage through his territories; for ſo he ſhould both doe a pleaſure to his countrey, in
disburdening it of garrizons, and ſhew himſelfe thankefull to Caeſar for his benefits.
This ſpeech being ended, Ambiorix departed, and Carpineius and Iunius made report
thereof to the Legates.
               
                  OBSERVATIONS.
                  
                     LEander his counſell, to vſe the foxes skin where the lyons faileth,
doth ſhew, that the diſcourſe of our reaſon is ſooner corrupted with
errour, then the powers of our bodie are ouercome with force.
For oftentimes the minde is ſo diſquieted, with the extremitie
of perturbation, that neither the apprehenſion can take ſound inſtructions, nor
the iudgment determine of that which is moſt for our good: but according as
any paſſion ſhall happen to raigne in our diſpoſition; ſo are we caried headlong
to the ruine of our fortune, without ſenſe of errour, or miſtruſt of welſucceeding:
where as the bodie continueth firme in his owne ſtrength, and
is ſubiect onelie to a greater waight of power, by which it maie bee ſubdued
and ouerthrowen. It behooueth vs therefore to take good heed, that
our ſureſt holde bee not vnfaſtened by the ſubtiltie of the foxe, when it

hath continued firme againſt the force of the Lyon: and that the trecherie
of the ſpirit doe not diſaduantage thoſe meanes, which either our owne
power or oportunitie, hath gained in our actions. Wherein a commander
cannot haue a better rule for his direction, then to beware, that violence of
paſſion doe not hinder the courſe of ſound deliberation: and withall, to bee
iealous of whatſoeuer an enemie ſhall, either by ſpeech or action, ſeeme to
thruſt vpon him, how colourable ſoeuer the reaſons maie be, which are alleadged
to induce him thereunto. For firſt, if the minde be not confirmed by the
vertue of her better faculties, to reſiſt the motion of fruitleſſe apprehenſions,
it may eaſily bee ſeduced either by feare or vaine imagination, diffident conceptions
or ouer eaſie credulitie, with manie other ſuch diſturbing powers,
from that waie, which a good diſcretion and an vnderſtanding, free from paſſion,
would haue taken. Firſt therefore I holde it neceſſarie, to haue the conſiſtorie
of our iudgment well ſettled, with a firme reſolution, and with the preſence
of the minde, before wee enter into deliberation of ſuch thinges, as are
made happie vnto vs by good direction. And then this, amongſt other circumſtances,
will giue ſome helpe to a good concluſion; when we conſider how
improbable it is, that an enemie, whoſe chiefeſt care is to weaken his aduerſarie,
and bring him to ruine, ſhould aduiſe him of anie thing that maie concerne
his good; vnleſſe the profite, which he himſelfe ſhall thereby gather, doe farre
exceede that which the contrarie part may expect. I grant that in ciuill warres,
where there are many friendes on either partie, and haue the aduerſe cauſe as
deere vnto them as their owne; there are oftentimes many aduertiſements giuen,
which proceede from a true and ſincere affection, and maie aduantage
the partie whom it concerneth, as well in preuenting any danger, as in the furtherance
of their cauſe; and therefore are not altogether to be neglected, but
to be waied by circumſtances, and accordingly to be reſpected; whereof wee
haue manie pregnant examples in the ciuill warres of France, and particularly
in Monſieur La Nou his diſcourſes: But where there are two Armies, different
in nation, language and humor, contending for that which peculiarly belongeth
vnto one of them; where care to keepe that which is deareſt vnto them,
poſſeſſeth the one, and hope of gaine ſtirreth vp the other; there is commonlie
ſuch an vniuerſall hatred betweene them, that they are to looke for ſmall
aduantage, by aduertiſements from the enemie: which if the Romans
had well conſidered, this ſubtile Gall had not
diſpoſſeſt them of their ſtrength,
nor brought them to
ruine.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. X.
               
                  The Romans call a councell vpon this aduertiſement,
and reſolue to depart, and ioyne themſelues
to ſome other of the
legions.
               
               
                  THE Romans being troubled at the ſodainneſſe of the matter,Caeſar.
albeit thoſe thinges were ſpoken by an enemie, yet they thought
them no way to be neglected; but eſpecially it moued them, for
that it was incredible that the Eburones, beeing baſe and of
no reputation, durſt of themſelues make war againſt the people
of Rome: and therefore they propounded the matter in a councell,
wherein there grew a great controuerſie among them: L.
Arunculeius and moſt of the Tribunes, and Centurions of the firſt orders, thought
it not good to conclude of any thing raſhlie, nor to depart out of their wintering
campes, without expreſſe commandment from Caeſar; foraſmuch as they were able
to reſiſt neuer ſo great a power, yea euen of their Germans, hauing the garizons wel
fortified: an argument whereof was, that they had valiantly withſtood the firſt aſſault
of the enemy, and giuen them many wounds. Neither wanted they anie victuals,
and before that prouiſion which they had was ſpent, there would come ſuccor frō
other garizons and from Caeſar. And to conclude, what was more diſhonorable,
or ſauored of greater inconſtancy, then to conſult of their waightieſt affaires, by the
aduertiſement of an enemy? Titurius vrged vehementlie to the contrarie, that it
then would be too late for them to ſeeke a remedie, when a greater power of the enemy,
accompanied with the Germans, were aſſembled againſt them; or when anie
blow were giuen to anie of the next wintering campes hee: tooke Caeſar to be gone
into Italie, for otherwiſe the Eburones, would not haue come ſo proudly to the camp.
Let them not reſpect the authour, but the thing it ſelfe; the Rhene was not far off,
and hee knewe well that the ouerthrow of Ariouiſtus, and their former victories,
were greeuous to the Germans. The Galles were vexed with the contumelies they
had receiued, being brought in ſubiection to the Romaine Empire, and hauing loſt
their former reputation in deedes of armes. And to conclude, who would imagine
that Ambiorix ſhould enterpriſe ſuch a matter, without any ground, or certaintie
thereof? but howſoeuer thinges stoode, his counſell was ſure, and could bring no
harme: for if there were no worſe thing intended, they ſhould but goe ſafelie to the
next garizons; or otherwiſe, if the Galles conſpired with the Germans, their onelie
ſafetie conſiſted in celeritie. As for the counſell of Cotta, and ſuch as were of the
contrarie opinion, what expectation could be had thereof? wherein if there were
not preſent danger; yet aſsuredly famine was to be feared by long ſiege. The diſputation
being thus continued on either part, and Cotta with the Centurions of the
firſt orders, earneſtly repugning it; doe as pleaſe you, ſince you will needes haue
it ſo, ſaith Sabinus; and that he ſpake with a loud voice, that a great part of the ſoldiours
might well heare him. For I am not he that moſt feareth death among you,

let theſe be wiſe: and if any miſchance happen vnto them, they ſhall aske account
thereof at thy hands, inaſmuch as if thou wouldeſt let them, they might ioine themſelues
within 2. daies to the next garizons, & with them ſuſtaine what chance ſoeuer
their common deſtinie ſhould allot them; and not periſh with famine and ſword, like
a people caſt off and abandoned from their fellowes. After theſe wordes, they began
to riſe out of the councell; but holde was laide vpon them both; entreatie was made
that they would not obstinatelie bring all vnto a deſperate hazard; the matter was
all one whether they went or ſtaied, ſo that they all agreed vpon one thing; wheras
in diſagreeing, there was no likelihood of well doing: the diſputation was prolonged
vntill midnight; at length Cotta yeelded, and the ſentence of Sabinus tooke
place. And thereupon it was proclaimed, that they ſhould ſet forth by the breake
of day: the reſt of the night was ſpent in watching, euery ſoldior ſought out vvhat
he had to carry with him, and what he ſhould be conſtrained to leaue behind him of
ſuch neceſſaries, as he had prepared for winter: all things were diſpoſed in ſuch ſort,
to make the ſoldiours beleeue, that they could not ſtay without danger.
               
                  OBSERVATIONS.
                  
                     BY the reſolution in this diſputation, it appeareth how little a graue
and wiſe deliberation auaileth, when it is impugned with the violence
of paſſion, according to the truth of my former obſeruation;
for the matter was well reaſoned by Cotta, and his poſitions
were grounded vpon thinges certaine, and well knowne to the whole councell:
and yet the feare of Sabinus was ſuch, that it caried the concluſion by ſuch ſuppoſed
aſſertions, as the qualitie of his paſſion had ratified for true principles;
being grounded altogether vpon that which the enemy had ſuggeſted, and not
vpon any certaine knowledge of the truth: neither is it often ſeene, when a
Councell diſputeth vpon matters of ſuch conſequence, that their deliberations
are altogether cleere from ſuch troubleſome motions, but that it will ſomwhat
incline to the partialitie of a ſtrong affection; ſo powerfull is paſſion
in the gouernment of the ſoule, and ſo intereſſed in the other faculties. And
this is one cauſe of the vncertainty of mans iudgement, from whence all contrarie
and different opinions do ariſe. Neither is this ſo ſtrange a matter, that a
councell of warre ſhould ſo much varie in caſe of deliberation, when as many
eſpeciall points of military diſcipline remaine yet vndecided; hauing the authoritie
of the great Commaunders of all ages, to ratifie the trueth on either
parte; whereof I coulde alleage many examples. But concerning the iſſue
and euent of our deliberations, what can bee more truelie ſaide then that of
the Poet?
                  
                     Et malè conſultis pretium est, prudentia fallax,
                     Nec fortuna probat cauſas, ſequiturque merentes;
                     Sed vaga per cunctos nullo diſcrimine fertur:
                     Scilicet eſt aliuà quod nos cogatque regatque
                     Maius, & in proprias ducat mortalia leges.
                  
                  
                     
Notwithſtanding, foraſmuch as our wiſdome is not ſo ſubiect to fortune, but
that it may comprehend within it ſelfe, the good direction of moſt of the occurrences,
which fall within the courſe of our buſineſſe; or if we muſt needes
miſcarrie, yet it ſomwhat helpeth our ill fortune to thinke, that we went vpon
beſt probabilities; it ſhall not be amiſſe to ſet down ſome rules for the better
directing of a mature conſultation. Wherein we are to vnderſtand, that as all
our knowledge ariſeth from ſome of our ſenſes, and our ſenſes comprehende
onely particularities, which being caried vnto the apprehenſion, are diſpoſed
into formes and degrees, according as they either concur or diſagree in their
ſeuerall properties: from whence there ariſe intellectual notions, and rules of
Arte; wherein the ſcience of the ſaid particulars conſiſteth: ſo hee that intendeth
to debate a matter, with ſound deliberation, muſt deſcend from confuſed
conceptions and a knowledge in generall, to the exact diſtinction of particular
parts, which are the occurrences to be directed, and the materiall ſubſtance
of euery action: he therfore that can giue beſt direction, either by experience,
or iudicious diſcourſe, concerning ſuch particularities as are incident to the
matter propounded, can beſt aduiſe which is the ſafeſt way to auoid the oppoſition
of contradicting natures. But to make this ſomewhat plainer, I will alleage
2. examples: the one moderne in caſe of conſultation; the other ancient,
and may ſeeme not ſo pertinent to this matter, in regard it is a meere Apology,
yet foraſmuch as it freely cenſureth the quality of particular circumſtances, it
may giue great light to that which we ſeeke after.
                  The moderne example is taken out of Guicherdin,Lib. 9. from the warres which
Lewis the French King had with the Pope and the Venetians, concerning the
ſtate of Ferrara and the Duchie of Milan: wherein there aroſe a controuerſie
among the French captaines, whether it were better to go directlie to ſeeke the
enemy, who albeit were lodged in a ſtrong and ſecure place, yet there was hope,
that with the virtue of armes and importunitie of artillerie, they might bee
diſlodged and driuen to a retreit: or otherwiſe, to take the way either of Modina
or Bolognia, that ſo the enemy for feare of looſing either of thoſe townes,
might quit their holde, and by that meanes Ferrara ſhould bee freed from the
warre. Monſieur Chaumont the Generall of the French, inclined to the former
aduiſe: But Triuulce, a man of great authoritie and experience, hauing
beene an executioner in 18. battailes, reaſoned thus in particulars to the contrary.
We debate (ſaith he) to go ſeeke the enemy to fight with him; and I haue
alwaies heard great captaines holde this as a firme principle: Not to attempt
the fortune of a battell, vnleſſe there be either an offer of an eſpeciall aduantage,
or otherwiſe, compulſion by neceſſitie. The rules of warre giue it to the
enemy that is the inuader, and hath vndertaken the conqueſt of Ferrar, to
ſeeke to aſſaile and charge vs; but to vs, to whom it is ſufficient to defende our
ſelues, it cannot be but impertinent to vndertake an action, contrary to all direction
and diſcipline of war. I am of opinion, which is confirmed by euident
reaſon, that there is no poſsibility to execute that deuiſe, but to our harmes
and diſaduantage: for we cannot go to their campe but by the ſide of a hill, a
ſtreight and narrowe way, where all our forces cannot be imploied; and yet

they with ſmall numbers will make reſiſtance, hauing the oportunitie of the
place fauourable to their vertues: wee muſt march by the riſing of a hill, one
horſe after another; neither haue we anie other waie to draw our Artillerie, our
baggage, our cartes and bridges, but by the ſtreight of the hill: and who doubteth
not but in a waie ſo narrowe and combrous, euerie artillerie, euerie carte,
or euery wheele that ſhall breake, will not ſtay the Armie a whole houre at the
leaſt? By which impediments euerie contrarie accident may put vs to diſorder.
The enemie is lodged in couert, prouided of victuals and forrage; and wee
muſt incampe all bare and naked, not carying with vs that which ſhould ſerue
for our neceſſarie nouriture, but expect the things to come after; which in reaſon
ought to go with vs. To attempt newe enterpriſes, whereof the victorie is
leſſe certaine then the perill, is contrarie to the grauitie and reputation of a leader;
and in actions of the warre, thoſe enterpriſes are put to aduenture, that are
done by will and not by reaſon. Many difficulties may compell vs to make our
aboade there, two or three daies; yea the ſnowes and raines ioyned with the extremitie
of the ſeaſon, may ſuffice to detaine vs: how ſhall we then doe for victuals
and forrages? What ſhall we be able to doe in the warres, wanting the
thinges that ſhould giue vs ſtrength and ſuſtenance? What is he that conſidereth
not, how dangerous it is to go ſeeke the enemie in a ſtrong campe, and to
be driuen at one time to fight againſt them, and againſt the diſcommoditie of
the place? If we compell them not to abandon their campe, wee cannot but
be inforced to retire; a matter of great difficultie in a countrey ſo wholy againſt
vs, and where euerie little disfauour will turne to our great diſaduantage, &c.
                  And thus proceeded that graue diſcourſe, in the diſcouerie of the particular
occurrences, incident to that enterpriſe; which being laied open to their confuſed
iudgments, did manifeſtly point at the great diſaduantages, which were to be
vndergone, by that attempt.
                  The other example is of more antiquitie,Anal. 6. taken out of Tacitus, and concerneth
the araignment of certaine ſenatours, for the friendſhip that had paſt betweene
Scianus and them. Amongſt whom M. Terentius thus anſwered for
himſelfe; according as it hath of late been publiſhed by tranſlation.
                  It would be peraduenture leſſe behoouefull for my eſtate to acknowledge,
then to denie the crime I am charged with: but happe what happe maie, I will
confeſſe that I haue beene Seianus friend, and that I deſired ſo to bee, and that
after I had obtained his friendſhip, I was glad of it. I had ſeene him ioint officer
with my father, in the gouernment of the pretorian cohort; and not long after
in managing the cittie affaires, and matters of warre: his kinſemen and allies
were aduanced to honour, as euerie man was inward with Seianus, ſo he was
graced by Caeſar: and contrariwiſe, ſuch as were not in his fauour, liued in
feare, and diſtreſſed with pouertie. Neither doe I alleadge any man for an example
of this; all of vs who were not priuie to his laſt attempts, with the danger
of my onely eſtate I will defend: not Seianus the Vulſinienſis, but a part of
the Claudian and Iulian familie, which by alliance hee had entered into; thy
ſonne in law Caeſar, thy companion in the Conſulſhip, and him, who tooke vpon
him thy charge of adminiſtring the common-wealth, wee did reuerence

and honor. It is not our part to iudge of him, whom thou doeſt exalt aboue the
reſt, nor for what conſiderations: to thee the higheſt iudgement of thinges the
gods haue giuen; and to vs the glory of obedience is left. We looke into thoſe
thinges which we ſee before our eies, whom thou doeſt inrich, whome thou
doeſt aduance to honours, who haue greateſt power of hurting or helping,
which Seianus to haue had, no man will denie. The Princes hidden thoughts,
or if he go about any ſecret drift, it is not lawful to ſound, and dangerous; neither
ſhalt thou in the ende reach vnto them. Thinke not onely Lordes of the
ſenate, of Seianus laſt daie; but of ſixteene yeeres, in which wee did likewiſe
fawne vppon and court Satrius, and Pomponius; and to be knowne vnto
his freed men and partners, was reckoned for a high fauour. What then?
ſhall this defence bee generall, and not diſtinguiſhed, but a confuſion made
of times paſt, and his latter actions? no, but let it by iuſt boundes and
tearmes be deuided: let the treaſons againſt the common wealth, the intentions
of murdering the Emperour bee puniſhed; but as for the friendſhips,
dueties, pleaſures and good turnes, the ſame ende ſhall diſcharge and quit
thee, O Caeſar, and vs! The conſtancie of this Oration preualled ſo
much, that his Accuſers were puniſhed with exile. And thus wee ſee howe
particularities decide the controuerſie, and make the waie plaine to good
direction.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XI.
               
                  The Romaines take their iourney towardes
the next legion; and are ſet vpon by
the Galles.
               
               
                  AS ſoone as the daye lyght appeared, they ſet foorth of
their Campe,Caeſar. like men perſuaded that the counſell had
beene giuen them not by an enemie, but by Ambiorix
an eſpeciall friende, with a long tailed march, and as
much baggage as they were able to carrie. The Galles
vnderſtanding of their iourney, by their noiſe and watching
in the night; ſecretlie in the woodes ſome two miles
off layed an Ambuſcado, in two ſeuerall places of aduantage,
and there attended the comming of the Romaines; and when the greateſt
part of the troupes were entered into a valley, ſodainlie they ſhewed themſelues
on both ſides the vale, preſsing harde vppon the rerewarde, and hindering the
formoſt from going vppe the hill; and ſo beganne to charge vppon the Romaines
in a place of as great diſaduantage for them as coulde bee. Then at length Titurius,
as one that had prouided for nothing before hande, began to tremble, ran

vp and down, and diſpoſed his cohorts, but ſo fearefully and after ſuch a faſhion, as if
all things had gone againſt him, as it happeneth for the moſt part to ſuch, as are forced
to conſult in the inſtance of execution.
               
                  THE OBSERVATION.
                  
                     IT nowe plainelie appeareth, by this negligent and ill ordered
march, and the vnlooked for incounter which the Galles gaue
thē, that feare had ratified in the iudgment of Sabinus the ſmooth
ſuggeſtion of Ambiorix, with an approbation of a certaine
truth; and laied that for a principle, which a diſcourſe free from paſſion
would haue diſcerned to be but weake, and of no probabilitie: which ſo
much the more amazed Titurius, by howe much his apprehenſion had erred
from the truth, and betraied good counſell to a courſe full of danger; which
as Caeſar noteth, muſt needes fall vpon ſuch, as are then to ſeeke for direction
when the buſineſſe requireth execution. I haue handled alreadie the inconueniences
of diſappointment; and therfore at this time wil but bring it only into
remembrance, that wee may take the greater care to preuent an accident of
that nature: wherein, as the beſt remedie for an euill is to foreſee it, according
to the ſaying, praeuiſa pereunt mala; ſo the greateſt miſchiefe in an euill, is
when it commeth vnthought of, and beſides our expectation; for then it falleth
vpon vs with a ſupernaturall waight, and affrighteth the minde with a ſuperſtitious
aſtoniſhment, as though the diuine powers had preuented our deſſignements,
with an irremediable calamitie, and cut off our appointment with
a contrarie decree: although peraduenture the thing it ſelfe carie no ſuch importance,
but might be remedied, if wee were but prepared with an opinion,
that ſuch a thing might happen. It were no ill counſell therefore, what reſolution
ſoeuer bee taken, to make as full account of that which may fall out to
croſſe our intentions, as that which is likelie to happen from the direction
of our chiefeſt proiects; and ſo we ſhall be ſure to haue a
preſent mind in the middeſt of our occaſions, and
feele no further danger, then that which
the nature of the thing
inforceth.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. XII.
               
                  The Romans caſt themſelues into an Orbe;
and are much diſcouraged.
               
               
                  BVT Cotta, who had before thought that theſe things might
happen by the waie, and for that cauſe would not bee the author
of the iourney, was not wanting in anie thing that concerned
their common ſafetie: for both in calling vppon the
ſoldiours and incouraging them, hee executed the place of a
Commaunder; and in fighting, the dutie of a ſoldiour. And
when they found, that by reaſon of the length of their troupe,
they were not able in their owne perſons to ſee all thinges doone, and to giue direction
in euerie place; they cauſed it to bee proclaimed, that they ſhould all forſake
their baggage, and caſt themſelues into an Orbe: which direction, although in
ſuch a caſe bee not to be reprooued; yet it fell out ill fauoredlie: for it both abated
the courage of the Romans, and gaue the enemie greater incouragement, inaſmuch
as it ſeemed that that courſe was not taken, but vppon a great feare and in
extremitie of perill. Moreouer, it happened, as it coulde not otherwiſe choſe,
that the ſoldiours went from their Enſignes, to take from the cariages ſuch
thinges as were moſt deere vnto them: and there was nothing heard amongſt them
but clamours and weepings. But the Barbarous Galles were not to learne howe
to carrie themſelues: for their Commaunders cauſed it to bee proclaimed, that
no man ſhoulde ſturre out of his place; for the praie was theirs, and all that the
Romaines had laide aparte, was reſerued for them: and therefore let them ſuppoſe
that al things conſiſted in the victorie. The Romans were equal to the Galles,
both in number of men and valour▪ and albeit they were deſtitute of good Captaines,
and of good fortune, yet they repoſed in their manhoode al the hope of their
ſafety: and as often as any cohort iſſued out, they failed not to make a great ſlaughter
of the enemy on that part.
               
                  THE FIRST OBSERVATION.
                  
                     I Haue alreadie handeled the nature of an Orbe, with ſuch properties
as are incident to a circle; wherein I ſhewed the conueniencie
of this figure, in regarde of ſafe and ſtrong imbattailing:
I will nowe adde this much concerning the vſe thereof,
that as it is the beſt manner of imbattailing for a defenſiue
ſtrength, and therefore neuer vſed but in extremitie; ſo we muſt be very carefull,
that the ſodaine betaking of our ſelues to ſuch a refuge, doe not more
diſmaie the ſoldiours, then the aduantage of that imbattailing canne benefit

them. For vnleſſe a leader be carefull to keepe his men in courage, that their
hearts may bee free from deſpaire and amazement, what profit can there ariſe
from any diſpoſition or bodie ſoeuer, when the particular members ſhall bee
ſenceleſſe of that duty, which belongeth vnto them? for order is nothing but
an aſsiſtance to courage, giuing meanes to manage our valour with aduantage.
In the warre of Africke wee reade, that Caeſars legions being incircled about
with great multitudes of enemies, were forced to make an Orbe; but he quicklie
turned it to a better vſe, by aduancing the two Cornets two contrary waies,
and ſo deuided the enemy into two partes; and then beate them backe to their
great diſaduantage.
               
               
                  THE SECOND OBSERVATION.
                  
                     I Neede not ſtand vpon this order which the Galles heere tooke, concerning
pillage, that no ſoldior ſhould forſake his ſtation, or diſranke
himſelfe in hope of ſpoile; which is a thing that from the very infancie
of warres hath often changed the fortune of the day, and ſolde
the honor of a publike victorie, for priuate lucre and petty pilfering. Amongſt
other examples,Lib. 20 let that which Guichardine reporteth of the battell of Taro,
ſuffice to warne a well directed armie, as well by the good which Charles
the eighth of that name, King of France, receiued at that time, as by the
loſſe which the Italians felt by that diſorder, not to ſeeke after pillage vntil the
victory be obtained.
               
               
                  THE THIRD OBSERVATION.
                  
                     THe inſufficiency of theſe Commanders, whereof Caeſar now complaineth
as the only want, which theſe Romans had to cleere themſelues
of this daunger; bringeth to our conſideration that which
former times haue made a queſtion, which is, whether it were the
vertue of the Roman leaders, or the valor of their ſoldiers, that inlarged their
Empire to that greatnes, and made their people and ſenate Lords of the world?
Polybius waighing the cauſes of a victorie, which the Carthagineans gained
of the Romans, by the counſell and good direction of one Zantippus a Grecian,
hauing before that time receiued diuers ouerthrowes, during the time of
thoſe warres in Africke; concluded, that it was more in the worthines of the
Commanders, then in any extraordinary vertue of the ſoldiours, that the Romans
atchieued ſo many conqueſts. And beſides the preſent example of Zantippus,
he confirmed his opinion with the proceedings of Hanniball; who from
the beginning of the ſecond punicke warre, ſtill gained of the Roman Empire,
enlarging the territories of Carthage, and ſtreightening the iuriſdiction of
mightie Rome, vntill it had got a leader matchable to that ſubtle Carthaginean,
and found a Scipio to confront their Hannibal. To this may be added that

                     
                        SABINVS AND COTTA
                     
                     
                     
famous battell betweene the olde Romans, and the laſt Latines; wherein
both parties were equally ballaunced, both in number and quality of their ſouldiers,
hauing both the ſame Armes, the ſame vſe of their weapons, and the ſame
diſcipline, as if it had beene in a Ciuill warre: neither could fortune tell by the
preſence of their Armies, where to beſtowe her fauour, or where to ſhewe her
diſdaine; but that the worthineſſe of the Roman leaders brought the oddes in
the triall, and made Rome great with the ruine of the Latines. Whereby it appeareth,
how much it importeth the whole fortune of an Armie, to haue a leader
worthie of the place which he holdeth: foraſmuch as nothing doth make a
greater difference of inequalitie betweene two equall Armies, then the wiſedome
and experience of a graue commander, or the diſabilitie of an vnskilfull
leader; which are ſo powerfull in their ſeuerall effectes, that there is greater
hope of a heard of Hartes led by a Lyon, then of ſo many Lyons conducted
by a Harte.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XIII.
               
                  Ambiorix directeth the Galles how they might
beſt fight with aduantage, and fruſtrate
the weapons of Romaine
ſouldiers.
               
               
                  THE which thing when Ambiorix perceiued;Caeſar. he commanded
his men to throwe their caſting weapons a farre off, and keepe
themſelues from comming neare at hand, and where the Romans
charged vpon them to giue waie; and againe, as they
ſawe them retire to their enſignes, then to purſue them. Which
commandement was ſo diligently obſerued by the Galles, that
as oft as any cohort ſallied out of the Orbe to giue an aſſault,
the enemie gaue backe as faſt as they could; and in the meane time there was no help,
but that part muſt be left naked and open to the inconuenience of caſting weapons;
and againe, as they retired to their place, they were circumuented as well by them
that had giuen place vnto them, as by ſuch as ſtood next about them: And if they
went about to keepe their ground, they could neither helpe themſelues by their manhood;
nor ſtanding thicke together, auoide the dartes that ſuch a multitude caſt vpon
them: and yet notwithſtanding theſe inconueniences beſides the woundes which
they had receiued, they ſtood ſtill at their defence, and hauing ſo ſpent the greatest
part of the daie (for they had fought eight houres together) they counted nothing diſhonourable
or vnworthie of themſelues.
               
                  
                  THE OBSERVATION.
                  
                     I Haue ſpoken alreadie of the manner of the Roman fight, conſiſting
altogether in good diſpoſition of imbattailing, and in firme ſtanding,
and buckling at handy-blowes: as may appeare by this circumſtance,
where Ambiorix forbiddeth his men to buckle with them,
but to giue backe and follow on againe, as the lightneſſe of their Armes gaue
them oportunitie. In like manner in the firſt booke of the Ciuill warres, in
the battell betweene Caeſar and Affranius, it appeareth, that Caeſar his ſouldiers
were bound to keepe their araie, not to leaue their enſignes, nor without a
waightie occaſion to forſake their ſtations appointed them: whereas the Affranians
fought thinne, and ſcattered here and there; and if they were hard
laied vnto, they thought it no diſhonour to retire and giue backe, as they had
learned of the Portugals, and other Barbarous nations.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XIIII.
               
                  The Romans are ouerthrowen.
               
               
                  THEN T. Baluentius, who the yeare before had beene Primipile
of that legion, a valiant man and of great authoritie,
had both his thighes darted through with a Iauelin: and Q.
Lucanius, of the ſame order, valiantly fighting to ſuccour his
ſonne, was ſlaine: and L. Cotta the Legate, as he buſilie incouraged
all the Cohortes and Centuries, was wounded in the
mouth with a ſling. Titurius mooued with theſe thinges, as he
beheld Ambiorix a farre off incouraging his men, ſent C. Pompeius vnto him, to
intreat him that he would ſpare him and his ſouldiers. Ambiorix anſwered, that
if he were deſirous to treat, he might: for he hoped to obtaine ſo much of the people,
to ſaue the ſouldiers: but for himſelfe he ſhould haue no harme at all; for the aſsurance
whereof, he gaue him his faith. Titurius imparted the matter to Cotta, who abſolutely
denied to go to an armed enemie, and continued reſolute in that opinion. Titurius
commanded ſuch Tribunes and Centurions that were preſent, to follow him;
and when he came neere to Ambiorix, being commanded to caſt awaie his armes, hee
obeied, and willed thoſe that were with him, doe the ſame. In the meane time while
they treated of the couditions, and Ambiorix began a ſolemne proteſtation of purpoſe,
Titurius was by little and little incompaſsed about and ſlaine. Then according to their
cuſtome, they cried victorie, and taking vp a houling, charged the Romans with a
freſh aſſault, and routed their troupes. There L. Cotta fighting valiantly was ſlaine,
with the moſt part of the ſouldiers with him. The remnant retired into their campe,
amongst whom L. Petroſidius the eagle-bearer, when he ſawe himſelfe ouercharged
with enemies, threw the Eagle within the rampier, and fighting with a great courage,

before the campe was ſlaine. The reſt with much adoe indured the aſſault vntill
night, and in the night being in deſpaire of all ſuccour ſlewe themſelues euerie man:
a few, that eſcaped from the battell, came by vnknowne waies through the woods to
Labienus, and certified him how all things had fallen out.
               
                  OBSERVATIONS.
                  
                     ANd thus haue we heard of the greateſt loſſe, that euer fel at any one
time vpon Caeſar his Armie, from the time that hee was firſt Proconſull
in Gallia, vnto the ende of his dictatorſhip. For in the two
ouerthrowes at Dirrachium, he loſt not aboue 1000 men, and in
that at Gergouia not ſo manie: but here fifteene cohortes were cut in pieces,
which amounted to the number of 7000 men, or thereabout. Which maketh
cowardice, and ill direction the more hatefull, in regard that the great victorie,
which his valour obtained in Pharſalia, coſt him but the liues of two hundreth
men. The reſolution of ſuch as returned to the campe, witneſſeth the exceeding
valour of the Roman ſouldier, if a valiant leader had had the managing thereof;
or if Cotta alone had beene abſolute commander, there had beene great hope
of better fortune in the ſucceſſe: but here it happened as it commonly doth,
that where there are many that are equall ſharers in the chiefe authoritie, the
direction for the moſt part followeth him that is more violent in opinion then
the reſt: which being a propertie rather of paſſion then of iudicious diſcourſe,
forceth a conſent againſt the temperat oppoſition of a true diſcerning vnderſtanding;
and ſo conſequently it falleth out, that one coward, hauing place
and authoritie in the councel, doth either infect or annihilate the ſound deliberations
of the reſt of the leaders: for his timerouſneſſe flieth alwaies to extremities,
making him raſh in conſultation, peremptorie in opinion, and baſe in
caſe of perill; all which are enemies to good direction, and the onely inſtruments
of miſchieuing fortune.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XV.
               
                  Ambiorix haſteth to beſiege Cicero; and ſtirreth
vp the Aduatici, the Neruij; and ſo
raiſeth a great power.
               
               
                  AMBIORIX tooke ſuch ſpirites vnto him vpon this victorie, that
with his horſemen he went immediatly vnto the Aduatici, being the
next borderers vpon his kingdome, without intermiſsion of night,
commanding his footmen to follow him: The aduatici being ſtirred
vp to Commotion, the next daie after he came to the Neruij, exhorting

them not to let ſlippe this occaſion of taking to themſelues perpetuall libertie, and
reuenging them of the Romans for the wrong they had receiued. He tolde them that
two Legates were alreadie ſlaine, and a great part of the Armie ouerthrowne: it was
now no great matter, ſuddenly to ſurpriſe the legion that wintered with Cicero; to
the performance whereof, he offered himſelfe to be their aſsiſtant. Theſe remonſtrances
eaſilie perſwaded the Neruij, and therefore they diſpatched ſpeedie meſsengers to
the Centrones, Grudij and other people vnder their dominion, and raiſed verte great
forces, and with them they haſted to the campe where Cicero wintered, before anie
inkling of the death of Titurius was brought vnto him.
               
                  THE OBSERVATION.
                  
                     THe ambitious and working ſpirit of Ambiorix, that could attempt
to raiſe the baſeneſſe of a ſmall and ignoble ſtate, to ſo high a point
of reſolution, that they durſt aduenture vpon the Roman legions,
being ſetled in the ſtrength of their Empire, by the memorie of ſo
manie victories in Gallia: wanted now no meanes to make an ouerture to a vniuerſall
commotion, propounding libertie and reuenge to the Galles, two
the ſweeteſt conditions that can happen to a ſubdued people, if they would but
ſtretch out their hands to take it, and follow that courſe which his example had
proued ſure and eaſie. Which maie ſerue to ſhewe, that he that will attempt
vpon doubtfull and vnſafe Principles, will take great aduantage from a probable
entrance, and make a ſmall beginning a ſufficient meanes for his greateſt
deſſignes.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XVI.
               
                  Cicero defendeth his campe from the ſurpriſe
of the Neruij, and prepareth himſelfe
againſt a ſiege.
               
               
                  IT happened to Cicero alſo (as it coulde not otherwiſe chuſe)
that manie of the ſouldiers, that were gone into the woods for
timber and munition, were cut off by the ſudden approach of
the enemies horſemen. Theſe being circumuented, the Eburones,
Neruij, and Aduatici, with all their confederates and
clientes, began to aſsault the campe. The Romans betooke
them ſpeedily to their weapons; and got vpon the rampier,
with much adoe they helde out that daie: for the Galles truſted much vpon celeritie,
hoping if they ſped well in that action, to be victors euer after. Cicero diſpatched

letters with all ſpeede to Caeſar, promiſing great rewardes to him that ſhould carie
them: but all the waies were ſo forelaid, that the meſsengers were taken. In one
night there was built in the campe 120 towers, of ſuch timber as was brought in
for fortification, & whatſoeuer wanted of the reſt of the worke, was perfected. The
enemie the next daie with a farre greater power aſsaulted the campe, and filled vp
the ditch: the Romans made the like defence, as they had done the daie before; the
like was continued diuers daies after. The Romaines made no intermiſsion of their
worke at anie part of the night, nor gaue anie reſt either to the ſicke or the wounded.
Whatſoeuer was needfull for the next daies aſsault, was prouided in a readineſſe the
night before; a great number of ſtakes hardened in the fire were prepared, and manie
murall piles were made; the towers were floored in their ſtories, Pinacles and
Parapets were ſet vp of hurdles: and Cicero himſelfe being ſickly, and of a weake
conſtitution, tooke not ſo much leaſure as to reſt himſelfe in the night time; ſo that
the ſouldiers of their owne accord compeld him, by intreatie, to ſpare himſelfe.
               
                  THE OBSERVATION.
                  
                     THis Q. Cicero is ſaid to bee the brother of Marcus Cicero the famous
Oratour, & to him were the letters ſent which are found in his
Epiſtles, directed Quincto fratri. In this action his cariage deſerued
as great reputation, in the true cenſure of honor, as euer his brother
did for his eloquence, pro Roſtris. And if it had been the others fortune to haue
performed the like ſeruice, he would haue made it the greateſt exploit that euer
Roman had atchieued by armes: wherein particularly may be commended the
diligence and induſtrie, which was vſed in raiſing ſo manie towers, in ſo ſmall a
time; for prouiding the night before, ſuch thinges as were neceſſarie for the
next daies defence; for making ſo manie ſtakes hardened at the ende with fire,
for the defence of the rampier; and for the ſtore of theſe murall piles, which reſembled
the forme of the ordinarie pile, but were farre greater and waightier
in regard they were to be caſt from the rampier; which gaue them ſuch
aduantage, by reaſon of the height, that being caſt by a ſtrong
and well practiſed arme, they were verie
effectuall and of great
terrour.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. XVII.
               
                  The Neruij propound the ſame things to Cicero
which Ambiorix had done to Sabinus;
but are reiected.
               
               
                  THEN the Princes and chiefe commanders of the Neruij, which
had anie entrance of ſpeech and cauſe of acquaintance with Cicero,
ſignified their deſire to ſpeake with him: which being
granted, they propounded the ſame things they had vſed to deceiue
Sabinus; all Gallia was in Armes; the Germans were
come ouer the Rhene; Caeſar and the reſt were beſieged in their
wintering campes; Sabinus and his men were cut in pieces;
notwithſtanding they carried this minde to Cicero, that they refuſed nothing but
their wintering among them, they might depart in ſafetie whither they would, without
diſturbance or feare of danger. Cicero onely made this anſwere: that it was not
the cuſtome of the people of Rome, to take anie article or condition from an armed enemie;
but if they would laie their armes aſide, let them vſe his furtherance in the
matter, and ſend ſome to negotiat it with Caeſar; there was great hope in regard of
his iuſtice and equitie, that they ſhould not returne vnſatiſfied.
               
                  THE OBSERVATION.
                  
                     THe firſt attempt, which Ambiorix made vpon the campe of Sabinus
and Cotta, was but ſhort; but here what with the pride of the
former victorie, and the great multitude of the aſſailants, they continued
it longer, in hope to carrie it by aſſault: for the firſt aſſault of
a place, eſpecially when it commeth by waie of ſurpriſe, is of greater hope to
the aſſailant, and of greater danger to the defendant, then ſuch as afterward are
made in the ſequell of the warre: for after the firſt brunt, the heate of the enemy
is much abated, as well through the nature of a hot deſire, which is moſt violent
in the beginning, and afterward groweth colde and remiſſe, as alſo with the
harmes and perill which they meete with in the incounter; and on the contrarie
ſide, the defendants hauing withſtood the firſt furie, wherein there is moſt
terrour and diſtruſt, grow more confident and better aſſured of their manhood,
and in experience of their ſtrength ſtand firme againſt anie charge whatſoeuer.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. XVIII.
               
                  The Neruij beſiege Cicero, with a ditch and a
rampier, and worke meanes to ſet fire
on their tents.
               
               
                  THE Neruij diſappointed of his hope, carried a ditch and a
rampier round about the campe; the rampier was 11 foot high,
and the ditch 15 foote deepe; which they had learned of the
Romaines, partly by being conuerſant among them certaine
yeares before, and partly by the priſoners and captiues which
they had taken; but they had no yron tooles fit for that purpoſe,
but were driuen to cut vp turfe with their ſwords, and gather
earth with their hands, and carrie it away with their mantles and gaberdines. Wherby
may be gathered, what a multitude of men there were at the ſiege; for in leſſe then
three houres, they finiſhed the fortification of fifteene miles in circuit. The daies following,
the enemy built towers to the height of the rampier, prepared great hooks and
ſtrong penthouſes, or ſauegardes of boords and timber, according as the captiues had
giuen them inſtruction. The ſeauenth daie of the ſiege being a very windie daie, they
caſt hoat bullets of claie out of ſlinges, and burning dartes vpon the cabines of the Romans,
which after the manner of the Galles, were thatched with ſtrawe: theſe cabines
were quickly ſet on fire, which by the violence of the winde was carried ouer all
the campe; the enemie preſsing forward with a great clamour, as though the victorie
were alreadie gotten, began to bring their Turrets and Teſtudines to the rampier,
and to ſcale it with ladders. But ſuch was the valour of the Roman ſouldiers, that albeit
they were ſcorched on all ſides with fire, and ouer-charged with multitude of
weapons, and ſaw all their wealth burned before their face; yet no man forſooke the
rampier, or ſcarce looked backe at that which had happened, but they all fought valiantly,
and with an exceeding courage.
               
                  OBSERVATIONS.
                  
                     THis one example may ſerue to ſhew the excellencie of the Romaine
diſcipline, and the wiſedome of the firſt founders of that Arte: for
they perceiuing that the fortune of warres conſiſted chiefelie in the
maſtering of particular occurrences, trained their ſouldiers in that
forme of diſcipline, as might ſtruggle with inconueniences, and ſtrong oppoſitions
of contradicting accidents; and ſo ouerwage all difficulties and hinderances,
with a conſtant perſeueration and a courage inuincible. For the great attempting
ſpirit of an ambitious commāder, that ſeeketh to ouertop the trophes
of honour, with the memorie of his exploites, will quickly periſh by his owne
direction, if the inſtruments of execution be weaker, then the meanes which

lead him to his deſſignments. For where the waight is greater then the ſtrength,
the engine will ſooner breake, then lift it vp. Let a diſcreet leader therefore ſo
leuell his thoughts, that his reſolution may not exceede the abilitie of his particular
means; but firſt let him be well aſſured what his ſouldiers can doe, before
he reſolue what he will doe: or otherwiſe, let him ſo inable them by diſcipline
and inſtructions, according to the example of the old Romans, that their worth
maie anſwere the height of his deſires and follow his aſpiring minde, with a reſolution
grounded vpon knowledge and valour; and ſo making their ability the
ground of his deſſignes, he ſhall neuer faile of meanes to performe what he intendeth.
The want of this conſideration hath, within theſe late yeares, repaide
our commanders in many partes of Chriſtendome with loſſe and diſhonour;
when as they meaſured the humour of their poore needie and vndiſciplined
ſouldier, by the garbe of their ambitious thoughtes, and ſo laide ſuch proiects
of difficultie, as were verie vnſutable in the particularitie of occurrences to that,
which their ſouldiers were fit to execute.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XIX.
               
                  The aemulation betweene two Centurions, Pulfio,
and Varenus, with their fortunes in
the incounter.
               
               
                  THERE were in that legion two valiant men, Titus Pulfio, and
L. Varenus Centurions, comming on a pace to the dignitie of the
firſt orders: theſe two were at continuall debate which of them
ſhould be preferred one before another, & euery yeare contended
for place of preferment, with much ſtrife and emulation. Pulfio
at a time, that the fortification was very ſharply aſſaulted, called
to Varenus, and asked him why he now ſtood doubtfull? or what
other place he did looke for to make triall of his manhood? this is the daie (ſaith hee)
that ſhall decide our controuerſies; and when he had ſpoken theſe wordes, he went
out of the fortification, and where he ſaw the enemie thickeſt, he fiercely ſet vpon thē:
then could not Varenus hold himſelfe within the rampier, but followed after in a reaſonable
diſtance. Pulfio caſt his pile at the enemie, and ſtrooke one of the multitude
through that came running out againſt him; he being ſlaine, all caſt their weapons at
him, giuing no reſpite or time of retrait: Pulfio had his target ſtrooke through, and the
dart ſtucke faſt in his girdle: this chance turned aſide his ſcabberd and hindered his
right hand from pulling out his ſword, in which diſaduantage the enemy preſſed hard
vpon him; Varenus came and reſcued him: immediatly the whole multitude, thinking
Pulfio to be ſlaine with the darte, turned to Varenus, who ſpeedely betooke him to his
ſword, and came to handy-ſtrokes, and hauing ſlaine one he put the reſt ſomewhat
backe. But as he followed ouerhaſtely vpon them, he fell downe: him did Pulfio reſcue,

                  
                     CICERO BESIEGED
                  
                  
                  
being circumuented and in danger; and ſo both of them hauing ſlaine manie of the
enemie, retired to their campe in ſafety, to their great honour. Thus fortune caried
as well the contention, as the incounter of them both, that being enemies, they neuertheleſſe
gaue helpe to ſaue each others life, in ſuch ſort, that it was not to bee iudged
which of them deſerued greateſt honor.
               
                  OBSERVATIONS.
                  
                     CAEſar inſerteth this accident of the two Centurions, as worthie to
be related amongſt the deeds of armes contained in theſe commē
                     taries:
wherein we are firſt to obſerue the grounds of this quarrel,
which was their continual ſtrife for place of preferment, which they
ſought after by ſhewing their valour in time of danger, and approouing their
worth by the greatneſſe of their deſert; a contention worthy the Roman diſcipline,
and may ſerue for a paterne of true honour full of courage, accompliſhed
with vertue. For theſe Simultates, which deſire of honor had caſt between
them, brought forth emulation which is the ſpur of vertue, far from enmitie or
hatefull contention: for the difference betweene theſe two qualities is, that enmitie
hunteth after deſtruction, and onely reioiceth in that which bringeth to
our aduerſary vtter ruine, diſhonour or ill atchieuement: but emulation contendeth
only by well deſeruing, to gaine the aduantage of an other mans fame,
that vſeth the ſame meanes to attaine to the like end; and is alwaies mixed with
loue, in regard of the affinity of their affections, and the ſympathie of their deſires,
not ſeeking the ouerthrow of their Competitor, but ſuccouring him in
time of danger, and defending him from foule and vnfortunate calamitie, that
he may ſtill continue to ſhew the greatnes of his worth by the oppoſition of inferior
actions, which are as a leſſer ſcantling of deſert to meaſure the eſtimation
of the others honour.
                  A vertue rare and vnknowne in theſe daies, and would hardly find ſubiects
to be reſident in, if ſhe ſhould offer her helpe in the courſe of our affaires, or ſue
to be entertained by the crooked diſpoſitiōs of our times: for we can no ſooner
conceiue the thoughts that breed emulation, but it turneth preſently to hatred,
which is followed to the vttermoſt of our malice, and reſteth better ſatisfied
with the miſerable end of our oppoſed partner, then with thouſand of Trophes
deſeruedly erected to our honor. Which maketh me wonder, when I looke into
the difference of theſe and thoſe ages, whether it were the diſcipline of that
time, which brought forth ſuch honeſt effectes of vertue, to their glory and our
ignominy, hauing learned better rules then were known vnto them; or whether
the world weakened with age, want ſtrength in theſe times to bring foorth her
creatures in that perfection, as it did in thoſe daies; or what other cauſe hath
made our worſt affections ſo violent, and our better faculties ſo remiſſe and
negligent, that vertue hath no part in vs but wordes of praiſe, our whole practiſe
being conſecrated to actions of reproch. The iniuries, murthers, ſcandalous
cariages of one towards an other, which in theſe daies are ſo readily offered,

and ſo impatientlie digeſted, will admit no ſatisfaction but priuate combate,
which in the firſt monarchies was granted only againſt ſtrangers, and forraine
enemies, as the only obiects of armes and wrath, and capable of that iuſtice,
which the priuate ſworde ſhoulde execute: for they well perceiued that
theſe ſingle battels were, as ſparkles of ciuill diſcorde, and inteſtine warres;
although not ſo apparant in the generall viewe of their ſtate, yet as odious
in particular, and as diſhonourable to good gouernment. And if there were
a true recorde of ſuch, as haue beene either ſlaine or wounded within theſe
fortie yeeres, either in this kingdome, or in France, or in Germanie, by this
licentious and brutiſh cuſtome; I make no queſtion, but they woulde amount
to a number capable of that fearefull ſtile, which is attributed to ciuill
warres.
                  Neither is there any lawe howe rigorous or harde ſoeuer, that can giue reliefe
to this diſorder, but the reſtraint will drawe on as great enormities, and as
vntolerable in a good gouernment. Rotaris king of the Lumbardes forbade
his ſubiectes this manner of combate; but ſhortlie after, hee was conſtrained
to recall the edict, for the auoiding of greater euils; although hee proteſted
the thing to bee both inhumane, and barbarous. The like edict was
publiſhed in France by Philip the Faire, but was within two yeeres reuoked
againe, at the inſtante requeſt of his ſubiectes, in regarde of the murthers
and aſſaſinats committed in that kingdome. The onelie remedie, that
I finde to take effect in this caſe, was that of late time, which the Prince of Melphe
in Piemont, inuented to preuent this euill: for perceiuing howe ordinarie
quarrels and bloudſhed were in his campe, hee aſſigned a place betweene two
bridges for the performance of the Duellum, with this charge; that hee
that had the worſt ſhoulde alwaies bee ſlaine, and caſt from the bridge into
the water; the daunger ioyned with diſhonour (which by this decree attended
ſuch as vndertooke priuate combate) made the ſoldiours wiſer in their
cariage, and put an end to their ſedition and ciuill diſcordes. But that which is
yet worſt of all, is that cuſtome hath now made it ſo familiar, that euery trifle
ſeemeth ſufficient to call the matter to a priuate combate; a croſſe looke
calleth an others mans honour in queſtion; but the word lye is of as great conſequence,
as any ſtabbe or villanie whatſoeuer. Whereat we may well wonder
howe it happeneth, that wee feele our ſelues ſo much exaſperated at the reproch
of that vice, which we ſo ordinarilie commit; for in the cuſtome of theſe
times to caſt vpon vs the lie, is the greateſt iniurie that wordes can doe vnto vs;
and yet there is nothing more frequent in our mouth. It may be a propertie in
our nature, to ſtand chiefely in the defence of that corruption vnto which wee
are moſt ſubiect: I ſpeake not this to qualifie the fouleneſſe of this vice; for I
holde a lier to bee a monſter in nature, one that contemneth God and feareth
man, as an ancient father ſaith; but to ſhew the crookedneſſe of our diſpoſition
in diſdaining to acknowledge that fault, which wee ſo commonlie commit.
But I would faine learne when honor firſt came to be meaſured with words, for
from the beginning it was not ſo. Caeſar was often called to his face theefe,
and dronkard, without any further matter; and the liberty of inuectiues, which

great perſonages vſed one againſt an other, as it began, ſo it ended with words.
And ſo I thinke our lie might too, for I take him that returneth the lie, and ſo
letteth it reſt vntill further proofe, to haue as great aduantage in the reputation
of honor, as the former that firſt gaue the diſgrace.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XX.
               
                  Cicero ſendeth to Caeſar, at whoſe comming
the ſiege was raiſed, and the Galles
ouerthrowne.
               
               
                  AT length Cicero found meanes, by a Gall to aduertiſe Caeſar
of the danger wherein he was: who ſpeedily haſted with two
legions to giue him ſuccour; the Neruij vnderſtanding of
Caeſars approach, forſooke the ſiege and went to meet him.
Caeſar finding the enemy to be 60000. ſtrong, and himſelfe
not to haue aboue 7000. men, incamped himſelfe in a place of
aduantage; and ſought by counterfeiting feare, to draw the
enemy to come and aſſault his campe, which he handled with
that dexteritie, that the Galles came vp vnto him, with a full aſſurance of victory:
but Caeſar ſending out two ſallies at two ſeueral gates of the campe, ouerthrew the
greateſt part of them, and diſpoſſeſt the reſt of their armes; and ſo ended that war.
               FINIS.
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
            
         
      
   