
      
         
            
            Weepe with Ioy.
            A Lamentation, for the loſſe of our late Soueraigne Lady Queene ELIZABETH, with ioy and exultation for our High and Mightie Prince, King IAMES, her lineall and lawfull Succeſſor.
            
               THe Thracians euer wept when any were borne; Heraclitus alwayes wept while he liued; Hezekiah began to weepe when he ſhould die: ſo that it may be ſaid of all worldly ioyes, They are mixed with weeping, as it was ſaide of the Iewes, Their wine was mixed with water, Iſay. 1. 23.
            
            He that weepes in meaſure, is like a Chriſtian, he that weepes without meaſure, is like an Heathen; he that cannot weepe at all, is like a Stone; the very heauens are ſaid to weepe when men cannot: and if the godly weepe for the miſeries of this life, the wicked had neede to weepe for the miſeries to come, Iam. 5. 1.
            
            To weepe for com-miſeration, as Iob did, to behold the miſeries of others, Iob 30. 25. is fraternall. To weepe of contrition, as Peter did for his owne ſins, is penitentiall. To weepe for loue, as Dauid did for the loſſe of Ionathan: or for griefe, as Rachel did for the death of her children, Math. 2. 18. or for ioy, as Ioſeph did at the ſight of Iacob, Gen. 46. 29. is naturall: but to weepe for oſtentation, as many Mourners did, Ier. 9. 18. or for diſſimulation, as Delilah did, Iudg. 16. or for deſperation, as Iudas did, is hypocriticall.
            
               Weepe.
               
                  WHen Nero died, it is reported, the people reioyced: but when Moſes died, it is ſaid, that all the children of Iſrael wept, Deut. 34. 8. and no maruell: for the one was a cruel and tyrannicall Ruler, and the other was a milde and mercifull Gouernor: and men do commonly weepe for thoſe they loue, and not for thoſe they hate: therefore when Chriſt wept for LaZarus, Loe (ſaith the Iewes) how he loued him, Iohn 11. 36.
               
               Who can call to minde the life of our late ſoueraigne Lady Queene Elizabeth, that cannot lament the loſſe of ſo vertuous a Prince; the Vine bleedeth when the Branch is cut, the Turtle mourneth when ſhe is left alone: then what ſhall the body do when the head is gone? Such as did loue and honour her life, cannot but weepe and deplore her death; her Actions being ſo glorious when ſhe liued, her diſſolution muſt needes be grieuous when ſhe died.
               This moſt gratious Prince, which liued a Woman, Virgine, and Queene, to the wonder of all the world, which was a preſident of pietie and humilitie to all Princes, which was a patterne of lenitie and mercie to all her people, which was an Example of loue and patience to all her enemies: who can not but lament the loſſe of ſo loyall a Lady?
               This moſt royall and godly Prince, which ſucceeded the Crowne after Queene Mary, as Hezekiah did after Ahaz, 2. Kings 16. did not onely ſuppreſſe all ſuperſtition, but planted true religion in her Land, ſhewing her ſelfe more mercifull to malefactors to reclaime them to the word of God, then her predeceſſor did to the Martires that ſuffered for profeſſing the word: and therefore who cannot weepe for the loſſe of ſo religious a Lady?
               This moſt loyall and proſperous Prince, which poſſeſſed peace in England longer then Salomon did in Iſrael: had her Land fenced, not onely with walls of wood, as Gretia was againſt Zerxes, Herodotus in Polymnia, but with walls of braſſe and yron againſt all outward hoſtilitie, that it might be ſaid of Engliſhmen as of the Iſraelites, Euery one dwelt without feare vnder his owne vine, 1. Kings 4. 25. For our Nation, vnder her Regiment, did floriſh in peace and plentie, as the land of Canaan flowed with milke and hony: and therefore who cannot weepe for the loſſe of ſo peaceable a Prince?
               When the people wept for Chriſt, he willed them to weepe for themſelues, Luke 23. And ſo, though we mourne for her Maieſtie, let vs weepe for our ſelues, conſidering the cauſe of alteration of Princes is imputed to the ſinnes of the ſubiects, according to that ſaying of Salomon, For the tranſgreſſion of the people there are many Princes, Prouerbs 28. 2. For what hath this precious word and peace effected in vs, ſeeing for the moſt part, we are content to be but Chriſtians in our tongues, though we be Atheiſts in our hearts, and farre worſe then Heathens in our liues?
            
            
               Ioy.
               
                  THe Iewes at their funeralls did vſe melodie, Math. 9. 23. becauſe they tooke Death to be an end of miſerie, and therefore as Martial obſerueth in the Swanne, Cantatur cygnus funeris ipſe ſui, he ſingeth alittle before he dieth; euen ſo it is noted in the children of God, they reioyce when they are ready to die, Acts 5. 41. becauſe indeede, all people, yea all Princes are but pilgrimes vpon earth, and their beſt habitation is in heauen. The departure of our godly Prince, though it be dolorous, in reſpect of her ſubiects, it ought to be ioyfull, in regard of her ſelfe: for ſhe hath left an earthly Kingdome, to poſſeſſe an heauenly Kingdome; and inſteede of a crowne of Gold ſhe hath put on a crowne of Glory: then what cauſe haue we to weepe, ſeeing ſhe is partaker of ſo vnſpeakeable Ioy, but rather, as the ſcripture teacheth vs, to reioyce with thoſe that reioyce, Rom. 12. 15. Let this ſuffice for our comfort, Though death hath ſeized of her Highneſſe Body, the Angels receiued her bleſſed Soule, and the world poſſeſſeth her glorious Name.
               If we reade the ſcriptures, we ſhall find, that amongſt all the Kings of Iſrael, King Salomon raigned longeſt; and if you reade the Chronicles, you ſhall find, that amongſt all the Kings and Princes of England, Queene Elizabeth raigned longeſt, ſauing one: yet was there neuer Prince more malitiouſly beſet with treaſon then her Maieſtie, nor any Prince more miraculouſly protected by Gods mercie: for he did, not onely protect her from vntimely dangers and deaths, but he did protract her dayes to the naturall courſe of declining, for ſhee died (as it was ſaid of Dauid, 1. Chro. 29. 28.) in a good age, ful of dayes, riches, and honor; for which we haue great cauſe to ioy.
               God for our ſinnes might iuſtly haue made the heauens braſſe ouer our heads, and the earth yron vnder our feete, and ſo haue conſtrained vs, as the people of Samaria did in extreamitie, not onely to eate dung, but their children, 2. Kings 6. But ſee how mercifully God hath dealt by vs; he hath taken away our Prince in a time of plentie, to take away all occaſions of murmuring and mutinies amongſt vs, whereunto many are ſubiect, if they be but preſſed with alittle ſcarſitie: and though the Iſraelites liued diſorderly when their Gouernours were gone, Iudg. 17. 6. yet, contrary to the expectation of many, our people haue liued very orderly and ciuilly ſince the taking away of our Queene, for which we haue great cauſe to ioy.
               To conclude, when God tooke away Iehoſhaphat from the Throne, and Iehoram came to the Crowne, there was great cauſe of calamitie, becauſe he maintained Idolatry, 2. Chro. 21. but when Dauid died and Salomon was inſtalled, there was continuance of ioy, becauſe he continued true religion as his fathers did before. And ſo, though God hath taken away Queene Elizabeth our late and louing Nurce-mother, yet the ſucceeding of that mightie and godly Prince, King Iames, our new and renowned Nurce-father, doeth giue vs exceeding cauſe of ioy: inſomuch, as the ſucceſſion of the latter, is a mittigation of ſorrow for the former. And as the Proclamation was read and receiued with great applauſe of the people, ſo his Coronation will be as ioyfull as euer was Salomons, when the earth rang with the ſound of the ſubiects, in ſigne of exultation and exceeding Ioy, 1. Kings 1. 40. God make vs thankefull for ſo worthy a Prince; and himſelfe ioyfull of ſo vnworthy a People.
            
         
      
      
         
            Printed at London by V. S. for Edmund Mutton, dwelling in Pater-noſter-Row, at the ſigne of the Huntſ-man. 1603.
         
      
   