
      
         
            
            
            The picture of the vnfortunate gentleman, Sir Geruis Eluies Knight. late leiftenant of his Maieſties Tower of London.
            
               
            
            
               Behold him aright whoſe office & eſtate,
               Vnwiſely manag'd, made him vnfortunate:
               And whoſe flattring hopes of popular grace,
               Rob'd him of life, fauoures dignity, and place.
               Yet let the worſt of him thus much conceait,
               A foe to him ſelfe, in ſtriuing to be great:
               Worſhipfull by birth, deborare and kind,
               Perfect in all, but the purpoſe of minde.
               Thorough which, he vainely ayming ouer hye,
               Deceaiued him ſelfe and won blame thereby:
               For in thinking to better his degree,
               Fortune betrayd him with falſe hopes we ſee.
               The golden meanes was not his harts content,
               Nor countrey life, with quiet ſlumbers ſpent:
               But watchful cares, and charges of eſtate,
               The onely aymes his hart made leuell at.
               So climing vp to dignity & fame,
               Forgot what daungers dwelt about the ſame:
               But ſeated on the top of Fortunes mount,
               He little thought ſo ſoone to giue account,
               Of his amiſſe: and deeds of ſecret ſin;
               Of which by law he was found guillty in.
               And being caſt, as Iuſtice had ordain'd,
               His ſoule for heauenly mercy ſtill complain'd:
               And ſo with true repentance leauing earth,
               Tooke patiently his iuſt deſerued death.
               Reſt then in peace on Sions holy hill,
               Perſwaſions trayn'd thee vnto this curſed ill:
               Which if to it thou neuer had'ſt giuen conſent,
               Thy dayes had beene in gracious maner ſpent.
            
         
      
      
         
            Printed at London in the Black-Friers, by Paul Boulenger. 1615.
         
      
   