
      
         
            
            
               
               THE BOKE NAmed the Gouernour, deuyſed by ſyr Thomas Elyot knight. ❧
            
            1534
         
         
            
            
            The proheme of Thomas Elyot knyghte vnto the moſt noble & victorious prynce kyng Henry the eight kyng of Englande and Fraunce, defender of the true faythe, and lorde of Irelande.
            
               
                  I LATE CONSYDERYNGE (moſte excellent prince and myn onely redoubted ſouerayne lorde) my duetie, that I owe to my naturall countrey, with my faith alſo of alligeance and othe, wherwith I am double bound vnto your maieſtie, more ouer thaccompte that I haue to render for that one lytel talent deliuered to me, to employe (as I ſuppoſe) to the increaſe of vertue, I am (as god iuge me) violētly ſtyred to deuulgate or ſet forth ſome part of my ſtudy, truſtynge therby to acquite me of my dueties to god, your highnes, & this my countrey. Wherfore taking comfort & boldnes, partly of your graces moſt beneuolent inclination towarde the vniuerſall weale of your ſubiectes, partly inflamed with zeale, I haue nowe enterpriſed to deſcribe in our vulgar tunge, the forme of a iuſte publike weale: whiche matter I haue gathered, as well of the ſayinges of moſt noble autors (grekes

and latyns) as by myn owne experience: I beinge continually trayned in ſome dayely affaires of the publike weale of this your moſt noble realme almoſte from my childehode. Which attemptate is nat of preſumption to teache any perſon, I my ſelf hauyng moſt nede of teaching: But only to the intent that men, which wyl be ſtudious about the weale publike, may find the thing therto expedient cōpendiouſly writen. And for as moche as this preſent boke treateth of the education of them, that hereafter may be demed worthy to be gouernours of the publike weale vnder your highnes (which Plato affirmeth to be the fyrſte and chiefe parte of a publyke weale, Salomon ſaying alſo, where gouernours be nat, the people ſhall fal into ruine.) I therfore haue named it the Gouernour, & do now dedicate it vnto your highnes as the fyrſte fruites of my ſtudy: verily truſtinge that your moſte excellent wyſedome wylle therein eſteme my loyall harte and diligent endeuour, by the example of Artaxerxes, the noble kyng of Perſia: who reiected nat the pore huſband man, which offred to hym his homely handes full of cleane water, but mooſte graciouſly receiued it with thankes, eſtemynge the preſente nat after the value, but rather to the wyll of the gyuer. Semblably kinge

Alexaunder retayned with hym the poete Cherilus honourably, for wrytyng his hiſtorie, all though that the poete was but of a ſmalle eſtimation: whiche that prince did nat for lacke of iugement, he beinge of excellent lernyng, as diſciple to Aryſtotell: but to thentent that his liberalite emploied on Cherilus, ſhoulde animate or gyue courage to others moch better lernid, to contende with hym in a ſemblable enterpriſe. And if, moſte vertuous prince, I may perceyue your hyghnes to be herewith pleaſed, I ſhall ſoone after (god gyuynge me quietnes) preſent your grace with the reſidue of my ſtudy & labours. Wherein your highnes ſhall wel perceiue, that I nothing eſteme ſoo moche in this worlde, as youre royall aſtate (my moſt dere ſouerayn lorde, and the publyke weale of my cuntrey) proteſtynge vnto your excellent maieſtie, that where I cōmende herin any one vertue, or diſprayſe any one vyce, I meane the general deſcription of thone and thother, without any other particular mening to the reproche of any one perſone: to the whiche proteſtation I am now driuen through the malignitie of this preſent tyme, all diſpoſed to malicious detraction. Wherfore I moſt humbly beſeche your highnes, to dayne to be patrone and defendour of this lyttelle

warke, agayne the aſſaultes of maligne interpretours: whiche fayle nat to rente and deface the renoume of writers, they theym ſelfes beinge in nothynge to the publyque weale profitable: whiche is by no man ſoner perceyued, than by your highnes, beinge bothe in wyſedome and very nobilitie equall to the moſt excellent princis, whom I beſeche god ye maye ſurmounte in longe lyfe and perfecte felicitie.
            Amen.
         
         
            
               ¶ The Chapyters conteyned in the fyrſte boke.
               THe ſignification of a publyke weale, and why it is called in latine Reſpublica. Cap. 1. fol. 1.
               That one ſouerayne gouernour ought to be in a publike weale, & what damage hath happened by lackyng one ſoueraygne gouernour. Cap. ii. fo. 6.
               That in a publyque weale oughte to be inferiour gouernours calledde magiſtrates. cap. 3. fol. 13.
               The education or forme of bringing vp the childe of a gentyll man, whiche is to haue auctoritie in the publike weale. ca. 4. fo. 15.
               The order of lernynge before the chylde cometh to thage of .vii. yeres. cap. v. fo. 17.
               Whan a tutour ſhuld be prouided, and what

ſhall app ertayne to his office. Ca. vi. fo. 19.
               In what wyſe muſike maye be vnto a noble man neceſſary. cap. 7. fol. 20.
               That it is commendable in a gentyl manne to paynte or carue exactely, yf nature doo therto induce him. Cap. 8. fo. 23.
               What exacte diligence ſhulde be in choſing of mayſters. Cap. ix. fo. 26.
               what order ſhulde be in lernyng, & whiche autours ſhulde be firſt radde. Ca. x. fo. 28.
               The mooſte neceſſarie ſtudies ſuccedynge the leſſon of Poetes. cap. xi. fo. 33.
               why gentylmenne in this preſente tyme be nat equall in doctrine to the auncient noble menne. Cap. xii. fol. 40.
               The ſeconde and thyrde decaye of lernynge. Cap. xiii. fo. 43.
               How the ſtudentes in the lawes of this realme maye take excellent cōmoditie by the leſſons of ſondry doctrines. ca. xiiii. fo. 50.
               The cauſes why in Englande be fewe perfecte ſchole maiſters. Ca. xv. fo. 56.
               Of ſondry fourmes of exercyſe neceſſarie for a gentylman. Cap. xvi. fol. 57.
               Exerciſes wherof cometh both recreation and profyte. Cap. xvii. fo. 59.
               The auncient huntyng of grekes Romaynes and Perſians. cap. xviii. fo. 62.
               That all daunſynge is nat to be reproued. Cap. xix. fol. 67.
               
                  
The fyrſt begynnyng of daunſyng, and the olde eſtimation thereof. Ca. xx. fo. 69.
               wherfore in the good order of daunſynge a man and a womanne doo daunſe togither. Cap. xxi. fo. 77.
               Howe daunſynge maye be an introduction into the fyrſte moralle vertue called Prudence. cap. xxii. fo. 79.
               Of prouidence & induſtrie. cap. xxiii. fo. 81.
               Of circumſpection. ca. xxiiii. fol. 83.
               Of election, experience, and modeſtye. cap. 25. 86.
               Of other exercyſes, whyche moderatelye vſed, be to euery aſtate of manne expediente. ca. xxvi. fol. 88.
               That ſhotyng in a longe bowe is principall of all other exerciſes. cap. xxvii. fo. 91.
            
            
               ¶ The chapiters conteyned in the ſeconde boke.
               VVhat thynge he that is elected to be a gouernor of a publike weale ought to premeditate. cap. pri. fo. 94.
               what maieſtie is. ca. ii. fo. 96.
               Of apparaile belongynge to a gouernour or great counſaylour. ca. iii. fo. 101.
               what very nobilitie is. cap. iiii. fo. 103.
               Of affabilitie & the vtilite therof. ca. v. 106.
               How noble a vertue placabilite is. ca. vi. 111.
               
                  
That a gouernour ought to be mercyfulle, and the dyuerſytie betwene mercye and vayne pitie. cap. vii. fo. 116.
               The three principalle partes of Humanitie. cap. viii. fol. 121.
               Of what excellēce beneuolēce is. ca. ix. 122.
               Of beneficence & liberalitie. cap. x. fo. 130.
               The true definition of amitie, and betwene what perſons it hapneth. cap. xi. fo. 132.
               The wonderfull hiſtorie of Titus and Giſyppus, wherein is the ymage of perfecte amitie. cap. xii. fol. 136.
               The diuiſyon of Ingratitude and the dyſprayſe therof. cap. xiii. fo. 152.
               The election of frendes, and the diuerſitie of flatterers. cap. xiiii. fo. 154.
            
            
               ¶ The chapiters conteyned in the thyrde boke.
               OF the moſte excellent vertue named Iuſtyce. capi. i. fol. 158.
               The fyrſte parte of Iuſtyce diſtrybutyfe. cap. ii. fo. 159.
               The thre notable councelles of Reaſone, ſocietie, and knowledge. cap. iii. fo. 163.
               Of Fraude and Deccite, whiche be agayn Iuſtice. Cap. iiii fol. 167.
               That Iuſtyce oughte to be betwene ennemyes. cap. v. fol. 170.
               
                  
Of fayth called in latin Fides. ca. vi. fo. 171
               Of promyſe and couenaunte, and of what importaunce othes were in olde tyme. Capitul. vii. fol. 178.
               Of the noble vertue Fortytude, and the two extremities therof audacitie and timeroſytie. Cap. viii. fol. 181.
               In what actes fortitude is. Cap. ix. fo. 184.
               Of peynefulneſſe a companyon of Fortitude. Cap. x. fo. 185.
               Of the fayre vertue pacience, and the true defynition therof. Cap. xi. fol. 188.
               Of pacience in ſuſteynynge wronges and rebukes. Cap. xii. fo. 189.
               Of repulſe or hynderaunce of promotion. Capi. xiii. fol. 190.
               Of magnanimitie, whiche maye be named valiaunt courage. Cap. xiiii. fo. 193.
               Of obſtinacie, a familyar vice folowynge magnanimitie. Cap. xv. fo. 196.
               Of a perilloꝰ vice called ābition. xvi. fo. eo.
               The trewe ſignifycation of abſtinence and contynence. Cap. xvii. fol. 199.
               Examples of Contynence gyuen by noble menne Cap. xviii. fol. 202.
               Of cōſtance called alſo ſtabilite. C. xix. 204
               The trewe ſygnification of Temperaunce Cap. xx. fol. 207.
               Of moderation a ſpyce of Temperaunce. Cap. xxi. fol. 208.
               
                  
Of Moderation in diete called ſobrietie. Ca. xxii. fo. 211.
               Of ſapience & the definitiō therof .xxiii. 215.
               The trewe ſygnification of vnderſtādyng. Cap. xxiiii. fol. 222.
               Of experience precedynge our tyme with a defence of hyſtories. Ca. xxv. fo. 226.
               The experience neceſſarie for the perſone of euery gouernour. Cap. xxv. fo. 230.
               Of detraction & the image therof made by Apelles the noble paynter. Ca. xxvi. 233.
               Of conſultation & Counſayle, and in what forme they ought to be vſed. ca. xxvii. 235.
               The principal conſiderations to be in euery conſultation. Cap. xxviii. fo. 237.
               The ſecond conſideration with the cōcluſyon of this warke. Cap. xix. fol. 239.
            
         
         
            Tabula Alphabetica.
            
               ABſteining frō rewardis. 199
               Adoleſcency. fol. 103.
               
                  Alexāds muſike. 21.
               Alexaunders crueltie. foli. 108.
               Amitie. fo. 121.
               Ambition. 198.
               Archa federis. 74.
               Arte of Rhetoricke in motyng. 53.
               Audacitie. 182.
               Ancient robes. 104.
               Arundell a hors. 62.
            
            
               B
               Bee. fol. 7.
               Beneuolēce. 121. 126
               Beneficence. 130.
               A Braule in

daunſynge. fo. 80.
               Bucephal a hors. 61
            
            
               C
               Cāpus Martius. 61.
               Cardes. fol. 91.
               Celeritie, or quickneſſe. fol. 80.
               Ceremonies. fo. 162.
               Cheſſe. fol. 91.
               Charitie. 121. 125.
               Ciuile warres. fo. 11.
               Comedies. 47.
               Cōmodities that do happē by aduancemēt of good mē. 191.
               Choribantes. 69.
               Ceſars tyranny. 108.
               Continence. 204.
               Confydence. 206.
               Conſtaunce egall to Juſtyce. 205.
               Coſmographie, and the cōmodities ther of. fol. 35.
               Conſideration. 82.
               Conſideration in giuynge. 130.
               Coūſaylours diſers. fol. 90.
               Coūcellors. 163. 238
               Crueltie. 113. 116.
               Churches materiall and ornamentis. 161.
               Curates. 69.
               Courage. 193.
               Couetiſe. 198.
               Conſideration of go uernours. 95.
               Conſultation. 235.
               Coūcel. 235. 137. 238
               Counſell proued by iii. thynges. 236.
            
            
               D
               Dammage enſuynge lacke of lybertie of ſpeche. 109.
               Decay of archers. 93
               Decii and theyr auowe. 105.
               Defence with weapons. fol. 61.
               Deuotion. 160.
               Dimocratia. fo. 6.
               Dioniſe the tiran. 18.
               Diſcretion. 87.
               Diſobedience. 95.
            
            
               E
               Education of noble wyttes. fo. 15.
               England diuided. 11.
               
                  
Election. 86.
               Eloquence. 44. 4
                     •
                  .
               Epiſtol of kyng 
                     ••
                  ilip to Ariſtotle. 
                     ••
                  .
               Eſops fables. eodē.
               Aequalitie in ſowles and corporalle ſubſtaunce. fo. 164.
               Eſtimation of diſers folio. 90.
               Experyence or execution. fol. 86.
               Exerciſes for preſer uyng of helth. 92.
            
            
               F
               Faithfull tutor. 177.
               Faithefulnes in ſubiectes. 177.
               Faith neglectid. 172
               Feſtina lente. 81.
               Fidelitie. 172. 173.
               Flatterie. 156.
               Flatterers. 157.
               Form of an oth. 179.
               Frendes. 157.
               Fraude and deceite. 167. 168. 169.
               Frugalitie. 212.
               Frendeſhyppe. 150. 151. 154.
            
            
               G
               Gentilmen. fo. 14.
               Gelo kynge of Sycyle. 72.
               Gentyll coūtenance. fol. 107.
               Gouernāce. 166. 181
               Gouerneſſe. 15.
            
            
               H
               Honour. fol. 4. 159.
               Hiſtories. 36. 175. 226. 227.
               Haukynge. 66.
               Hangynges & plate mete for a noble mā. fol. 102.
               Haut coūtenāce. 106
               Henry beau clerke, kynge of England. folio. 40.
               Honeſtie. 170.
               Huntyng of Perſyans, Grekes, & Romans. 64. 65, 66.
            
            
               I
               Infancy. 16.
               Inſtruction in infancye. fol. 18. 28.
               Induſtry. 82.
               Idelneſſe. 88.
               
                  
Iuell cuſtome. 9.
               Ire, or wrath. 111.
               Iuſtyce. 123. 158. 167.
               Iniuurie. fo. 167.
               Incontinence. 208.
               Image of detraction. fol. 134.
            
            
               K
               Kynges of Romaynes. fo. 10.
               Kyng Edgar. 12.
               Kynge Dauid daunfynge openly. 74.
               Kyng Henry the ſeuenth. fo. 85.
               Kyng Xerxes. 89.
               Kyng Codrus. 125.
               Kyndeneſſe in beaſtes. 152.
               Knowlege. 162. 164 166.
            
            
               L
               Leonidas. fo. 20.
               Liſippus. 25.
               Liberalitie. 88. 121.
               Libertie in ſpeking. 108. 109.
               Liberall man. 122. 130. 131.
               Loyaltie. 173. 174.
               Logike. fol. 33.
               Loue. 121.
            
            
               M
               Maieſtie. fo. 10.
               Mans qualities. 78.
               Maturitie. 80.
               Manſuetude. 88.
               Mercye ſhewed by Auguſtus to his en nemye. 117.
               Mercy and gentylneſſe. fo. 119.
               Modeſtie. 87. 88.
               Morall philoſophy. folio. 38.
               Moderatiō of wrath fol. 210.
               Muſis. 219.
            
            
               N
               Nources how they ſhuld be choſen. 15.
               Name of a kīg whēs it proceded. 158.
               Nobilitie. 103. 104.
               Numa kynge of Romayns. ibidem.
               Nygardſhyp. 213.
            
            
               O
               Office of a tutor. 20.
               
                  
Occupation. 12.
               Opinion. 189,
               Oportunitie. 86.
               Order. fol. 2.
               Othes. 179.
            
            
               P
               Pacience. 125. 189. 191.
               Paterne of a perfite gouernour. 187.
               Peinfulnes in herig controuerſies. 187.
               Periurie. 179.
               Playeng at dice. 89.
               Phenix Achilles tu tour. fol. 19.
               Plebs. fol. 2.
               Plebeii. codem.
               Poetes. 33. 46.
               Policie of Anniball. 186.
               Placabilitie. 114.
               Populus. fo. 1.
               Profyte. eodem.
               Prouidence. 81.
               Prudence. 79.
               Prodigalite. 131. 132.
               Princis of Grece. 9.
               Publike weale. 1.
               Publike. ibidē.
               Publike & cōmune. 2
               Preparation of gouernours. 95.
               Promiſe. 181.
               Puiſſaunce lackinge beneuolence. 129.
            
            
               R
               Reſpublica. fol. 1.
               Rennynge. 59.
               Rhetorike. 33.
               Reprinſe in daunſynge. fo. 83.
               Remedy againſt impacience. 190.
               Rydinge and vauntynge of horſes. 61.
            
            
               S
               Sapience word is to gouernours. 96.
               Sapience. 221.
               Sharpeneſſe of Juſtyce. fol. 123.
               Science. fo. 221.
               Singles in dāſing. 81
               Simplicitie. 169.
               Shotyng in a longe bowe. 92.
               Sobrietie. 212.
               Slowneſſe. 80.
               Swymmyng. 61.
            
            
               
               T
               Tables. fol. 90.
               Table to hange in gouernours chambres. fol. 98.
               Temperaunce. 208.
               Tenyſe play. 92.
               Timoroſitie. 182.
               Tullies officis. 38.
               Treatorie of Lucyfer. fol. 89.
               Tolleration of Fortune good & bad. 109
               Treaſon. 170.
               Truſte. 173.
            
            
               U
               Uayne pitie. 119.
               Uertue. 130.
               Uengeance for treaſon. 178.
               Ualiant mā. 182. 184
               Underſtandyng. 4.
               Wraſtlynge. 59.
            
            FINIS TABVLAE.
         
      
      
         
            
            THE FYRSTE BOKE.
            
               ¶The ſignification of a publyke weale, and why it is called in latyn Reſpublica.
               
               
                  A Publike weale is in ſondry wiſe defined by philoſophers, but knowing by experience, that the often repetition of any thyng of graue or ſadde importaunce, wyll be tedyous to the reders of this warke, who perchaunce for the more parte haue not ben trayned in lerning conteynynge ſemblable matter: I haue compiled one definition out of many, in as compendious fourme, as my poore wytte can deuyſe: truſtynge that in thoſe fewe wordes the true ſignification of a publike wele ſhall euidently appere, to them whom reaſon can ſatiſfie.
               ¶A publike weale is a body lyuyng, compact publike weale. or made of ſōdry aſtates and degrees of men, whiche is dyſpoſed by the order of equytye, and gouerned by the rule and moderation of reaſon. In the latin tongue it is called Reſpublica, of the whiche the Reſpublica. worde Res, hath dyuers ſignifications, and dothe not onely betoken that, that is called a thynge, whiche is diſtinct from a perſon,

but alſo ſignyfieth aſtate, condityon, ſubſtaunce, and profyt.
               ¶In our olde vulgare, profytte is called profytte. weale. And it is called a welthy countray, wherin is al thynge that is profitable: And he is a welthy man, that is ryche in money and ſubſtaunce. Publyke (as Uarro ſayth) publyke. is diriuied of people: which in latyn is called Populus. wherfore it ſemeth, that men haue ben longe abuſed, in calling Rempublicam, a commune weale. And they which do ſuppoſe it ſo to be called, for that, that euery thynge ſhoulde be to all men in commune, without diſcrepaunce of any aſtate or condition, be therto moued more by ſenſualite, than by any good reaſon or inclination to humanitie. And that ſhall ſo one appere vnto them, that wyll be ſatyſfied eyther with auctoritie, or with naturall order and example.
               ¶Fyrſte the propre and trewe ſignificatiō of the wordes, Publike and Comune, whiche be borowed of the latin tongue, for the inſufficiencie of our owne langage, ſhal ſufficiently declare the blyndenes of them, which haue hitherto holden and meynteyned the ſayde opinions. As I haue ſayde, publyke toke his begynnynge of people, whiche in latin is Populus: in which worde populus. is conteyned, all the inhabytantes of a realme

or citie, of what aſtate or condition ſo euer they be.
               
                  ¶Plebs in engliſſhe, is called the communaltie, plebs. whiche ſignifieth onely the multytude, wherin be conteyned the baſe & vulgare inhabitantes, not auaunced to any honour or dignitie: whiche is alſo vſed in our dayly comunication. for in the citie of London, and other cities, they that be none aldermen, or ſheriffes, be called communers. And in the countrey, at a ſeſſions, or other aſſembly, if no gentyll men be there at, the ſayinge is, that there was none but the cō
                  munaltye, whiche proueth, in myne opinion, that Plebs in latine, is in engliſhe communaltie: and Plebeij be communers. plebeii.
               
               ¶And conſequentely there maye appere, lyke diuerſitie to be in engliſhe, betwene a publyke weale, and a commune weale, as publyke & commune. ſhuld be in latyn, betwene Res publica, and Res plebeia. And after that ſignification, if there ſhulde be a commune weale, eyther the communers onely muſt be welthy, and the gentyl and noble men, nedy and myſerable: orelles excludyng gentylitie, al men muſte be of one degre and ſort, and a newe name prouided. For as moche as Plebs, in latine, and comminers in englyſhe, be wordes onely made for the diſcrepance of degrees, wherof procedeth Ordre: whiche Ordre.
                  
in thynges, as well naturall as ſupernaturall, hath euer hadde ſuche a preeminence, that therby the incomprehenſible maieſtye of god, as it were by a bryght leme of a torche or candell, is declared to the blynd inhabitantes of this worlde.
               ¶ More ouer, take awaye Order from all thynges, what ſhulde than remayne? Certes nothynge finally, excepte ſomme man wolde imagine eftſones, Chaos, whiche of ſome is expounded, a confuſe mixture. Chaos.
               
               ¶ Alſo where there is any lacke of order, nedes muſte be perpetuall conflycte. And in thynges, ſubiecte to nature, no thyng of hym ſelfe onely maye be nouryſſhed: but whan he hath diſtroyed that, wherwith he doth participate, by the order of his creation, he hym ſelfe of neceſſitie muſte than peryſſhe, wherof enſueth vniuerſall dyſſolution.
               ¶ But nowe to proue by example of thoſe thynges, that be within the coumpaſſe of mannes knowlege, of what eſtimation Ordre is, not onely among men, but alſo with god, all be it his wyſedome, bountye, and magnificence, can be with no tonge or pen ſufficiently expreſſed. Hath not he ſette degrees & aſtates in all his glorious warkes?
               ¶ Fyrſte in his heuenly miniſters, whom, as the Churche affyrmethe, he hath conſtituted

to be in dyuers degrees, called hierarches. Alſo Chriſte ſayth, by his euangeliſt, that in the houſe of his father (whiche is god) be many manſions.
               ¶ But to treate of that, whiche by naturall Elemenꝭ. vnderſtandynge, maye be comprehended, Beholde the foure elementes, wherof the body of man is compacte, how they be ſet in theyr places, called ſpheres, higher or lower, accordynge to the ſouerayntie of theyr natures: that is to ſaye, the fier, as the moſte pure elemente, hauinge in it nothyng, that is corruptible, in his place, is hygheſte, and aboue other elementes.
               The ayer, whiche next to the fyre, is moſt pure in ſubſtance, is in the ſeconde ſphere or place: The water, whiche is ſomewhat conſolidate, and approcheth to corruptiō, is nexte vnto the erthe: The erthe, which is of ſubſtance gros and ponderous, is ſet, of all elementes, moſte loweſt.
               ¶ Beholde alſo the order, that god hath put generally in all his creatures, begynnynge at the mooſte inferiour or baſe, and aſſendynge vpwarde: he made not onely herbes to garniſhe the erthe, but alſo trees of a more eminent ſtature, than herbes: and yet in the one and the other, be degrees of qualities, ſome pleaſante to beholde, ſome delycate or good in taſte, other holſome

and medycinable, ſome commodyous and neceſſarie. Semblably in byrdes, beaſtis, and fyſſhes, ſome be good for the ſuſtināce of man: ſome beare thynges profytable to ſondry vſes: other be apte to occupation and laboure: in dyuerſe is ſtrengthe and fierſenes onely: in many is both ſtrengthe and commoditie: ſome other ſerue for pleſure: none of them hath all theſe qualities: fewe haue the more parte or many, ſpecially beautie, ſtrengthe, and profytte. But where any is founde, that hath many of the ſayde propreties, he is more ſette by, than al the other, and by that eſtimation, the ordre of his place and degree euidentely appereth. So that euery kynde of trees, herbes, birdes, beaſtis, and fiſſhes, beſide their diuerſitie of fourmes, haue (as who ſayth) a peculyer dyſpoſityon, appropered vnto them, by god theyr creatour: ſo that in euery thynge is ordre, and withoute ordre maye be nothyng ſtable or permanent. And it maye not be called Ordre, excepte it do conteyne in it, degrees, high and baſe, accordyng to the meryte or eſtimation of the thynge that is ordered.
               ¶ Nowe to returne to the aſtate of manne kynde, for whoſe vſe, all the ſayde creatures were ordeyned of god, and alſo excelleth them all, by prerogatiue of knowlege

& wyſedome. It ſemeth, that in hym ſhulde be no leſſe prouidence of god declared, thā in the inferiour creatures: but rather with a more perfect ordre and dyſpoſition. And therfore it appereth, that god gyueth not to euery man like gyftes of grace, or of nature, but to ſome more, to ſome leſſe, as it lyketh his diuine maieſtie. Ne they be not in cōmune (as fantaſtical foles wolde haue all thynges) nor one man hath not all vertues, and good qualities. vuderſtā
                     dynge.
               
               ¶ Not with ſtandynge, for as moch as vnderſtandynge, is the moſte excellent gyfte, that man can receyue in his creation, wherby he doth approche moſte nyghe vnto the ſimilitude of god, whiche vnderſtandynge is the pryncipall parte of the ſoule: It is therfore congruent, and accordynge, that as one excelleth an other, in that influence, as therby beinge nexte to the ſimilitude of his maker: ſo ſhulde the aſtate of his perſon be auaunced in degree, or place, where vnderſtandynge maye profyt, which is alſo dyſtrybuted into ſondry vſes, faculties, and offices, neceſſary for the lyuynge and gouernaunce of mankynd. And lyke as the angels, whiche be moſt feruent in contemplation, be hygheſt exalted in glorye (after the opinion of holy doctours) and alſo the fire, which is the moſt pure of elementes,

and alſo dothe clarifie the other inferioure elemētes, is deputed to the higheſt ſphere or place. So in this worlde, they, whiche excelle other in this influence of vnderſtan dynge, and do imploye it to the deteynyng of other within the boundes of reaſon, and ſhewe them, howe to prouide for theyr neceſſarie lyuynge: ſuche ought to be ſette in a more highe place, than the reſidue, where they maye ſe, and alſo be ſene, that by the beames of theyr excellente wytte, ſhewed throughe the glaſſe of auctoritie, other of inferiour vnderſtanding, maye be directed to the way of vertu and cōmodious liuing.
               ¶ And vnto men of ſuche vertue, by verye equitie apperteineth Honour, as theyr iuſt Honour. rewarde and duetie: which by other mens labours, muſte alſo be meynteyned, accordynge to theyr merytes. For as moche as the ſayde perſons, excellinge in knowlege, wherby other be gouerned: be mynyſters for the only profite and cōmoditie of them, whiche haue not equall vnderſtandynge: where they, whiche do exerciſe artificiall ſcience, or corporall labour, do not trauaile for theyr ſuperiours only, but alſo for their owne neceſſitie. So the houſeband man fedethe hym ſelfe and the clothe maker: the clothe maker apparayleth him ſelf and the houſebande: they bothe ſocour other artificers:

other artificers them: they and other artificers, them that be gouernours.
               ¶ But they that be gouernours (as I before ſayde) nothyng do acquire by the ſayd influence of knowlege for theyr owne neceſſities, but do imploye all the powers of theyr wyttes, and theyr dylygence, to the only preſeruation of other their inferiours. Amonge whiche inferiours alſo behoueth to be a diſpoſition and order, accordyng to reaſon: that is to ſay, that the ſlouthfull or idell perſon, do not participate with hym, that is induſtrious, and taketh peyne, wher by the fruites of his labours, ſhulde be diminiſſhed, wherin ſhulde be none equalite, but therof ſhulde procede dyſcourage, and finally dyſolution, for lacke of prouyſion. Wherfore it can none other wiſe ſtand with reaſon, but that the aſtate of the perſon in preeminence of lyuynge, ſhuld be eſtemed, with his vnderſtandynge, labour, and policie: where vnto muſte be added an augmentation of honour and ſubſtaunce, whiche nat only impreſſeth a reuerence, wherof procedeth due obedience amonge ſubiectes, but alſo inflameth men, naturally inclined to idelnes, or ſenſual appetite, to coueyte lyke fortune, and for that cauſe, to diſ poſe them to ſtudy or occupation.
               ¶ Howe to conclude my fyrſte aſſertion or

argument. where al thing is comune, there lacketh ordre: and where ordre lackethe, there all thynge is odyouſe, and vncomly. And that haue we in dayly experience. for the pannes and pottes, garnyſſhe well the ketchyn, and yet ſhuld they be to the chā
                  bre none ornamente. Alſo the beddes, teſtars and pyllowes, beſeme not the hall, no more than the carpettes and kuſſhines become the ſtable. Semblably the potter and tynker, onely perfecte in theyr crafte, ſhal littell do, in the miniſtration of Iuſtice. A ploughman or carter, ſhall make but a foble anſwere to an ambaſſadour. Alſo a wayuer or fuller, ſhuld be an vnmete capitaine of an army, or in any other office of a gouernour. wherfore to conclude, it is only a publyke weale, where, lyke as god hath dyſpoſed the ſayde influence of vnderſtandynge, is alſo appoynted degrees and places, accordynge to the excellencie therof, and therto alſo wolde be ſubſtance conuenient, and neceſſarie, for the ornamente of the ſame: which alſo impreſſeth a reuerence and due obedience to the vulgare people or cōmunaltie, and without that, it can be no more ſayde, that there is a publike weale, than it may be affyrmed, that a houſe without his propre and neceſſary ornamentes, is well and ſufficiently furnyſhed.
            
            
               
               That one ſoueraygne gouernour ought to be in a publyke weale. And what damage hath happened, wher a multytude hath hadde equall auctorite without any ſoueraygne. Cap. ii.
               
                  LYke as to a caſtel or fortres, ſuffiſeth one owner or ſoueraign, and where any mo be of like power and authorite, ſeldome cometh the warke to perfection, or beynge all redy made, where the one diligently ouerſeth, & the other neglecteth, in that conten tion all is ſubuerted and cōmeth to ruyne, In ſēblable wiſe doth a publike weale, that hath no chiefe gouernours than one. Example we may take of the Grekes, amonge whom in diuers cities, weare diuers fourmes of publyke weales, gouerned by multitudes: wherin one was moſte tollerable, where the gouernance and rule was alway permitted to them, which excelled in vertue, and was in the Greke tonge called Ariſtocratia, in latin Optimorum Potentia, in engliſhe, the rule of mē of beſt diſpoſition. which the Chebanes of lōg time obſerued.
               ¶ An other publyque weale was amonge the Athenienſis, where equalytye was of

aſtate among the people, and only by their hole conſente, theyr Citie and dominions were gouerned: whiche moughte well be called a Monſter with many heedes, nor neuer it was certayne or ſtable, and often tymes they baniſſhed, or ſlewe the beſt cytezins, whiche by theyr vertue and wyſe dome, had moſte profited to the publyke weale. This maner of gouernaunce was called in greke Dimocratia, in latin, Popularis 
                  Dimocratia. 
                  potentia: in englyſſhe, the rule of the comminaltie. Of theſe two gouernances, none may be ſufficient. For in the firſt, whiche conſiſteth of good men, vertue is not ſo conſtant in a multitude, but that ſome beynge ones in authoritie, be incenſed with glorie, ſome with ambition, other with couetiſe and deſyre of treaſure or poſſeſſions, wherby they falle in to contention, and fynally, where any achiueth the ſuperioritie, the hole gouernāce is reduced vnto a fewe in nombre, whiche fearynge the multitude, and theyr mutabilitie, to the intent to kepe them in drede to rebell, ruleth by terrour, and crueltie, thynkynge therby, to kepe them ſelfe in ſuertie. Not withſtandynge, rancour coarcted, and longe deteyned in a narowe roume, at the laſt braſteth out, with intollerable vyolence, and bryngeth all to confuſion. For the power, that is practized,

to the hurte of many, can not continue.
               ¶The popular aſtate, if it any thyng do vary from equalitie of ſubſtāce, or eſtimation, or that the multitude of people, haue ouer moch libertie, of neceſſitie one of theſe inconueniēces muſt happen, either tyranny, where he that is to moch in fauor, wold be eleuate, & ſuffre none equalitie, or elles in to the rage of a communaltie, whiche of al rules is mooſte to be feared. For lyke as the communes, if they fele ſome ſeueritie, doo humbly ſerue and obeye, ſo where they imbracing a lycence, refuſe to be brydeled, do flyng and plunge: and if they ones throwe downe theyr gouernour, they order euery thyng without iuſtice, only with vengeāce and crueltie, and with incomparable diffycultie, and vnneth by any wyſedome, be pacified and brought again into order. Wherfore vndoutedly, the beſt and the moſt ſure gouernāce, is by one King or Prince, whiche ruleth onely for the weale of his people: and that maner of guernaunce is beſte approued, and hath longeſt continued, and is moſte auncient. For who can denye, but that all thynge in heuen and erth is gouerned by one god, by one perpetual ordre, by one prouidēce? One ſonne ruleth ouer the day, and one Moone ouer the nyght. And to deſcende downe to the erthe.
               
                  
¶In a lyttell beaſt, whiche of all other is moſt to be maruayled at, I meane the Bee, Bee. is lefte to man by nature, as it ſemeth, a perpetuall figure, of a iuſte guernaunce or rule: who haue among them, one principal Bee, for theyr gouernour, whiche excelleth all other in greatenes, yet hath he no pricke or ſtinge, but in hym is more knowlege, thanne in the reſidue. For if the daye folowynge ſhall be fayre and dry, and that the bees may iſſue out of theyr ſtalles, with out peryl of raine, or vehemēt wynd, in the mornynge erely he callethe them, makyng a noyſe, as it were the ſowne of a hurne, or a trumpet, and with that, al the reſidue pre pare them to labour, and fleeth abrode, gatherynge nothynge, but that ſhall be ſwete and profitable, all thoughe they ſytte often tymes on herbes, and other thynges, that be venemous and ſtynkynge. The capirayne hym ſelfe, laboureth not for his ſuſtynaunce, but all the other for hym: he onely ſeeth, that if any drane, or other vnprofitable bee, entreth in to the hyue, and conſumeth the honye, gathered by other, that he be immediately expelled from that company. And whanne there is a nother nombre of bees encreaſed, they ſemblably haue alſo a capitayne, whiche be not ſuffered to continue with the other. Wherfore

this newe company, gathered in a ſwarme, hauynge theyr capitayne among them, and enuir onynge hym, to preſerue hym frome harme, iſſue forthe, ſekinge a newe habitation: which they finde in ſome tree, except with ſome pleaſaunt noyſe, they be alured and conueyed vnto an other hyue.
               ¶I ſuppoſe, who ſeriouſly beholdeth this example, and hath any commendable wyt, ſhall therof gather moche mattyer, to the fourmyng of a publike weale. But bicauſe I may not be long therin, conſiderynge my purpoſe, I wolde the reder herof, if he be lerned, ſhuld repayre to the Georgikes of Uirgile, or to Plini, or Collumella, where he ſhal fynde the example more ample, and better declared.
               ¶And if any deſyreth to haue the gouernaunce of one perſon, proued by hiſtories, let him firſte reſorte to the holy ſcripture, where he ſhall fynde, that almyghtye god cōmanded Moiſes onely, to brynge his elected Moiſes. people out of captiuitie, giuinge only to hym that auctoritie, without appoyntinge to hym any other aſſyſtence of equall power or dignitie: except in the meſſage to kynge Pharao, wherin Aaron, rather as a Raron. miniſter thanne a companyon, wente with Moiſes. But only Moiſes conducted the people throughe the redde ſee, he onely

gouerned them forty yeres in deſerte. And bycauſe Dathan and Abiron diſdayned his Dathan & Abiron. rule, and coueted to be equal with him, the erthe opened, and fyre iſſued out, and ſwalowed them in, with all their holle familye, and confederates, to the nōbre of. 14700. And all thoughe Hietro, Moſes father in lawe, counſailed hym to depart his importable The counſayle of Hietro. labours, in continual iugemētes, vnto the wiſe men, that were in his company: he nat withſtandyng, ſtyll retayned the ſouerayntie, by goddis commandement, vntyll a litle before he died, he reſigned it to Ioſue, aſſigned by god to be ruler after hym.
               ¶ Semblably after the deth of Ioſue, by Ioſue ſucceſſour to Moiſes. the ſpace of. 246. yeres, ſucceded frome tyme to tyme, one ruler amōge the Iewes, which was choſen for his excellēcy in vertue, and ſpecilly iuſtyce. Wherfore he was called the iuge, vntil the Iſraelites deſired of almyghty god, to let them haue a kyng, as other people hadde: who appointed to them Saul, to be theyr kyng, who exceded Saul. all other in ſtature.
               ¶ And ſo ſucceſſiuely one kyng gouerned all the people of Iſrael, vnto the tyme of Roboaz, ſonne of the noble kyng Salomō: who beinge vnlyke to his father in wyſedome, Roboaz practiſed tyrannye amonge his people. Wherfore. ix. partes of theym, whiche

they called Tribus, forſoke hym, & elected Hieroboam, late ſeruaunt to Salomon, to be theyr kynge, onely the .x. parte remaynynge with Roboaz. And ſo in that realme were contynually two kynges, vntyll the kynge of Mede had depopulate the countrey, and brought the people in captiuytie to the citie of Babylon: So that durynge the tyme, that two kynges rayned ouer the iewes, was euer continuall batayle among them ſelfes: where if one kynge had alway rayned lyke to Dauid or Salomon, of lyke lyhode the countrey ſhuld not ſo ſone haue ben brought in captiuitie.
               ¶ Alſo in the tyme of the Machabeis, as longe as they had but one buſſhop, which was theyr ruler, and was in the ſtede of a prynce, they valiantly reſyſted the gentils: and as well the Romaynes, than great lordes of the worlde, as Perſians, and diuers other realmes, deſyred to haue with them amitie and aliaunce: and al the inhabitantes of that countrey, lyued in great weale and quietnes. But after that by ſymonye and ambition, there happened to be two byſſhoppes, whiche deuyded theyr authoryties, and alſo the Romaynes had deuyded the realme of Iudea to foure princes, called Tetrarchas, and alſo conſtytuted a Romayne capitayne or preſidente ouer them:

amonge the heddes there neuer ceſſed to be ſedition, and perpetual dyſcorde: wherby at the laſte the people was dyſtroyed, and the countrey brought to deſolation and horrible barrennes.
               ¶ The Grekes, which were aſſembled to reuenge the reproche of Menelaus, that he toke of the Troians by the rauiſſhynge of Helene his wyfe, dydde not they by one aſſente electe Agamemnon to be theyr emperour or capitayne: obeying him as their ſouerayne, durynge the ſiege of Troy? all though that they had diuers excellent princis, not only equal to hym, but alſo excellyng Prynces of Grece. hym, as in prowes Achilles, and Aiax Thelemonion: in wyſedome Neſtor, and Uliſſes, and his owne brother, Menelaus: to whom they moughte haue gyuen equal auctoritie with Agamēnon: but thoſe wiſe princes conſidered, that without a generall capitayne, ſo many perſons as were there, of dyuers realmes gathered together, ſhulde be by no meanes well gouerned wherfore Homere calleth Agamēnon Agsmemnon. the ſhepeherd of peple. They rather were cōtented to be vnder one mans obedience, than ſeuerally to vſe theyr auctorites, or to ioyne in one power and dignite, whereby at the laſt ſhulde haue ſourded diſcention amonge the people, they beinge ſeperately

enclined towarde theyr naturall ſouerayne lorde: as it appered in the particuler contention, that was betwene Achilles and Agamemnon for theyr cōcubines, where Achilles, renouncynge the obedience, that he with all other pryncis had before promyſed, at the batayle fyrſte enterpryſed agaynſte the Troyans. For at that tyme no lyttell murmur, and ſedition was moued in the hoſte of the grekes, whiche not withſtandynge was wonderfully pacified: and the armie vnſcatered, by the maieſtie of Agamemnon, Maieſtie? ioynynge to him counſailours, Neſtor and the wytty Uliſſes. Neſtor. Uliſſes.
               
               ¶ But to retourne agayne. Athenes and other cities of Grece, whan they had abā
                  doned kynges, and concluded to lyue as it were in a cōmunaltie, whiche abuſifly they called equality: howe long tyme did any of them continue in peace? Yea what vacation had they from the warres? or what noble man had they, which auaunced the honour and weale of theyr Citie, whom they did not baniſhe or ſlee in priſon? Surely it ſhall appere to them, that wyll rede Plutarche, or Emilius probus, in the lyues of Milciades, Cimon, Themiſtocles, Ariſtides, and diuerſe other noble & valiant capitaynes: which is to longe here to reherſe. Kynges in Rome.
               
               ¶ In lyke wyſe the Romaynes, durynge

the time that they were vnder kinges, whiche was by the ſpace of. 144. yeres, were well gouerned, nor neuer was among them diſcorde or ſedition: But after that by the perſuatiō of Brutus and Colatinus, whoſe wyfe (Lucretia) was rauyſhed by the ſōne Lucrecia. of Tarquine, kynge of Romaynes, not only the ſayde Tarquine and all his poſterytie, were exiled out of Rome for euer, but alſo it was finally determyned amonge the people, that neuer after they wolde haue a kynge reygne ouer them. Conſequently the cōmunaltie more and more encroched a lycence, and at the laſt compelled the Senate to ſuffre them to choſe yerely amonge them, gouernours of theyr owne aſtate & condition, whō they called Trybunes: vnder Tribunes. whom they reſceyued ſuche audacytie and power, that they finally opteyned the higheſt auctoritie in the publyke weale: in ſo moche, that oftentymes they dyd repele the actes of the Senate, and to thoſe Tribunes mought a man appele from the Senate, or any other offyce or dygnitie. But what came therof in concluſion? Surelye whan there was any difficulte warre imminent, they were conſtrayned to electe one ſoueraygne and chyefe of all other, whom they named Dictator, as it were commaunder, Dictator. from whom it was not laufull for any

man to appele. But bycauſe there appered to be in hym the pryſtinate auctorytie and maieſtie of a kynge, they wolde no longer ſuffre hym to continue in that dignitie, than by the ſpace of .vi. monethes, excepte he than reſigned it, and by the conſente of the people eftſones dyd reſume it. Finally vntyl Octauius Auguſtus had diſtroied Anthony, and alſo Brutus: and finiſhed al the Ciuile warres (that were ſo called bycauſe Ciuile▪ warres they were betwene the ſame ſelfe Romayn citezins) the citie of Rome was neuer long quiete from factions or ſedicions amonge the people. And if the nobles of Rome had not bē men of excellent lerning, wiſedome, and proweſſe, & that the Senate, the moſte noble counſaylle in all the worlde, whiche was fyrſte ordeyned by Romulus, and encreaſed by Tullus hoſtilius, the thyrd king of Romaynes, had not continued, and with great difficultie reteyned theyr auctoritie, I ſuppoſe verylye, that the Citie of Rome had ben vtterly deſolate ſone after the expellynge of Tarquine. And if it hadde ben efteſones renewed, it ſhulde haue ben twē
                  ty tymes dyſtroyed, before the tyme that Auguſtus raygned: ſo moch diſcorde was euer in the citie, for lacke of one gouernor.
               ¶ But what nede we to ſerche ſo fer from vs, ſens we haue ſufficiente examples nere

vnto vs? Beholde the aſtate of Florence Florence and Gene. and Gene, noble cities of Italy, what calamite haue they both ſuſtened by their own factions, for lacke of a cōtinuall gouernor?
               ¶ Ferrare, and the moſte excellent cite of Ferraria. Ueniſe, hauynge dukes, ſeldome ſuffre damage, excepte it happen by outwarde hoſtilitie.
               ¶ We haue alſo an example at home, which is moſte neceſſary to be noted.
               ¶ After that the Saxons by treaſone had Englande. deuided. expelled out of England the Britons, whiche were the auncient inhabitauntes, this realme was deuyded into ſondry regions, or kyngedomes. O what myſery was the people than in? O howe this moſte noble Iſle of the worlde was decerpt and rent in pieces? the people purſued and hunted like wolfes, or other beaſtes ſauage: none induſtry auayled, no ſtrength defended, noo ryches profited. Who wolde then haue deſired to haue ben rather a man than a dog, whan men eyther with ſwerde or with hū
                  gre peryſhed, hauynge no profite or ſuſtynance of theyr owne corne or catell, which by mutuall warre was contynually diſtroyed? Yet the dogges, eyther takynge that that men coulde not quietly come by, or fedynge on the deed bodies, whiche on euery parte lay ſcatered plentouſly, dyd ſatiſfye

theyr hungre.
               ¶ Where fynde ye any good lawes, that at that tyme were made and vſed? or any cō
                  mendable monumente, of any ſcyence or crafte in this realme occupied? ſuche iniquitie ſemeth to be than, that by the multitude of ſoueraygne gouernours, all thynges hadde ben brought to confuſion, if the noble kinge Edgar hadde not reduced the Kynge Edgar. monarchie to his priſtinate aſtate and fygure: whiche brought to paſſe, reaſon was reuiued, & people came to cōformitie, & the realme began to take comfort, and to ſhewe ſome viſage of a publike weale: and ſo (lauded be god) haue continued: but not being alway in like aſtate or condition. Al be it, it is not to be diſpaired, but that the king our ſoueraigne lorde nowe reignynge, and this realme, alway hauyng one prince, like vnto his highnes, equall to the auncient princis, in vertue and courage, it ſhall be reduced (god ſo dyſpoſyng) vnto a publyke weale, excellynge al other in preeminence of vertue, and abundance of thynges neceſſary.
               ¶ But for as moche as I do wel perceiue, that to wryte of the offyce or duetye of a ſoueraygne gouernoure or prynce, farre excedeth the compaſſe of my lernyng, holye ſcrypture affyrmynge, that the hartes of pryncis be in goddes owne handes

and dyſpoſition: I wyll therfore kepe my penne within the ſpace that is diſcrybed to me, by the thre noble mayſters, reaſon, lernynge, and experience. And by theyr enſeignement or teachynge, I wyl ordynately treate of the two partes of a publyke weale, wherof the one ſhall be named due Due adminiſtration. adminiſtration, the other neceſſary occupation, whiche ſhall be deuyded in to two volumes. In the fyrſte ſhal be comprehended the beſt fourme of education or bryngyng Occupation. vp of noble chyldren, from their natiuitie, in ſuche maner as they may be foūd worthy, and alſo able to be gouernours of a publyke weale. The ſecond volume, whiche god grauntinge me quietnes and libertie of mynde, I wyl ſhortly after ſend forth: It ſhall conteyne all the remenant, whiche I canne eyther by lernynge or experience fynde apte to the perfection of a iuſte publyke weale: in the whiche, I ſhall ſo endeuour my ſelfe, that al men, of what aſtate or condition ſo euer they be, ſhall fynde therin occaſion to be alway vertuouſly occupyed: and not without pleaſure, if they be not of the ſcholes of Ariſtippus, or Apicius: of whom the one ſuppoſed felycitye to be onely in lechery, the other in delycate fedyng and glotony. From whoſe ſharpe talons and cruell tethe, I beſeche all gentyll

reders to defende theſe warkes, whiche for theyr commodite is onely compiled,
            
            
               That in a publyke weale ought to be inferiour gouernours called Magiſtrates, whiche ſhal be appoynted or choſen by the ſoueraygne gouernour. Capitulo. iii.
               
                  THere be bothe reaſons and examples vndoutedly infynite, wherby maye be proued, that there can be no perfect publyke weale, without one capitall and ſoueraygne gouernour, whiche maye longe endure or continue. But ſens one mortal man can not haue knowlege of all thynges done in a realme or large dominion, and at one time diſcuſſe all controuerſics, refourme all tranſgresſions, and exploite al cōſultations, cō
                  cluded as well for outwarde, as inwarde affayres: it is expedyente, and alſo nedefull, that vnder the capytall gouernour be ſondry meane auctorities, as it were aydynge hym in the dyſtribution of iuſtice in ſondry partes of a huge multitude: wherby his labours being leuigate, and made more tollerable, he ſhal gouerne with the better aduyſe, and conſequently with a more perfecte gouernaunce. And as Ieſus Sirach, Sapi. vi.
                  
ſaythe, The multitude of wyſe men is the welth of the world. They which haue ſuch auctorities to them cōmitted, may be called inferiour gouernours, hauynge reſpect to theyr office or duetie, wherin is alſo a repreſentation of gouernance: All be it they be named in latine Magiſtratus. And herafter I intende to cal them Magiſtrates, lac kynge an other more conuenient worde in englyſhe: but that wyll I do in the ſeconde parte of this warke, where I purpoſe to write of theyr ſondry offices, or effectes of theyr auctoritie.
               ¶ But for as moche as in this parte, I intende to write of theyr education and vertue in maners, whiche they haue in cōmune with princes, in as moche as therby they ſhal as wel by examble, as by auctoritie, ordre wel them, whiche by theyr capital gouernour, ſhall be to theyr rule commytted, I may without anoyance of any man, name them gouernours at this tyme, apropryatinge to the ſoueraygnes, names of kinges and princis, ſens of a longe cuſtome, theſe names, in cōmune fourme of ſpeking, be in a higher preemynence and eſtimation than gouernours. That in euery cōmune weale ought to be a great nombre of ſuche maner of perſons, it is partly proued in the chaptre next before written, where I haue ſpoken

of the commoditie of ordre.
               ¶ Alſo reaſon and commune experyence playnely declare, that where the dominion is large and populouſe, there it is conuenient, that a prynce haue many inferiour gouernours: whiche be named of Ariſtotel, Politic. li. iiii. his eies, eares, handes, and legges: whiche if they be of the beſte ſorte (as he further more ſaith) it ſemeth impoſsible, a coū tre not to be wel gouerned by good lawes. And excepte excellent vertue and lernyng do inhable a manne of the baſe aſtate of the communaltie, to be thought of al men worthy to be ſo moche auaunced, els ſuche gouernours wold be choſen out of that aſtate of men, whiche be called worſhypfull, if amonge them may be founden a ſufficiente nombre, ornate with vertue and wyſedome, mete for ſuche purpoſe: and that for ſondry cauſes.
               ¶ Fyrſte it is of good congruence, that the ſuperiours in condition or hauiour, ſhulde haue alſo preeminence in adminiſtration, if they be not inferiour to other in vertue.
               Alſo they, hauynge of theyr owne reuennues certayne, wherby they haue competente ſubſtaunce to lyue withoute takynge rewardes: it is lykely, that they wyll not be ſo deſirous of lucre (wherof may be engendred corruption) as they, whiche haue

very lytteli or nothynge ſo certayne.
               ¶ More ouer, where vertue is in a gentyl man, it is commonly myxte with more ſufferance, Gentilmē. more affabilitie, and myldenes, thā for the more parte it is in a perſon rurall or of a very baſe lynage, and whan it hapneth other wyſe, it is to be accompted lothſome and monſtruous.
               ¶ Furthermore, where the perſon is worſhyppefull, his gouernaunce, though it be ſharpe, is to the people more tollerable, and they therwith the leſſe grutche or be dyſobedient.
               ¶ Alſo ſuche menne hauynge ſubſtaunce in goodes by certeyne and ſtable poſſeſſions, which they may aporcionate to theyr owne lyuynge and bryngynge vp of theyr chyldren in lernynge and vertues, maye (if nature repugne not) cauſe them to be ſoo inſtructed and furnyſhed towarde the adminiſtration of a publyke weale, that a poore mannes ſonne, onely by his naturall wytte, without other helpe, neuer or ſeldome may atteyne to the lyke. Towarde the whiche inſtruction, I haue prepared this warke.
            
            
               The education or fourme of bryngynge vp of the chylde of a gentylman, whiche is to haue auctoritie in a publyke weale. Capitulo. iiii.
               
                  
                  FOr as moche as al noble authors do conclude, and commune experyence proueth, that where the gouernours of realmes & cities be founden adourned with vertues, and do employ theyr ſtudye and mynde to the publyke weale, as well to the augmentation ther of, as to the eſtablyſſhynge and longe continuaunce of the ſame: there a publyke weale muſte nedes be both honorable and welthy. To the entēt to declare, howe ſuche perſonages may be prepared, I wyll vſe the polycie of a wyſe and cunnynge gardener, who purpoſynge to haue Education of noble wyttes. in his gardeine a fyne and preciouſe herbe, that ſhulde be to hym and all other, repayrynge therto, excellentely cōmodious, or pleaſaunt: he wyll ſyrſte ſerche througheout his gardeyne, where he can fynde the moſte melowe and fertyle erth, and therin wyl he put the ſede of the herbe to growe, and be noryſſhed, and in moſte diligent wiſe attende, that no weede be ſuffred to growe or approche nyghe vnto it: and to the ende it maye thryue the faſter, as ſcone as the fourme of an herbe ones appereth, he wyl ſet a veſſel of water by it, in ſuche wyſe, that it may contynually diſtyll on the rote ſwete dropes: and as it ſpryngeth in ſtalke, vnder

ſette it with ſome thinge, that it breake not, and alway kepe it clene from wedes. Like ordre wyll I enſue, in the fourmynge the gentyll wyttes of noble mennes chyldren, who frome the wombes of theyr mother, ſhalbe made propiſe or apte to the gouernaunce of a publyke weale.
               ¶ Fyrſte they, vnto whom the bringing vp of ſuche chyldren apperteyneth, ought againſte Norcies▪ howe they oughte to be choſen. the tyme that theyr mother ſhall be of them deliuered, to be ſure of a nouriſe, whiche ſhoulde be of no ſeruile condicion, or vice notable. For as ſome auncient writers do ſuppoſe, oftē times the childe ſouketh the vice of his nouriſe, with the mylke ofher pappe. And alſo obſerue, that ſhe be of mature or ripe age, not vnder. xx. yeres, or aboue. xxx. her body alſo beynge clene from all ſykenes, or deformyte, and hauing her complection mooſte of the ryghte and pure ſanguine. For as moche as the mylke therof cominge, excelleth all other, bothe in ſwetenes and ſubſtance.
               ¶ More ouer, to the nouryſe ſhuld be appoynted A gonernes or drynoryce an other womanne, of approued vertue, dyſcretion, and grauitie, who ſhal not ſuffre in the childes preſcence to be ſhewed any acte or tatche dyſhoneſte, or any wantō or vnclene worde to be ſpoken. And

for that cauſe all menne, excepte phiſytyons onely, ſhulde be excluded and kepte out of the nurſery.
               ¶ Perchaunce ſomme wyll ſcorne me, for that I am ſoo ſeryous, ſayinge that there is no ſuche damage to be fered in an infant, who for tenderneſſe of yeres, hath not the vnderſtandynge, to decerne good from yuell. And yet no manne wyll deny, but in that innocency he wyldecerne mylke from butter, and breadde from pappe, and er he canne ſpeake, he wyll with his hande or countenaunce ſygnyfie, which he deſyreth. And I veryly ſuppoſe, that in the braynes and hartes of yonge chyldren, whiche be membres ſpirytuall, whyles they be tender, and the lyttell ſlyppes of reaſon begin in theym to burgyne, there maye happe by yuell cuſtome, ſome peſtyferours dewe of vyce to perſe the ſayde membres, and infecte and corrupt the ſoft and tendre buddes, wherby the fruite maye growe wilde, and ſome tyme conteyne in it feruente and mortall poyſon, to the vtter deſtruction of a realme.
               ¶ And we haue in dayly experience, that Enfanc
                        •
                     e. lyttell infantes aſſaye to folowe, not onely the wordes, but alſo the faictes, and geſture of them, that be prouecte in yeres.

For we dayly here, to our greate heuynes, chyldren ſwere greatte othes, and ſpeake laſciuious and vnclene wordes, by the example of other, whom they here: wherat the leude parentes do reioice, ſone after, or in this worlde, orels where, to theyr gret peyne and tourmente. Contrary wyſe, we beholde ſome chyldren, knelynge in theyr game before images, and holdyng vp their lyttell whyte handes, moue theyr pratye mouthes, as they were prayeng: other goynge and ſyngyng, as it were in proceſſion. wherby they do expreſſe theyr dyſpoſition, to the imitation of thoſe thynges, be they good or yuel, which they vſually ſe or here. Wherfore not onely princis, but alſo all other chyldren, from theyr nuriſes pappes, are to be kepte diligently from the heryng or ſeinge of any viſe or yuell tache. And in continent, as ſone as they can ſpeake, it behoueth with moſt pleaſaunt allurynges, to inſtill in them ſwete maners and vertuouſe cuſtome.
               ¶ Alſo to prouide for them ſuche companions and play felowes, as ſhall not doo in theyr preſence any reprocheable acte, or ſpeake any vncleane word or othe, ne to ad uaunte theym with flattery, remembrynge theyr nobylytie, or any other lyke thynge, wherin they moughte glory: onles it be to

perſwade them to vertue, or to with drawe them from vice, in the remembring to them the danger of theyr yuell example. For noble men more greuouſly offend by theyr example, than by theyr dede. Yet often remē
                  braunce to them of theyr aſtate, maye happen to radicate in theyr hartes intollerable pryde, the moſte dangerous poyſon to noblenes. wherfore there is requyred to be there in moche cautele and ſobrenes.
            
            
               The ordre of lernynge, that a noble man ſhulde be trayned in, before he come to thaige of ſeuen yeres. Cap. v.
               
                  SOme olde auctours hold opinion, that before the age of ſeuen yeres, a chylde ſhulde not be inſtructed in letters, but thoſe wryters were eyther grekes or latines: amōg whom all doctryne and ſcyences were in theyr maternall tonges, by reaſon wherof they ſaued all that longe tyme, whiche at this dayes is ſpente in vnderſtandyng perfectely the greke or latyn. Wherfore it requireth nowe a longer tyme to the vnderſtandynge of bothe. Therfore that infelycitie, of our tyme and countrey compelleth vs to encroche ſomwhat vpon the yeres of

chyldren, and ſpecially of noble men, that they maye ſoner attayne to wyſedowe and grauitie, than priuate perſones: conſyderynge, as I haue ſayde, theyr charge and example, whiche aboue al thynges is moſt to be eſtemed. Not withſtandynge I wold not haue them inforced by violēce to lerne, but accordynge to the counſayle of Quintilian, to be ſwetely allured therto, with prayſes, and ſuche pratye gyftes as chyldren delyte in. And theyr fyrſte letters to be paynted or lymned in a pleaſaunt maner: wherein chyldren of gentyll courage haue moche delectation. And alſo there is noo better allectiue to noble wyttes, thanne to induce theym in to a contention with theyr inferiour companions: they ſomtyme purpoſely ſuffrynge the more noble chyldren to vainquy ſhe, and as it were gyuynge to them place and ſoueraintie, though in dede the inferiour chyldren haue more lernyng. But there can be nothyng more conueniēt, than by lytel and lyttel to trayne and exercyſe them in ſpekynge of latin: infourming them to knowe firſt the names in latin of al thynges that come in ſyghte, and to name all the parties of theyr bodyes: and giuing them ſome what that they couete or deſire in moſte gentyll maner, to teache theym to aſke it agayne in latin. And if by this meanes

they maye be induced to vnderſtande and ſpeake latyne, it ſhall afterwarde be leſſe grefe to them in a maner, to lerne any thing, where they vnderſtand the langage, wherin it is wrytten. And as touchynge grammer, there is at this day better introductions, and more facile, than euer before were made, concernynge as well greke as latine, if they be wyſely choſen.
               ¶ And it is no reproche to a noble manne, Inſtruction in infā
                     cie. to inſtructe his owne chyldren, or at the leaſte wayes, to examine them by the waye of dalyaunce or ſolace, conſyderynge that the emperoure Octauius Auguſtus, dyſdayned not to rede the warkes of Cicero, and Uirgile, to his chyldren and neuewes. And why ſhulde nat noble men rather ſoo do, thanne teache theyr chyldren howe at dyſe and cardes they maye connyngly leſe and conſume theyr owne treaſure and ſubſtaunce?
               ¶ More ouer, teachyng repreſenteth the auctorytie of a pyrnce. wherfore Dionyſe, Dioniſe the tirrāte king of Cicile, whan he was for tiranny expelled by his people, he came in to Italy, and there, in a commune ſchole taught grā mer: where with whan he was of his enemies embraided, & called a ſchole mayſter, he anſwered them, That although Sicilians had exiled hym, yet in deſpite of them

all he reigned: notynge therby the auctoritie that he hadde ouer his ſcholers. Alſo whan it was of hym demanded, what auailed hym Plato, or philoſophy, wherin he had ben ſtudious, he anſwered, That they cauſed hym to ſuſteyne aduerſitie paciently, and made his exile to be to hym more facile and eaſye. whiche courage and wyſedome conſidered of his peoble, they efteſones reſtored him vnto his realme and aſtate royal, where if he hadde procured agayne them hoſtilitie, or warres, or hadde returned into Sicile with any violence, I ſuppoſe the people wolde alway haue reſiſted and kepte hym in perpetuall exile: as the Romaynes dyd the proude kinge Tarquine, whoſe ſonne rauiſhed Lucrece. But to retourne to my purpoſe.
               ¶ It ſhall be expedient, that a noble mannes ſonne, in his infancye, haue with hym continually, only ſuche, as may accuſtome hym by lyttel and lyttel to ſpeake pure and elegant latyn. Semblably the nouriſes and other women aboute hym, if it be poſſyble, to do the ſame: or at the leaſte waye, that they ſpeke none engliſhe, but that, whiche is cleane, polite, perfectly, and articulately pronounced, omittynge no letter or ſyllable, as folyſhe women often tymes do of a wantonnes, wherby diuers noble menne,

and gentylmens chyldren (as I do at this daye knowe) haue atteyned corrupte and foule pronuntiation. This induſtry vſed in fourmynge lyttell infantes, who ſhall dout, but that they (not lackynge natural wytte) ſhall be apt to receyue lerninge, whan they come to mo yeres? And in this wyſe maye they be inſtructed, without any violence or inforſynge: vſynge the more parte of the tyme, vntyll they come to the aege of .vii. yeres, in ſuche dy ſportes as do apperteine to chyldren, wherin is no reſemblaunce or ſimilitude of vice.
            
            
               At what age a tutour ſhulde be prouyded, and what apperteyneth to his office to do. Capi. vi.
               
                  AFter a chylde is come to ſeuen yeres of age, I holde it expediente, that he be taken from the company of womē: ſauynge that he maye haue one yere or two at the moſt, an aunciente and ſad matrone attendynge on hym in his chaumbre, whiche ſhall not haue any yonge woman in her company: For though there be no perylle of offence in that tender and innocent age, yet in ſome chyldren nature is more proue to vice than

to vertue, and in the tender wittes be ſparkes of voluptuoſitie: whiche noriſſhed by any occaſion or obiecte, encreaſe often tymes in to ſo terrible a fyre, that therwith all vertue and reaſon is conſumed. wherfore to eſchewe that danger, the moſt ſure counſaylle is, to withdrawe hym from all company of womē, and to aſsigne vnto him a tutor, whiche ſhulde be an aunciente and worſhypfull man, in whom is approued to be moche gentilnes, myxte with grauitie, & as nyghe as can be ſuche one, as the child, by imitation folowynge, may growe to be excellente. And if he be alſo lerned, he is the more commendable,
               ¶ Pelcus the father of Achilles, committed the gouernaunce of his ſonne to Phenix, whiche was a ſtraunger borne: who as phenix Achilles tutor. well in ſpeakynge elegantely, as in doinge valyauntely, was mayſter to Achilles, as Homere ſayth.
               ¶ Howe moche profited it to kynge Philip, father to the great Alexander, that he was deliuered in hoſtage to the Thebanes Alexāder the great. Epaminō
                     das tutor to kynge philip. where he was kepte and brought vp vnder the gouernaunce of Epaminondas, a noble and valyaunte capytayne, of whom he receyued ſuche lernynge, as well in actes martiall, as in other lyberall ſciences, that he excelled al other kynges, that were before

his tyme in Grece: and fynally as wel by wyſedome as prowes, ſubdued all that countrey?
               ¶ Semblably he ordeyned for his ſonne Alexaunder a noble tutor, called Leonidas, Leonidas tutor to kynge Alexander. vnto whom for his wyſedome, humanytie, and lernyng, he commytted the rule and preemynence ouer all the maiſters and ſeruantes of Alexander. In whom not with ſtandynge was ſuche a famylier vyce, whiche Alexander apprehendynge in chyldhode, coulde neuer abandon, ſome ſuppoſe it to be fury and haſtynes, other ſuperfluous drynkynge of wyne, whiche of theym it were, it is a good warnynge for gentyll menne, to be the more ſeryous, inſerchyng not onelye for the vertues, but alſo for the vyces of theym, vnto whoſe tuityon and gouernaunce they wyll commytte theyr chyldren.
               ¶ The offyce of a tutor is fyrſte to knowe Office of a tutor. the nature of his pupil, that is to ſay, wher to he is moſte inclyned or dyſpoſed, and in what thing he ſetteth his moſt delectation or appetyte. If he be of nature curteiſe, piteouſe, and of a free and liberall harte, it is a pryncypall token of grace (as it is by all ſcripture determined) Than ſhal a wyſe tutor, purpoſely cōmende thoſe vertues, extolling alſo his pupil, for hauynge of them:

and therwith he ſhall declare them to be of al men moſt fortunate, whiche ſhal happen to haue ſuche a mayſter. And more ouer ſhall declare to hym, what honour, what loue, what commoditie ſhal happen to him by theſe vertues. And if any haue benne of dyſpoſytion contrary, than to expreſſe the enormities of theyr vice, with as moch deteſtation as maye be. And if any daunger haue therby enſued, mysfortune, or puniſhemente, to agreue it in ſuche wyſe, with ſoo vehement wordes, as the childe maye abhorre it, and feare the lyke aduenture.
            
            
               In what wyſe muſike may be to a noble man neceſſary: and what modeſtie ought to be therin. Cap. vii.
               
                  THe diſcretion of a tutor, conſiſteth in temperaunce: that is to ſaye, that he ſuffre not the child to be fatigate with continuall ſtudy or lernyng: wherwith the delycate and tender wytte maye be dulled or oppreſſed: but that there may be therwith entrelaſed and myxte, ſome pleaſaunte lernynge, and exerciſe, as playeng on inſtrumētes of muſike, whiche moderately vſed, and without diminution of honour, that is to ſay; without

wanton countenance and diſſolute geſture, is not to be contemned: For the noble kyng and prophete Dauid, kyng of Iſrael (whom almyghty god ſayd, he hadde choſen as a man accordyng to his harte or deſyre) duringe his lyfe, delyted in muſike: And with the ſwete harmony, that he made on his harpe, he cōſtrained the iuel ſpirite, that vexed kinge Saul, to forſake him, continuynge the tyme that he harped.
               ¶ The moſte noble and valiaunt princis of Grece often tymes, to recrete theyr ſpirites, and in augmentinge their courage, enbraced inſtrumentes muſicall.
               ¶ Thus dydde the valiant Achilles (Homere Achilles. Homerus. Iliades primo. ſayth) who after the ſharpe and vehement contention, betwene hym and Agamemnon, for the takynge away of his concubine: wherby he beinge ſet in a fury, had ſlayne Agamemnon, emperour of the grekes army, had not Pallas the goddes with drawen his hande. In whiche rage he all inflamed, departed with his people to his owne ſhyppes, that lay at rode, intendyng to haue retourned in to his countrey: but after he had taken to hym his harpe (wher on he hadde lerned to playe of Chiron the Chiron. Centaure, whiche alſo taughte hym feates of armes, with phyſicke and ſurgery) and playeng theron, had ſongen the geſtis and

actis martiall of the auncyente pryncis of Grece, as Hercules, Perſcus, Perithous, Theſeus, and his coſin Iaſō, and of diuers other of ſemblable value and proweſſe: he was therwith aſſwaged of his fury, and reduced in to his fyrſt aſtate of reaſon: in ſuche wiſe, that in redoubing his rage, & that there by ſhuld not remaine to him any note of reproche, he reteining his fiers & ſtourdy countenaunce, ſo tempered him ſelfe, in the enterteinemente and aunſwerynge the meſſagers, that came to hym from the reſidue of the Grekes, that they reputynge al that his fiers demeanour to be (as it were) a diuine maieſte, neuer embraided him with any inordinate wrath or fury.
               ¶ And therfore the great kynge Alexander, Alexanders muſyke. whan he had vainquiſhed Ilion, where ſome tyme was ſette the mooſte noble citie of Troye, beyng demaunded of one, if he wolde ſe the harpe of Paris Alexander, who rauiſſhed Helene, he there at gentilly ſimylynge, aunſwered, It was not the thynge that he moche deſyred, but had rather ſe the harpe of Achilles, wherto he ſange, not the illecebrous dilectatyons of Uenus, but the valyant actes and noble affaires of excellent princis.
               ¶ But in this commendation of muſyke, I wolde not be thought to allure noble men,

to haue ſoo moche delectation therin, that in playinge and ſyngynge onely, they ſhuld put theyr hole ſtudy and felicitie: As dyd Muſike reproueable. the epmerour Nero, whiche all a long ſomers day wolde ſyt in the Theatre (an opē 
                  Theatre. place where al the people of Rome beheld ſolemne actis and playes) and in the preſence of all the noble menne and ſenatours, wolde playe on his harpe and ſynge without ceſſynge. And if any manne hapned by longe ſitting to ſlepe, or by any other coū
                  tenance, to ſhewe hym ſelfe to be wery, he was ſodeynely bobbed on the face by the ſcruantes of Nero, for that purpoſe attendynge. Or if any perſon were perceiued to be abſent, or were ſene to laughe at the foly of the emperour, he was forth with accuſed, as it were of miſpriſion. Wherby the emperour founde occaſion to commyt him to priſon, or to put him to tortures. O what Muſyke miſerable. miſery was it, to be ſubiect to ſuche a minſtrell, in whoſe muſike was no melody but anguiſhe and dolour?
               ¶ It were therfore better, that no muſike were taught to a noble man, than by the exacte knowledge therof, he ſhuld haue therin inordinate delyte: and by that be illected to wantonnes, abandonynge grauitie and the neceſſary cure and office in the publike weale to hym commytted.
               
                  
¶ Kynge Philip, whan he harde that his Kynge Philipips wordes. to Alexā
                     der. ſonne Alexander dydde ſynge ſwetely and proprely, rebuked hym gentylly, ſayinge, But Alexander, be ye not aſhamed, that ye can ſynge ſo well and connyngly? wherby he mente, that the open profeſſion of that craft was but of a baſe eſtimation. And that it ſuffyſed a noble man, hauing therin knowlege, eyther to vſe it ſecretelye, for the refreſhynge of his wytte, whan he hath time of ſolace: orels onely herynge the contention of noble muſicyens, to gyue iugement in the excellēcie of theyr conninges. Theſe be the cauſes, wherento hauyng regarde, muſyke is not onely tollerable, but alſo cō
                  mendable. For as Ariſtotle ſayth: Muſike in the olde tyme was nombred amonge ſciences, for as moche as nature ſeketh not onely, howe to be in buſynes well occupyed, but alſo howe in quyetnes to be commendably dyſpoſed.
               ¶ And if the childe be of a perfect inclinatiō and towardnes to vertue, and very aptly Muſyke ꝓ fitable. diſpoſed to this ſcience, and rypely doth vnderſtand the reaſon and concordance of tunes, the tutors office ſhal be, to perſuade hym, to haue principally in remembraunce his aſtate, which maketh hym exempt from the lybertie of vſynge this ſcience in euery tyme and place: that is to ſay, that it onely

ſerueth for recreation, after tedious or laborious affaires. And to ſhewe hym, that a gentylman playinge or ſyngynge in a commune adyence, appayreth his eſtimation: The people forgettynge reuerence, whan they beholde him in ſymilitude of a cōmon ſeruaunt or mynſtrel. Yet notwithſtanding, he ſhal commende the perfecte vnderſtandynge of muſyke, declarynge howe neceſſary it is for the better attaining the knowlege of a publyke weale. which as I before ſayd, is made of an ordre of aſtates and degrees, and by reaſon therof conteyneth in it a perfect harmony: whiche he ſhall after warde more perfectly vnderſtand, whan he ſhal happē to rede the bokes of Plato and Ariſto. of publike weales: wherin be written dyuers examples of muſyke and gemetry. In this fourme may a wiſe and cyrcū
                  ſpecte tutor, adapte the pleaſant ſcience of muſike to a neceſſary & laudable purpoſe.
            
            
               That it is cōmendable in a gentyllman to paint and kerue exactly, if nature ther to doth induce hym. Cap. viii.
               IF the chylde be of nature inclyned (as many haue ben) to peynte with a pen, or to fourme images in ſtoone or tree: he ſhulde not be therfrom with drawen, or nature

be rebuked, whiche is to hym beniuolent: but puttynge one to hym, whiche is in that crafte, wherin he deliteth, moſt excellente, in vacant tymes from other more ſerious lernynge, he ſhulde be in the moſte pure wyſe enſtructed in payntynge or keruinge. And nowe per chance ſome enuious reder wyll here of take occaſyon to ſcorne me, ſayinge, that I hadde well hyed me, to make of a noble man, a maſon or peynter.
               And yet if eyther ambition or voluptuouſe idelnes wolde haue ſuffered that reder to haue ſene hiſtories, he ſhuld haue founden excellent princis, as wel in payntyng as in keruynge, equal to noble artificers: Suche were Claudius Citus, the ſonne of Uaſpaſian, Hadriane, both Antonines, and diuers other emperours and noble princis: whoſe warkes of longe tyme remayned in Rome and other cities, in ſuche places, where al men mought beholde them: as monumentes of theyr excellent wittes and vertuous occupation, in eſchewynge ofydelnes.
               ¶ And not without a neceſſary cauſe, princis were in theyr chyldhode ſo inſtructed: for it ſerued them afterwarde for deuyſing ofingynes for the warre: or for makynge them better, that be all redy deuyſed. For as Uitruuius (whiche writeth of buyldyng to the emperour Auguſtus) ſayth: Al turmentes

of warre, whiche we call ingyns, were fyrſte inuented by kynges or gouernours of hoſtes: or if they were deuyſed by other, they were by them made moche better.
               ¶ Alſo by the feate of portraiture or paintynge, a capitayne maye dyſcriue the coū
                  trey of his aduerſary, wherby he ſhall eſchewe the daungerous paſſages with his hoſte or nauie: alſo perceyue the placis of aduātage, the forme of embataylyng of his ennemyes, the ſituation of his campe, for his moſt ſuretie, the ſtrength or weakenes of the towne or fortreſſe, whiche he intendeth to aſſaulte. And that, whiche is moſte ſpecially to be conſidered, in viſitynge his owne dominions, he ſhall ſette them out in figure, in ſuche wyſe, that at his eie ſhal appere to hym, where he ſhal employ his ſtudy and treaſure, as well for the ſaufegarde of his countrey, as for the commodite and honour therof, hauynge at all times in his ſight the ſuretie and feblenes, auauncemēt and hyndrance of the ſame. And what pleſure and alſo vtilitie is it to a man, which in tendeth to edifie, hym ſelfe to expreſſe the fygure of the warke that he purpoſeth, accordynge as he hath conceyued it in his owne fantaſie, wherin by often amendinge and correcting, he fynally ſhall ſo perfecte

the warke vnto his purpoſe, that there ſhal neyther enſue any repentaunce, nor in the employment of his money he ſhall be by other dyſceyued.
               ¶ More ouer the feate of portrayture ſhal be an allectiue to euery other ſtudy or exerciſe. For the wit therto diſpoſed, ſhal alway coueite congruent matter, wherin it maye be occupyed, And whan he happeneth to rede or here any fable or hiſtory, forthwith he apprehendeth it more deſircuſly, and re teyneth it better than any other, that lacketh the ſayd fcate: by reaſon that he hath founde matter apte to his fantaſy. Fynally euery thynge that portraiture maye comprehend, wyll be to hym delectable to rede or here. And where the lyuely ſpirite, and that which is called the grace of the thing, is perfectely expreſſed, that thynge more perſwadeth and ſtereth the beholder, and ſoner inſtructeth hym, than the declaration in writynge or ſpeakyng doth the reder or hercr. Experiēce we haue ther of in lernynge of geometry, aſtronomy, and coſmogrophy, called in englyſſhe the diſcription of the worlde. In whiche ſtudies I dare affyrme, a man ſhal more profyte in one wike by figures and cartis, well and perfectely made, than he ſhall by the onely redyng or herynge the rules of that ſcyence, by the

ſpace of halfe a yere at the leaſte. Wherfore the late writers deſerue no ſmall commendation, which added to the autors of thoſe ſciences apt and propre figures.
               ¶ And he that is perfectely inſtructed in portrayture, and hapneth to rede any noble and excellent hiſtorie, wherby his courage is inflamed to the imitation of vertue, he forthwith taketh his pen or penſyl, and with a graue and ſubſtanciall ſtudy, gatherynge to hym al the partes of imagination, endeuoureth hym ſelfe to expreſſe lyuely, and (as I mought ſay) actually, in portraiture, not onely the faicte or affayre, but alſo the ſondry affectiōs of euery perſonage in the hiſtorie recited, whiche moughte in any wyſe appere or be perceyued in theyr viſage, countenance, or geſture: with lyke diligence, as Lyſippus made in metal king Liſippus. Alexander, fightynge and ſtruggling with a terrible lyon of incomparable magnitude and fierſenes: whom, after longe and dyfficulte batayle, with wonderfull ſtrengthe and cleane might, at the laſt he ouerthrewe and vainquiſhed. Wherin he ſoo expreſſed the ſimilitude of Alexander, and of his lordes ſtandinge about hym, that they all ſemed to lyue. Among whom the prowes of Alexander appered excellynge all other, the reſydue of his lordes after the value

and eſtimation of theyr courage, euery man ſet out in ſuche forwardnes, as they than ſemed more promte to the helpyng of their maiſter, that is to ſaye, one laſſe aferd than an other.
               ¶ Phidias the Athenienſe, whom all wryters Phidias. do commende, made of yuory the ſimu lachre or image of Iupiter, honoured by the gentiles, on the hyghe hille of Dlympus: whiche was done ſo excellently, that Pandenus, a counnynge paynter, therat admaruaylynge, required the craftis man, to ſhewe hym where he had the example, or paterne of ſo noble a warke. Than Phidias anſwered, that he had taken it out of thre verſes of Homere the poete: the ſentence wherof enſueth as well as my poore wytte can expreſſe it in engliſhe.
               
                  
                     Than Iupiter, the father of them all
                     Therto aſſented with his browes blacke,
                     Shaking his heare, & therwith dyd let fal
                     A coūtenāce, that made al heuē to quake.
                  
               
               ¶ Where it is to be noted, that Thetis the mother of Achilles, deſired Iupiter to incline his fauour to the part of the Troiās.
               ¶ Howe (as I haue before ſayd) I intend not by theſe examples, to make of a prynce or noble mannes ſonne a commune paynter or keruer, whiche ſhal preſent hym ſelfe openly, ſtained or embrued with ſondry colours,

or poudered with the duſte of ſtones that he cutteth, or perfumed with tedyous ſauours of the mettalles by him yoten. But veryly myne intente and meanynge is onely, that a noble chylde, by his owne naturall diſpoſition, and not by coertion, may be induced, to receyue perfect inſtruction in theſe ſciences.
            
            
               What exacte diligence ſhulde be in choſynge mayſters. Capitulo. ix.
               
                  AFter that the childe hath bē pleaſauntly trayned and induced to knowe the partes of ſpeche, and can ſeperate one of them from an other, in his owne langage, It ſhal thā be time, that his tutor or gouernour do make dilygente ſerche for ſuche a mayſter: as is exellentely lerned bothe in greke and latyne, and therwithall is of ſobre and vertuous dyſpoſition, ſpecially chaſt of liuing, and of moche affabilitie and patience: leſte by any vncleane example the tender minde of the chylde maye be infected, harde after warde to be recouered. For the natures of chyldren be not ſo moche or ſone aduaunced by thynges well doone or ſpoken as they be hyndred and corrupted by that,

whiche in actis or wordes is wontonly expreſſed. Alſo by a cruel and irous mayſter, the wyttes of chyldren be dulled: and that thynge, for the whiche chyldren be often tymes beaten, is to them euer after faſtidious: wherof we nede no better auctor for wytnes, than dayly experience. Wherfore the moſte neceſſary thinges to be obſerued by a maiſter in his diſciples or ſcholers (as Licon the noble gramarien ſayd) is ſhamfaſtnes and prayſe. By ſhamefaſtnes, as it were with a brydell, they rule as well their dedes, as theyr appetites. And deſyre of prayſe addeth to a ſharpe ſpurre to theyr dyſpoſition towarde lernynge and vertue. Accordynge there vnto Quintilian inſtructynge an oratour, deſireth ſuche a chylde to be giuen vnto hym, whom commendation feruently ſtereth, glory prouoketh, and beinge vaniquiſſhed, wepeth. That childe (ſaith he) is to be fedde with ambition, him a lyttel chyding ſore biteth, in hym no part of ſlouth is to be feared.
               ¶ And if nature diſpoſeth not the chyldes wytte to receyue lernyng, but rather other wyſe: it is to be applyed with more dylygence and alſo polycie, as choſynge ſome boke, wherof the argument or matter approcheth moſte nyghe to the childes inclination or fantaſy, ſo that it be not exſtremely

vicious, and therwith by littel and lytel, as it were with a pleaſaunt ſauce, prouoke hym to haue good appatite to ſtudye. And ſurely that child, what ſo euer he be, is wel bleſſed and fortunate, that fyndeth a good inſtructour or mayſter. Whiche was conſydered by noble kynge Philip, father to the great kynge Alexander, who immediately after his ſonne was borne, wrote a letter to Ariſtotle, the prynce of philoſophers, the tenour wherof enſueth.
               ¶ Ariſtotle, we grete you well. Lettynge The epiſtel of king Philip to Ariſtotel. you wytte, that we haue a ſonne borne, for the which we gyue due thankes vnto god, not for that he is borne onely, but alſo for as moch as it happeneth hym to be borne, you lyuinge. Truſtynge that it ſhall happē, that he by you taught and inſtructed, ſhall be hereafter worthy to be named our ſōne, and to enioy the honour and ſubſtance that we now haue prouided. Thus fare ye wel.
               ¶ The ſame Alexander was wonte to ſaye opnly, that he ought to gyue as great thā
                  kes to Ariſtoble his mayſter, as to kynge Philip his father, for of hym he toke the occaſion to lyue, of the other he receyued the reaſon and way to lyue well. And what maner a prince Alexader was made by the doctryne of Ariſtotle, it ſhall appere in diuers places of this boke: where his example

to princis ſhall be declared.
               ¶ The incomparable benefite of maiſters, haue ben well remembred of dyuers pryncis. In ſo moche as Marcus Antoninus, whiche amonge the emperours was commended for his vertue and ſapyence, had his mayſter Proculus (who taughte hym grammer) ſo moche in fauour, that he aduaunced hym to be proconſull: which was one of the hygheſt dygnyties amonge the Romaynes.
               ¶ Alexāder the emperour cauſed his maiſter Julius Fronto, to be cōſul: which was the higheſt office, and in aſtate next the emperour: & alſo opteyned of the ſenate, that the ſtatue or image of Fronton was ſet vp amonge the noble princis.
               ¶ What cauſed Traiane to be ſoo good a prince (in ſo moch that of late dayes, whan an Emperoure receyued his crowne at Rome, the people with a commune crie deſyred of god, that he moughte be as good as was Trayane) but that he hapned to haue Plutarche, the noble phyloſoper, to be his inſtructour?
               ¶ I agree me, that ſome be good of natural inclination to goodnes, but where good inſtructyon and exaumple is therto added, the naturall goodnes muſte there with nedes be amended, and be more excellent.
            
            
               
               What order ſhulde be in lernynge, and whiche autours ſhulde be fyrſte redde. Capitulo. x.
               
                  NOwe let vs retourne to the order of lernynge apte for a gentyll man. Wherin I am of Quintilians opinion, that I wolde haue hym lerne greke and latine authours bothe at one tyme, orels to begyn with greke, for as moche as that is hardeſte to come by: by reaſon of the diuerſytie of tonges, whiche be fyue in nombre, and all moſt be knowen, or elles vneth any poete can be wel vnderſtande. And if a chylde do begyn therin at The fyrſte lerninge in childhode. ſeuen yeres of aege, he maye contynually lerne greke autours thre yeres, and in the meane tyme vſe the latin tonge as a familyar langage: which in a noble mannes ſonne maye well come to paſſe, hauynge none other perſons to ſerue hym or kepynge him company, but ſuche as can ſpeake latine elegantly. And what doubt is there? but ſo maye he as ſoone ſpeake good latine, as he maye do pure frenche, whiche nowe is broughte into as many rules and fygures, and as longe a grāmer, as is latin or greke. I wyll not contende, who amonge them, that do write grammers of greke (whiche

nowe all moſt be innumerable) is the beſt: but that I referre to the diſcretiō of a wyſe mayſter. Alway I wolde aduyſe hym, not to deteyne the chylde to long in that tedyous labours, eyther in the greke or latyne grammer. For a gentyl wytte is there with ſone fatigate.
               ¶Grammer, beinge but an introduction to the vnderſtandynge of autors, if it be made to long or exquiſite to the lerner, it in a maner mortifyeth his courage: And by that tyme he cometh to the moſt ſwete and pleſante redynge of olde auctors, the ſparkes of ſeruente deſyre of lernynge is extyncte, with the burdone of grammer, lyke as a litel fire is ſone quenched with a gretheape of ſmal ſtickes: ſo that it can neuer come to the principall logges, where it ſhuld longe bourne in a great pleaſaunt fyre.
               ¶Nowe to folowe my pourpoſe. After a fewe and quicke rules of grammer, immediately, or interlaſynge it therwith, wolde be redde to the chylde, Eſopes fables in greke: in whiche argument children moch Eſopes fables. delyte. And ſurely it is a moche pleaſante leſſon, and alſo profitable, as well for that it is elegante and brefe (and not with ſtandyng it hath moch varietie in wordes, and therwith moche helpeth to the vnderſtandynge of Greke) as alſo in thoſe fables is

included moche morall and polytyke wyſedome. Wherfore in the teachynge of them, the maiſter dilygently muſte gather to gether thoſe fables, whiche maye be moſt accommodate to the aduauncement of ſome vertue, wherto he perceyueth the chylde inclyned: or to the rebuke of ſomme vyce, wherto he fyndeth his nature dyſpoſed. And therin the maiſter oughte to exercyſe his wytte, as well to make the child plainly to vnderſtand the fable, as alſo declaring the ſignification therof compendiouſly, and to the purpoſe. Fore ſene allwaye, that as well this leſſon as all other auctors, which the chylde ſhall lerne, eyther greke or latine, verſe or proſe, be perfectly had without the boke: wherby he ſhal not onely atteyne plentie of the tonges called Copie, but alſo encreaſe and nouriſhe remembrāce wonderfully.
               ¶The nexte leſſon wolde be ſome quycke The .ii. leſſon to children. Lucianus. and mery dialoges, elect out of Luciane, whiche be without ribawdry, or to moche ſkornynge: for eyther of them is exactely to be eſchewed, ſpecially for a noble man, the one anoyenge the ſoule, the other his eſtimation, concernynge his grauitie.
               ¶The comedyes of Ariſtophanes maye Ariſto. be in the place of Luciane, and by reaſon they be in metre, they be the ſoner lerned

by harte. I dare make none other compari ſon betwene them, for offendinge the frendes of them bothe: but thus moche dare I ſaye, that it were better, that a chyld ſhuld neuer rede any parte of Luciane, than all Luciane.
               ¶I coud reherſe diuers other poetis, whi che for mater and eloquēce, be very neceſſary, but I feare me to be to longe from noble Homere: from whom as from a fountayne, Homerus. proceded al eloquence and lerning. For in his bokes be conteyned, and moſte perfectly expreſſed, not only the documētis marciall and diſcipline of armes, but alſo in comparable wyſedomes, and inſtructions for polytike gouernaunce of people: with the worthy commendatiō and laude of noble princis, wherwith the reders ſhall be ſo all inflamed, that they moſte feruentely ſhall deſire and coueite, by the imitation or their vertues, to acquire ſemblable glory. For the whiche occaſion Ariſtotle, mooſte ſharpeſt witted, and excellent lerned Philoſopher, as ſone as he had receiued Alexander from kinge Philip his father, before any other thynge taught him the moſt noble warkes of Homere. Wherin Alexander founde ſuche ſwetenes and frute, that euer after he had Homere, not onely with hym in all his iourneyes, but alſo laide hym vnder

his pillowe, whan he went to reſte: and often tymes wolde purpoſely wake ſome houres of the nyght, to take as it were his paſſe tyme with that moſt noble poete. For by the redynge of his warke, called Illiados, where the aſſembly of the moſt noble grekes againe Troy is recyted, with their affaires, he gathered courage and ſtrength againe his ennemies, wyſedome and eloquence for conſultations and perſwations to his people and army. And by the other warke, called Odiſſea, whiche recounteth the ſondry aduentures of the wyſe Uliſſes: he by the example of Uliſſes, apprehended many noble vertues, and alſo lerned to eſkape the fraude and deceytfull imagynations of ſondry & ſubtile crafty wittes. Alſo there ſhal he lerne to enſerche and pceyue the maners and conditions of them that be his familiars, ſifting out (as I mought ſay) the beſt from the worſte, wherby he maye ſurely commytte his affaires and truſte to euery perſon after his vertues. Therfore I nowe conclude, that there is no leſſon for a yonge gentyll man to be compared with Homere, if he be playnly and ſubſtancially expouned and declared by the mayſter.
               ¶Notwithſtandyng, for as moche as the ſayd warkes be very longe, and do require therfore a great tyme to be all lerned and

kanned: ſome latin auctour wolde be therwith myxt, and ſpecially Uirgile: whiche in his warke called Eneidos, is moſte lyke to Uirgilius. Homere, and almoſte the ſame Homere in latin. Alſo by the ioining together of thoſe auctors, the one ſhall be the better vnderſtande by the other. And veryly (as I before ſayd) no one auctour ſerueth to ſo dyuers wittes, as doth Uirgile. For there is not that affect or deſire, wherto any childes fantaſy is dyſpoſed, but in ſome of Uirgils warkes may be foūden matter therto apt & propiſe. For what thing can be more famyliar than his bucolikes? nor no warke ſoo nyghe approcheth to the cōmune dalyance & maners of chyldrē, & the praty cōtrouerſies of the ſimple ſhepeherdes therin conteyned, wonderfully reioyceth the chylde that hereth it wel declared, as I knowe by mine owne experience. In his Georgikes, lorde what pleaſaunt varietie there is, the dyuers graynes, herbes, and flowres, that be there deſcribed, that redynge therin, it ſemeth to a man to be in a delectable gardeyne or paradyſe. What ploughe manne knoweth ſo moch of houſebandry, as there is expreſſed? who delytynge in good horſys, ſhall not be therto more enflamed, redynge there, of the bredyng, cheſyng, and kepyng of them? In the declaration wherof

Uirgille leaueth farre behynde hym all breders, hakney menne, and ſkorſers, Is there any aſtronomer, that more exactely ſetteth out the ordre and courſe of the celeſtiall bodyes: or that more truely doth deuine in his pronoſtications of the tymes of the yere, in their qualities, with the future aſtate of all thynges prouided by huſebandry, thā Uirgile doth recite in that warke?
               If the chylde haue a delyte in huntynge, what pleaſure ſhall he take of the fable of Ariſteus? ſemblably in the hunting of Dido and Eneas, whiche is diſcryued mooſte elegantly in his boke of Eneidos.
               If he haue pleaſure in wraſtling, renning, or other lyke exerciſe, where ſhall he ſe any more pleſaunte eſbatementes, than that whiche was doone by Eurealus and other troyans, whiche accompanyed Eneas?
               If he take ſolace in herynge mynſtrelles, what mynſtrel may be compared to Iopas, whiche ſange before Dido and Eneas? or to blinde Demodocus, that played & ſange moſte ſwetely at the dyner, that the kynge Alcinous made to Uliſſes? whoſe dityes & melody excelled as farre the ſonges of our minſtrelles, as Homere and Uirgile excell all other poetes,
               ¶ If he be more deſyrous (as the mooſte parte of children be) to here thinges maruailous

and exquiſite, which hath in it a viſa ge of ſome thinges incredyble: wherat ſhal he more wonder, than whan he ſhal beholde Eneas folowe Sibille into hel? what ſhal he more drede, than the terrible vyſages of Cerberus, Gorgon, Megera, and other furies and monſters? howe ſhall he abhorre tyranny, fraude, & auarice, whan he doth ſe the peines of duke Theſeus, Siſiphus, and ſuche other, tormented for their diſſolute and vicious lyuynge? Howe glad ſone after ſhall he be, whan he ſhal beholde in the pleaſaunt fieldes of Eliſius, the ſoules of noble princis and capitaynes, which for their vertue and labours, in aduaunſing the publyke weales of theyr countryaes, do lyue eternally in pleaſure inexplycable? And in the laſte bokes of Eneidos, ſhal he finde matter to miniſter to hym audacytie, valiaunt courage and polycie, to take and ſuſteyne noble enterpriſes, if any ſhall be nedefull for the aſſailynge of his enemyes. Finally (as I haue ſayde) this noble Uirgile, like to a good noriſe, giueth to a child, if he wyll take it, euery thynge apte for his witte and capacitie. Wherfore he is in the ordre of lerninge to be preferred before any other autor latine.
               ¶ I wolde ſet nexte vnto hym two bokes of Ouid, the one called Metamorphoſios,

whiche is as moche to ſaye, as changynge of men in to other fygure or fourme: the other is intytled De faſtis: where the ceremonies of the gentyles, and ſpecyally the Romaynes, be expreſſed: bothe ryght neceſſarye for the vnderſtandynge of other poetes. But by cauſe there is lyttell other lernynge in them, concernynge eyther vertuous maners or polycie, I ſuppoſe it were better that as fables and ceremonyes happē to come in a leſſon, to be declared abondantly by the maiſter, than that in the ſaide two bokes, a longe tyme ſhulde be ſpente and almoſte loſte: whiche mought be better employed on ſuche autors, that do minyſter both eloquence, ciuile polycie, and exhortation to vertue.
               ¶ Wherfore in his place, lette vs brynge in Horace, in whom is conteyned moch varietie of lerning, and quickeneſſe of ſentence. This poet may be enterlaced with the leſſon of Odiſſea of Homere, wherin is declared the wonderfull prudence and fortitude of Uliſſes, in his paſſage from Troye. And if the chylde were induced to make verſis by the imytation of Uirgile and Homere, it ſhulde myniſter to hym moche dylectation and courage to ſtudy: ne the makynge of verſis is not diſcōmended in a noble mā, ſens the noble Auguſtus, and almoſte all

the olde emperours made bokes in verſis.
               ¶ The two noble poetis, Silius and Lucane, be very expediente to be lerned: for Silius. Lucanus. the one ſetteth out the emulation in qualyties and prowes of two noble and valiante capitaynes, one ennemye to the other, that is to ſay, Silus writeth of Scipio the Romayne, and Haniball, duke of carthaginenſys: Lucane declareth a ſemblable matter, but moche more lamentable: for as moche as the warres were ciuile, and as it were in the bowells of the Romaynes, that is to ſay, vnder the ſtanderdes of Julius Ceſar and Pompei.
               ¶ Heſiodus in greke, is more briefe than Uirgile, where he writeth of houſebandry, and doth not ryſe ſo hyghe in philoſophy, but is fuller of fables: And therfore is more illeccbrous.
               ¶ And here I conclude, to ſpeke any more of poetis neceſſary for the chyldehode of a gentyll manne: for as moche as theſe (I doubt not) wyll ſuffyce, vntyll he paſſe the age of .xiii. yeres, In whiche tyme childhode declyneth, and reaſon waxeth rype, and apprehendeth thinges with a more cō
                  ſtante iugement.
               ¶ Here I wolde haue remembred, that I require not al theſe warkes to be throughly red of a chylde in this time, which were

almoſte impoſſible: But I only doſyre, that they haue in euery of the ſayde bokes ſoo moch inſtruction, that they may take therby ſome profytte. Than the chyldes courage Poetis de fēded and pryſed. infiamed by the frequente redynge of noble poetes, dayely more and more deſyreth to haue experyence in thoſe thynges, that they ſo vehemently do commende in them, that they write of.
               ¶ Leonidas, the noble kynge of Spartanes beynge ones demaunded, of what eſtimatiō in poetry Tirtaeus (as he ſuppoſed) was: it is written, that he anſwering ſayd, That for ſteryng the mindes of yong men, he was excellent, for as moche as they beinge meued with his verſys do renne into the batayle, regardynge no peryll, as men all inflamed in martiall courage.
               ¶ And whan a man is comen to rype yeres, and that reaſon in hym is confyrmed with ſerious lernyng and long experience: than ſhall he, in redyng tragedies execrate and abhorre the intollerable life of tirātes: And ſhall contemne the foly and dotage, expreſſed by poetes laſciuious.
               ¶ Here wyll I leaue to ſpeake of the firſte parte of a noble mannes ſtudy: And wyll write of the ſeconde parte, whiche is more ſerious, and cōteyneth in it ſondry maners of lernynge.
            
            
               
               The moſt commodious and neceſſary ſtudyes ſuccedynge ordinatly the leſſon of poetes. Capitulo. xi.
               
                  AFter .xiiii. yeres be paſſed of a chyldes age: his maiſter, if he can, or ſome other, ſtudy ouſly exercyſed in the arte of an oratour, ſhal fyrſt rede to hym ſome what of that parte of logike, that is called Topica, either of Cicero, or els of that noble clerke Logike. Topica. of Almayne, whiche late floured, called Agricola: whoſe warke prepareth inuention, tellynge the places, from whens an argumente, for the profe of any mater, maye be taken with lyttell ſtudye. And that leſſon with moche and dylygent lernyng, hauynge myxte there with none other exercyſe, wil in the ſpace of halfe a yere be perfectely kanned.
               ¶ Immediately after that, the art of Rhetorike Rhetorik. wolde be ſemblably taughte, eyther in greke out of Hermogines, or of Quintilian in latin, beginnyng at the thyrd boke, and inſtructynge dylygently the chylde in that parte of rheteryke principally, whiche concerneth perſuation: for as moch as it is moſt apte for conſultation. There can be noo ſhorter inſtruction of Rhetoryke,

than the treatiſe that Tulli wrote vnto his ſonne, whiche boke is named the partycion of rhetorike.
               ¶ And in good fayth, to ſpeake boldly that I thinke, for hym that nedeth not, or doth not deſyre to be an exquiſite oratour, the litell boke, made by the famous Eraſmus Eraſmus. (whom al gentil wittꝭ ar bounden to thāke, and ſupporte) whiche he calleth Copiam uerborum & Rerum, that is to ſay, plentie of wordes and maters, ſhall be ſufficiente.
               ¶ Iſocrates, concerning the leſſon of oratours, is euery where wōderful profitable, hauinge almoſt as many wyſe ſentences as he hath wordes, and with that is ſo ſwete & delectable to rede, that after hym almoſt all other ſeme vnſauery and tedyous: and in perſuadynge as well a prynce as a pryuate perſon to vertue, the two very lyttell and compēdious warkes, wherof he made the one to kyng Nicocles, the other to his frende Demonicus, wolde be perfectly kā
                  ned and had in continuall memorye.
               ¶ Demoſthenes and Tulli, by the conſent of all lerned men, haue preemynence and ſouerayntie ouer al oratours: the one reignynge in wonderfull eloquence in the publyke weale of the Romaynes, who had the empire and dominion of all the worlde: the other of no leſſe eſtimation in the Citie of

Athenes, whiche of longe tyme was accounted the mother of Sapience, and the palaice of muſis and all lyberall ſcyences. Of whiche two oratours may be attayned, not onely eloquence excellent and perfect, but alſo preceptes of wyſedome and gentill maners: with moſte commodious exaumples of al noble vertues and policie. Wherfore the mayſter in redynge them, muſt wel obſerue and expreſſe the partes and colours of rhetoryke in them conteyned, accordynge to the preceptes of that arte before lerned. The vtilytie that a noble man ſhal haue by redyng theſe oratours is, that whan he ſhall happe to reaſon in counſayle, or ſhall ſpeke in a greatte audyence, or to ſtrange ambaſſadours of great princis: he ſhall not be conſtrayned to ſpeake wordes ſodayne and dyſordred, but ſhall beſtowe them aptely and in theyr places. Wherfore the mooſte noble Emperour Octauius is hyghelye commended, for that he neuer Octauius. ſpake in the Senate, or to the people of Rome, but in an oration prepared and purpoſely made.
               ¶ Alſo to prepare the chylde to vndeſtandynge of hiſtories, whiche beinge repleniſhed with the names of countres & townes vnknowen to the reder, do make the hiſtorye tedious, orels the leſſe pleaſaunt, ſo if

they be in any wyſe knowen, it encreaſeth an inexplicable delectation: It ſhalbe therfore, Coſmographye & the commoditie therof. and alſo for refreſſhynge the wytte, a conuenyent leſſon, to beholde the olde tables of Ptholomee, wherin all the worlde is painted, hauinge fyrſte ſome introduction in to the ſphere, wherof nowe of late be made very good treatiſes, and more plaine and eaſy to lerne than was wonte to be. All be it there is none ſoo good lernynge, as the demontration of coſmographie, by materyall fygures and inſtrumentes, hauynge a good inſtructour. And ſurely this leſſon is bothe pleaſaunt and neceſſary. For what pleaſure is it, in one houre to beholde thoſe realmes, cities, ſees, ryuers, & fountaynes, that vneth in an olde mannes lyfe can not be iournayde? what incredible delyte is taken in beholdynge the dyuerſities of people, beaſtis, foules, fiſhes, tres, fruites, and herbes? To knowe the ſondry maners and condition of people, and the varietie of theyr natures, and that in a warme ſtudye or parler, without peril of the ſee, or daunger of longe and paynfull iourneyes? I cā not tel, what more pleaſure ſhuld happen to a gentil wyt, than to beholde in his owne houſe euery thyng that within al the worlde is conteyned.
               ¶ The cōmoditie therof knewe the great

kinge Alexander, as ſome writers do remembre. For he cauſed the countrayes, whervnto he purpoſed any enterpriſe, diligently and cunnyngly to be dyſcrybed and paynted, that beholdynge the pycture, he mought perceyue, which places were moſt daungerous, and where he and his hoſte moughte haue moſte eaſy and conuenable paſſage.
               ¶ Semblably dyd the Romayns in the rebellion of Fraunce, and the inſurrection of their confederates, ſettyng vp a table opē
                  ly, wherin Italy was paynted, to the intēt that the people lokynge in it, ſhulde reaſon and conſulte, in which places, it were beſt to reſiſte or inuade theyr ennemies.
               ¶ I omyt for length of the matter, to write of Cirus, the great king of Perſe, Craſſus the Romaine, and diuers other valiant and experte capitaines, which haue loſte them ſelfes & all theyr army by ignorance of this doctryne. Wherfore it maye not be of any wyſe man denyed, but that Coſmographie is to all noble men, nat onely pleaſaunt but profitable alſo, and wonderfull neceſſary.
               ¶ In the parte of Coſmographie, wherwith hiſtorie is mingled, Strabo reigneth, whiche toke his argumente of the diuyne Strabo. poete Homere.
               ¶ Alſo Strabo hym ſelfe (as he ſayth) laboured

a great part of Africa and Aegipt, where vndoubtedly be many thynges to be maruailed at.
               ¶ Solinus wryteth almoſte in lyke forme, Solinus. and is more briefe, and hath moch more varietie of thynges and matters, and is therfore maruaylous delectable. Yet Mela is Wels. moch ſhorter, and his ſtyle (by reaſon that it is of a more antiquitie) is alſo more clene and facile. Wherfore he, or Dioniſius ſhall Dioniſius. be ſufficient,
               ¶ Coſmographie being ſubſtancially perceyued, it is than tyme to induce a chylde to the redyng of hiſtories. But fyrſt to ſet Hiſtories and the fourme in redynge of them. him in a feruent courage, the maiſter in the moſte pleaſaunt and elegant wyſe, expreſſynge what incomparable delectation, vtilitic, and commoditie ſhall happen to emperours, kynges, pryncis, and all other gentyllmen, by redynge of hiſtories: Shewyng to hym, that Demetrius Phalareus, a man of excellent wyſedome and lerninge, and whiche in Athenes had ben long exerciſed in the publike weale, exhorted Ptholome king of Aegipt, chiefly aboue al other ſtudies to haūt & embrace hiſtories, & ſuche other bokes, wherin were cōteined preceptes made to kinges & princis, ſaying, That in them he ſhulde rede thoſe thinges, whiche no man durſt reporte vnto his perſone.
               
                  
¶ Alſo Cicero, father of the latine eloquence, calleth an hyſtorie the wytneſſe of tymes, mayſtres of lyfe, the lyfe of remembraunce, of trouthe the lyghte, and meſſager of antiquitie.
               ¶ More ouer, the ſwete Iſocrates exhorteth the kynge Nycoles, whom he inſtructeth, to leaue behynde hym ſtatues and images that ſhall repreſente rather the fygure and ſimilitude of his mynde, than the features of his body, ſignifieng therby the remēbrance of his actes writē in hyſtories.
               ¶ By ſemblable aduertiſementes ſhal a no ble harte be trayned to delyte in hyſtories. And than accordynge to the counſaylle of Quintilian, it is beſte that he begynne with Titus Liuius, not onely for his elegancie Titus Liuius. of writinge, whiche floweth in hym lyke a fountayne of ſwete mylke, but alſo for as moche as by redynge that auctor, he maye knowe, howe the moſt noble citie of Rome of a ſmall and pore begynnynge, by prowes and vertue, lyttel and lytel came to the empire and dominion of all the worlde.
               ¶ Alſo in that Citie he maye beholde the fourme of a publike weale, which if the inſolencie and pryde of Tarquine had not ex cluded kinges out of the citie, had ben the moſte noble and perfecte of all other.
               ¶ Xenophon, beinge bothe a philoſopher, Xenophō.
                  
and an excellent capitayne, ſo inuented and ordred his warke, named Paedia Ciri, whiche maye be interpreted the Chyldehode or diſciplyne of Cyrus, that he leaueth to the reders therof an incomparable ſwetenes and example of lyuynge, ſpecyally for the conductynge and wel orderyng of hoſtes or armies. And therfore the noble Sci pion, who was called Affricanus, as wel in peace as in warre, was neuer ſene without this boke of Xenophon.
               ¶ With hym may be ioyned Quintus Curtius, Quintus Curtius. who writeth the lyfe of kynge Alexander elegātly & ſwetely. In whom may be founden the fygure of an excellent prynce, as he that incomparably excelled all other kynges and emperours, in wiſedome, hardynes, ſtrength, policie, agilite, valiaunte courage, nobilitie, liberalite, and courtaiſy. Wherin he was a ſpectakle or marke for all princis to loke on. Contrary wiſe, whan he was ones vainquyſſhed with voluptie and pryde, his tyranny and beaſtly crueltie abhorreth all reders. The compariſon of the vertues of theſe two noble princes, equally deſcribed by two excellent writers, wel expreſſed, ſhall prouoke a gentyll courage, to contende to folowe theyr vertues.
               ¶ Iulius Ceſar and Saluſt, for theyr compendious Ceſar Saluſt. writynge, to the vnderſtandinge

wherof is required an exacte and perfecte iugemente, and alſo for the exquiſite order of batayle, and continuynge of the hiſtory, without any varietie, wherby the peyne of ſtudy ſhulde be alleuyate, they two wolde be reſerued, vntyll he that ſhall rede them, ſhall ſe ſome experience in ſemblable matters. And than ſhall he fynde in them ſuche pleſure and commoditie, as therwith a noble and gentyll harte ought to be ſatiſfyed. For in them both it ſhall ſeme to a man, that he is preſent and hereth the counſailes and exhortations of capitaynes, which be called Conciones, and that he ſeeth the order of hoſtes, whan they be embatayled, the fyers aſſaultes and encountringes of both armies, the furyouſe rage of that monſter called warre. And he ſhal wene that he hereth the terrible dintes of ſōdry weapons, and ordynaunce of battayle: the conducte and policies of wyſe and experte capytaynes, ſpecyally in the commentaries of Iulius Ceſar, whiche he made of his exploiture in Fraunce and Brytayne, and other countreyes nowe rekned amonge the prouynces of Germany. Whiche boke is ſtudyouſly to be redde of the pryncis of this realme of England and theyr conſaylours: conſyderynge that therof maye be taken neceſſarye inſtructyons concernynge the

warres, agayne Iryſſhe men or Scottes: who be of the ſame rudenes and wilde diſpoſitiō, that the Suiſes and Britons were in the tyme of Ceſar.
               ¶ Semblable vtilitie ſhal be founden in the hiſtorie of Titus Liuius, in his thyrde Decades, where he writeth of the battayles, that the Romaynes had with Anniball and the Charthaginenſis.
               ¶ Alſo there be diuers orations, as wel in all the bokes of the ſayde auctors, as in the hiſtorie of Cornelyus Tacitus, whiche be Cornelius Tacitus. very delectable, and for conſayles very expedient to be had in memory.
               ¶ And in good faith I haue oftē thought, that the conſultations and orations, writen by Tacitus, do import a maieſte, with a cō
                  pendious eloquence therin conteyned.
               ¶ In the lerninge of theſe autors, a yonge gentyllmanne ſhall be taughte to note and marke, not onely the ordre and elegancie, in declaration of the hyſtorie, but alſo the occaſion of the warres, the counſailes and preparations on eyther parte, the eſtymation of the capitaines, the maner and forme of theyr gouernaunce, the continuance of the battaylle, the fortune and ſucceſſe of the holle affayres. Semblably out of the warres in other dayely affayres, the aſtate of the publike weale, if it be proſperous or

in decaye, what is the very occaſion of the one or of the other, the forme and maner of the go uernaunce ther of, the good and yuell qualities of theym that be rulers, the cōmodites and good ſequele of vertue, the dyſcommodities, and yuel concluſion of vicious lycence.
               ¶ Surely if a noble man do thus ſeryouſly and diligētly rede hiſtories, I dare affirme, there is no ſtudy or ſcience for him of equal cōmoditie and pleaſure, hauynge regarde to euery tyme and age.
               ¶ By the tyme that the chylde doth come to .xvii. yeres of age, to the intent his courage Morall philoſophye▪
                   be brydled with reaſon, it were nedefull to rede vnto hym ſome warkes of philoſophy, ſpecially that parte that maye enforme hym vnto vertuous maners, whiche parte of philoſophy is called moral. Wherfore there wold be redde to hym for an introductiō, two the firſt bokes of the warke of Ariſtotle, called Ethicae, wherin is conteyned the defynitions and propre ſygnifications of euery vertue, and that to be lerned in Greke: for the tranſlations that we yet haue, be but a rude and groſſe ſhadowe of the eloquēce and wyſdome of Ariſtotle.
               ¶ Forth with wolde folowe the warke of Cicero, called in latine De officijs, wherevnto Tullies offices. yet is no propre engliſſhe worde to be

gyuen, but to prouyde for it ſome maner of expoſition, it maye be ſayde in this fourme, Of the duetyes and maners apperteynyng to men.
               ¶ But aboue al other, the warkes of Plato Plato. wold be moſt ſtudiouſly redde, whan the iugement of a man is come to perfectyon, and by the other ſtudies is inſtructed in the fourme of ſpeakynge that philoſophers vſed. Lorde god, what incomparable ſwetneſſe of wordes and matter ſhal he fynde in the ſayd warkes of Plato & Cicero, wherin is ioyned grauitie with delectatiō, excellent wyſedome with diuine eloquence, abſolute vertue with pleaſure incredible, and euery place is ſo infarced with profytable counſayle, ioyned with honeſtie, that thoſe thre bokes be almoſte ſufficiente to make a perfecte and excellent gouernour.
               ¶ The prouerbes of Salomom, with the bokes of Eccleſiaſtes and Eccleſiaſticus, be very good leſſons.
               ¶ All the hiſtoriall partes of the bible, be ryght neceſſary for to be redde of a noble man, after that he is mature in yeres. And the reſidue (with the newe teſtament) is to be reuerently touched, as a celeſtiall iewel or relyke, hauynge the chiefe interpretour of thoſe bokes, trewe and conſtante faith, and dredefully to ſet handes theron, remē
                  brynge

that Oza, for putting his hande to the holy ſhryne, that was called Archafederis, whan it was broughte by kynge Dauid from the citie of Gaba, though it were wauerynge and in daunger to fall, yet was he ſtryken of god, and fell deed immediately.
               ¶ It wolde not be forgoten, that the lytell boke of the moſte excellent doctour Eraſmus Roter. (which he wrote to Charles, nowe beinge emperour, and than prince of Caſtile) whiche boke is intituled, the inſtitution of a chriſten prince, wolde be as familiare alway with gentylmen, at al tymes and in euery age, as was Homere with the great kynge Alexander, or Xenophō with Scipio. For as all men may iuge, that haue red the warke of Eraſmus, there was neuer Eraſmus of the inſtitution of a chriſten prince. boke written in latin, that in ſo lyttell a portion, conteyned of ſentence, eloquence, and vertuous exhortation, a more compendious aboundaunce.
               ¶ And here I make an ende of the lerning and ſtudy, wherby noble menne maye attayne to be worthy to haue auctorytie in a publyke weale.
               ¶ Alwaye I ſhal exhorte tutours and gouernours of noble chyldren, that they ſuffre them not, to vſe ingourgytations of meate or drinke, ne to ſlepe moche, that is to ſay, aboue .viii. houres at the moſt. For

vndoubtedly, both repletion and ſuperfluous ſlepe be capitall enemies to ſtudye, as they be ſemblably to helth of body & ſoule.
               ¶ Aulus Gellius ſayth, that childrē, if they vſe to eate and ſlepe ouer moche, be made therwith dul to lerne. And we ſe, that ther of ſlowneſſe is takē, and the childrens perſonages do waxe vncomly, and growe leſſe in ſtature. Galen wyll not permytte, that pure wyne, without alaye of water, ſhulde in any wyſe be gyuen to chyldren, for as moch as it humecteth the body, or maketh it moyſter and hotter, than is conueniente: alſo it fylleth the heed with fume, in theym ſpecially, whiche be lyke, as chyldren of hote and moyſt temperature. Theſe be wel nyghe the wordes of the noble Galen.
            
            
               Why gentylmen in this preſent tyme, be not equall in doctryne to the auncient noble men. Capitulo. xii.
               
                  NOwe wyll I ſome what declare of the chiefe cauſes, why in our time noble mē be not as excellēt in lerning, as they were in olde time amōg the Romaynes and grekes. Surely as I haue diligently marked in day ly experiēce, the principal cauſes be theſe.

The pride, auarice, and negligence of parentes, and the lacke or fewenes of ſufficient mayſters or teachers.
               ¶ As I ſayde, Pride is the fyrſte cauſe of this inconuenience. For of thoſe perſones be ſome, which without ſhame dare affirme, that to a great gentylman, it is a notable reproche, to be well lerned, and to be called a great clerke: whiche name they accounte to be of ſo baſe eſtimation, that they neuer haue it in theyr mouthes, but whan they ſpeake any thyng in deriſion. Whiche perchaunce they wolde not do, if they had ones layſer to rede our owne cronycle of England, where they ſhal fynde, that kyng Henry beau clerk kynge of Englande. Henry the fyrſt, ſonne of Wylliam conquerour, and one of the moſt noble princis that euer reygned in this realme, was openly called Henry beau clerke, whiche is in englyſhe, fayre clerke, and is yet at this daye ſo named. And wheder that name be to his honour, or to his reproche, let them iuge that do rede and compare his lyfe with his two bretherne, Wylliam, called Rouſe, and Robert le courtoyſe, they both not hauyng ſemblable lernynge with the ſayde Henry, the one for his diſſolute lyuynge and tiranny, beynge hated of al his nobles and people, fynally was ſodeynely ſlayne by the ſhotte of an arrowe, as he was huntinge in

a foreſt, which to make larger, and to giue his deere more libertie, dyd cauſe the houſes of .lii. pariſſhes to be pulled downe, the people to be expelled, and all beinge deſolate, to be tourned into deſerte, and made onely paſture for beaſtis ſauage. Which he wolde neuer haue done, if he had ſo moche delyted in good lernynge, as dyd his brother. The other brother, Robert le Curtoyſe, beynge duke of Normandy, and the eldeſt ſonne of Wylliam Conquer our, all be it that he was a manne of moche proweſſe, and right expert in martial affayres, wherfore he was electe before Godfray of Boloigne, to haue ben kynge of Hieruſalem: yet not with ſtandynge, whan he inuaded this realme with ſondry puiſſaunt armies, alſo dyuers noble menne aydynge hym, his noble brother Henry beau clerke, more by wyſedome than power, alſo by lernyng, addynge policie to vertue and courage, often tymes vaynquyſſhed hym, and dyd put hym to flyght. And after ſondry victories, finally toke hym and kepte hym in pryſon, hauyng none other meanes to kepe his realme in tranquillitie.
               ¶ It was for no rebuke, but for an excellent honour, that the emperour Antonine was ſurnamed philoſopher, for by his moſt noble example of lyuinge and induſtrye incomparable,

he durynge al the tyme of his reygne, kept the publike weale of the Romaynes in ſuche a perfecte aſtate, that by his actis he cōfyrmed the ſaying of Plato, That bleſſed is that publike weale, wherin either philoſophers do reygne, or els kinges be in phyloſophy ſtudiouſe.
               ¶ Theſe perſons, that ſo moche contemne lernynge, that they wolde that gentilmens chyldren ſhulde haue no parte or very lyttell therof, but rather ſhulde ſpende theyr youth alway (I ſaye not onely in huntynge and haukynge, whiche moderately vſed as ſolaces ought to be, I intende not to dyſprayſe) but in thoſe ydle paſtymes, which for the vice that is therin, the commaundement of the prynce, and the vniuerſall conſente of the people, expreſſed in ſtatutes & lawes, do prohibite, I meane playenge at dyce & other games named vnleful. Theſe perſonnes I ſaye, I wolde ſhulde remembre, orelles nowe lerne, if they neuer elles harde it, that the noble Philyp, kynge of Macedonia, who ſubdued al Grece, aboue all the good fortunes that euer he hadde, moſte reioyſed, that his ſonne Alexander was borne in the tyme that Ariſtotle the philoſopher flouryſſhed, by whoſe inſtruction he mought attayne to moſt excellent lernynge.
               
                  
¶ Alſo the ſame Alexaunder often tymes ſayde, That he was equally as moch boū
                  den to Ariſtotle, as to his father king Philip: for of his father he receyued lyfe, but of Ariſtotle he receyued the waye to lyue nobly.
               ¶ Who dyſprayſed Epaminondas, the moſt valyaunt capitayne of Thebanes, for that he was excellentely lerned and a greatte phyloſopher?
               ¶ Who euer diſcōmēded Iulius Ceſar for that he was a noble oratour, and nexte to Tully in the eloquence of the latin tongue, excelled all other?
               ¶ Who euer reproued the emperour Hadriane, for that he was ſo exquiſitly lerned, not onely in greke and latine, but alſo in all ſciences liberal, that openly at Athenes, in the vniuerſal aſſembly of the gretteſt clerkes of the worlde, he by a longe tyme dyſputed with phyloſophers and Rheroricyens, whiche were eſtemed moſt excellent: and by the iugemente of them that were preſente, had the palme or rewarde of vyctorie? And yet by the gouernance of that noble ēperour, not only the publike weale floryſſhed, but alſo dyuers rebellions were ſuppreſſed, and the maieſtie of the empyre hugely increaſed.
               ¶ Was it any reproche to the noble Germanicus

(who by the aſſignemēt of Auguſtus ſhulde haue ſucceded Tiberius in the empyre, if traytorous enuy had not in his flouryſſhynge youth birefte hym his lyfe) that he was equal to the moſt noble poetis of his tyme: and to the increaſe of his honour and moſt worthy commendation, his image was ſette vp at Rome in the habyte that poetis at thoſe dayes vſed?
               ¶ Fynally, howe moche excellent lerning commendeth, and not dyſprayſeth nobilytie, it ſhall playnely appere vnto them that do rede the lifes of Alexander, called Seuerus, Tacitus, Probus, Aurelius, Conſtantyne, Theodoſius, and Charles the great, ſurnamed Charlemayne, all beynge emperours: and do compare them with other, whiche lacked or had not ſoo moche of doctrine.
               ¶ Ueryly they be ferre from good reaſon in myne opinyon, whiche couayte to haue theyr chyldren goodly in ſtature, delyuer, well ſyngynge: wherin trees, beaſtis, fyſſhes, and byrdes, be not onely with theym equall, but alſo ferre do excede them, And connynge, wherby onely man excelleth all other creatures in erthe, they reiecte and accoumpte vnworthy to be in theyr chyldren. What vnkind appetite were it, to deſyre to be father rather of a pece of fleſhe,

that can only moue and fele, than of a child, that ſhulde haue the perfecte fourme of a man? what ſo perfectely expreſſeth a man, as doctrine?
               ¶ Diogines the phyloſopher, ſeynge one without lernynge ſytte on a ſtone, ſayde to them that were with hym, Beholde where one ſtone ſytteth on an other. Whiche wordes wel conſydered and tried, ſhal appere, to conteyne in them wonderfull matter, for the approbation of doctryne.
            
            
               The ſeconde and thyrde decay of lerninge amonge gentylmen. Cap. xiii.
               
                  THe ſeconde occaſion, wherfore gentyll mens chyldren ſeldome haue ſufficiente lernyng, is auarice. For where theyr parentes wyll not aduenture, to ſende them farre out of theyr propre countreyes, partly for feare of dethe, whiche perchance dare not approche them at home with theyr father, partely for expence of money, whiche they ſuppoſe wold be leſſe in theyr own houſes, or in a vyllage with ſome of theyr tenantes or frendes, hauynge ſeldome any regarde to the teacher, whether he be well lerned or ignorant. For if they hire a ſchole mayſter

to teche in theyr houſes, they chiefely enquire, with howe ſmal a ſalary he wyl be contented, and neuer doo inſerche, howe moche good lernynge he hath, and howe amonge well lerned men, he is therin eſtemed: vſynge therin leſſe dilygence than in takynge ſeruantes, whoſe ſeruice is of moche leſſe importaunce, and to a good ſchole mayſter, is not in profyte to be compared.
               ¶ A gentyllman, er he take a cooke in his ſeruice, wyll fyrſte examine him diligently, howe many ſortes of meates, potages, and ſauces he can perfectely make, and howe well he can ſeaſon them: that they maye be both pleaſant and nouriſhynge. Yea, and if it be but a fauconer, he wyll ſcrupuluſly enquire, what ſkyll he hath in fedynge, called dyete, and kepyng of his hauke from al ſyckenes: alſo howe he can reclaime her & prepare her to flight. And to ſuche a cooke or fauconer, whom he fyndeth experte, he ſpareth not to gyue moche wages, with other bounteous rewardes. But of a ſchole maiſter, to whom he wyll cōmytte his child to be fedde with lernyng, and inſtructed in vertue, whoſe lyfe ſhall be the princypall monument of his name and honour, he neuer maketh further enquirie, but where he may haue a ſchole maiſter, and with howe lytel charge. And if one perchance be foū
                  den

well lerned, whiche wyll not take peines to teache without great ſalary: he than ſpeketh nothynge more, or els ſayth, what ſhall ſo moche wages be gyuen to a ſchole mayſter, whiche wolde kepe me two ſeruantes? To whom may be ſayd theſe wordes, that by his ſonne, beynge well lerned, he ſhall receyue more commoditie and alſo worſhyp, than by the ſeruyce of a hundred cookes and fauconers.
               ¶ The thyrde cauſe of this hyndrance, is negligence of parentes: which I note ſpecially in this poynte. There haue ben dyuers, as well meane gentyll men as of the nobilitie, whiche delytynge to haue theyr ſonnes excellent in lernynge, haue prouyded for them connynge maiſters, who ſubſtancially haue taught them grammer, and very wel inſtructed them, to ſpeake latin elegantly: wherof the parentes haue taken moch delectation, but whan they haue had of grammer ſufficient, and be comen to the aege of .xiiii. yeres, and do approche or drawe towarde the aſtate of man, whiche aege is called mature or rype (wherin not onely the ſaide lernynge continued by moche experyence ſhall be perfectely dygeſted and confyrmed in perpetuall remembrance, but alſo more ſeriouſe lernyng conteyned in other lyberall ſciences, and alſo

philoſophy wolde than be lerned) the parentes, this thynge nothynge regardinge, but beinge ſuffiſed, that theyr chyldren can onely ſpeke latine proprely, or make verſes without matter or ſentence: they from thēs forthe do ſuffre theym to lyue in idelnes, or elles puttynge them to ſeruyce, do as it were baniſhe them from al vertuous ſtudy, and from excerciſe of that, whiche they be fore lerned. So that we maye beholde dyuers yonge gentyll menne, whiche in theyr infancie and chyldehod, were wondred at for theyr aptnes to lernynge, and prompte ſpeakynge of elegant latine, nowe beynge men,: haue not onely forgotten theyr congruite (as the commune worde is) and vnneth can ſpeake one hole ſentence in trewe latine, but that wars is, haue all lernynge in deriſion, and in ſkorne therof, wil of wā
                  tonneſſe ſpeake the moſte barberouſly that they can imagine.
               ¶ Nowe ſome mā wil require me to ſhewe myne opinion, if it be neceſſary, that gentil men ſhulde, after the aege of .xiiii. yeres, continue in ſtudy. To be plaine and trewe, therin I dare affirme, that if the elegante Eloquēce cōmended ſpeakynge of latine be not added to other doctrine, lytel fruite may come of the tong, ſins latine is but a naturall ſpeche, and the fruite of ſpeche is wyſe ſentence, which is

gathered and made of ſondry lernynges. And he that hath nothyng but langage only, maye be no more prayſed than a popiniay, a pye, or a ſtare, whan they ſpeake featly. There be many nowe a days in famouſe ſcholes and vniuerſities, whiche be ſo moche gyuen to the ſtudy of tonges only, that whan they write epiſtels, they ſeme to the reder, that lyke to a trumpet they make a ſoune without any purpoſe, where vnto mē herken more for the noyſe than for any delectation that therby is meued. Wherfore they be moche abuſed, that ſuppoſe eloquence to be onely in wordes or colours of Rhetorike. For as Tully ſayth, what is ſo furiouſe or mad a thynge, as a vayne ſoune of wordes of the beſt ſort and moſt ornate, conteyninge neither conning nor ſentence.
               ¶ Undoubtedly, very eloquence is in euery what eloquence is. tonge where any matter or acte done or to be done is expreſſed in wordes clene, pro piſe, ornate, and comely, wherof ſentencis be ſo aptly compact, that they by a vertue inexplicable, do drawe vnto them the myndes and conſent of the herers, being therwith eyther perſuaded, meued, or to delectation induced.
               ¶ Alſo euery man is not an oratour, that can write an epiſtle or a flatterynge oration in latin, wherof the laſte (as god helpe me)

is to moche vſed. For a ryght oratour may not be without a moche better furniture. Tulli ſayth, that to hym belongeth the exply catynge or vnfoldinge of ſentence, with a great eſtimation, in gyuynge counſaylle concernyng matters of great importaunce: alſo to hym apperteyneth the ſterynge and quickenynge of people, languyſſhynge or dyſpeyryng, and to moderate them that be raſhe and vnbrydled. Wherfore noble auctours do affyrme, that in the fyrſte infancy of the worlde, men wandrynge lyke beaſtis in woddes and on mountaynes, regarding neyther the religion due vnto god, nor the office perteynynge vnto man, ordered all thynge by bodyly ſtrength: vntyl Mercurius (as Plato ſuppoſeth) or ſomme other man holpen by ſapience, and eloquence, by ſome apt or propre oration, aſſembled them to gether, and perſwaded to theym, what commoditie was in mutual couerſation and honeſt maners.
               ¶ But yet Cornelius Tacitus deſcrybeth Corn. Ta. de orat. an oratour, to be of more excellēt qualites, ſayinge, An oratour is he, that can or may ſpeke or reaſon in euery queſtion ſufficiētly, elegantly, and to perſwade proprely, accordynge to the dygnitie of the thing that is ſpoken of, the oportunitie of tyme, and pleaſure of them that be herers.
               
                  
¶ Tully before hym affyrmed, that a man may not be an oratour, heaped with preiſe, but if he haue gotten the knowlege of all thinges, and artes of greateſt importance. And howe ſhall an oratour ſpeake of that thynge, that he hath not lerned? And bycauſe there maye be nothynge, but it maye happen to come in preyſe or dyſprayſe, in conſultation or iugemente, in accuſation or defence: therfore an oratour, by others inſtruction perfectly furnyſhed, maye in euery matter and lernynge, commende or dyſprayſe, exhorte or diſſuade, accuſe or defēd eloquently, as occaſion hapneth. Wherfore in as moche as in an oratour is required to be a heape of all maner of lernynge, whiche of ſome is called the worlde of ſcience, of other the circle of doctrine, whiche is in one worde of Greeke ENCYCLOPEDIA, therfore at this daye, maye be founden but a very fewe oratours. For they that come in meſſage from pryncis, be for honour named nowe oratours, if they be in any degre of worſhyppe: onely poore men, hauynge equall or more of lernynge, beyng called meſſagers.
               ¶ Alſo they, which only teache rhetorike (whiche is the ſcyence, wherby is taughte an artiſiciall fourme of ſpekyng, wherin is the power to perſwade, moue, and delyte,

or by that ſcience onely do ſpeake or write without any admyniſtratyon of other ſcyences) ought to be named rhetoriciens, de clamatours, artificiall ſpeakers (named in Greke Logodedali) or any other name than oratours.
               ¶ Semblably they that make verſes, expreſſynge Poetes. therby none other lernynge, but the crafte of verſifienge, be not of auncient writers named poetes, but only called verſifyers. For the name of a Poete (wherat nowe, ſpecially in this realme, men haue ſuche indignation, that they vſe only poetes and poetry in the contempte of eloquence) was in auncient tyme in highe eſtymation: in ſo moche that all wyſedome was ſuppoſed to be therin included. And poetry was the firſt philoſophy that euer was knowen, wherby men from theyr chyldhode were brought to the reaſon, how to liue wel, lernynge therby not onely maners and naturall affections, but alſo the wonderful warkes of nature, myxtyng ſerious mater with thynges that were pleaſaunt: as it ſhall be manyfeſte to them that ſhall be ſo fortunate to rede the noble warkes of Plato and Ariſtotle: wherin he ſhall fynde the auctoritie of poetes frequentely alleged: ye and that more is, In poetis was ſuppoſed to be ſcience miſticall and inſpired: and therfore

in latyne they were called VATES, whiche worde ſignifieth as moche as prophetes. And therfore Tulli in his Tuſculane Ci. Tuſc. queſt. 
                        •
                     . queſtions ſuppoſeth, that a poete can not abundantly expreſſe verſes ſufficiente and complete, or that his eloquence may flowe without labour, wordes well ſounyng and plentuouſe, without celeſtial inſtinciō, whiche is alſo by Plato ratified.
               ¶ But ſens we be now occupied in the defence of Poetes, it ſhall not be incongruent to our matter, to ſhewe what profytte maye be taken by the dyligente redynge of auncient poetes: contrary to the falſe opinion that nowe rayneth, of them that ſuppoſe, that in the warkes of poetes is conteyned nothynge but baudry (ſuch is their foule word of reproche) and vnprofytable leaſynges. But fyrſt I wyl interprete ſome verſes of Horace, wherin he expreſſeth the offyce of poetes, and after wyl I reſorte to a more playne demonſtration of ſome wiſedomes and counſaylles conteyned in ſome verſes of poetes. Horace in his ſeconde boke of epiſtles, ſayth in this wyſe, or moche lyke,
               
                  
                     The poete facioneth by ſome pleſant meane, Horat. ep. li. ii. ep
                              •
                           a ad Auguſtum.
                     
                     The ſpeche of chyldren tendre and vnſure:
                     Pulling their eares from wordes vnclene,
                     Gyuinge to them preceptes that are pure:
                     
                        
Rebukynge enuy and wrath, if it dure:
                     Thinges wel done he can by exāple cōmende,
                     The nedy and ſycke he doth alſo his cure
                     To recomforte, if aught he can amende.
                  
               
               ¶ But they, which be ignorant in poetes, wyll perchance obiecte as theyr maner is, agaynſt theſe verſes, ſayinge, that in Therēce and other, that were writers of comedies, Ouide, Catullus, Martialis, and all that route of laſciuious poetes, that wrate epiſtles and ditties of loue, ſome called in latin Elegiae, ſome Epigrāmata, is nothing conteyned, but incitation to lechery.
               ¶ Fyrſte comedies, whiche they ſuppoſe to be a doctrinall of rybaudry, they be vndoutedly Comedies a picture, or as it were a mirrour of mans lyfe: wherin yuell is not taughte, but dyſcouered, to the intent that men, beholding the promptnes of youth vnto vice, the ſnares of har lottis and baudes, layd for yonge myndes, the diſceipt of ſeruauntes, the chaunces of fortune, contrary to mens expectation, they beynge therof warned, maye prepare them ſelfe to reſyſte and preuente occaſion. Semblably remembrynge the wyſedomes, aduertyſementes, counſayīes, diſſuaſyon from vice and other profytable ſentences, moſte eloquently and familiarly ſhewed in thoſe comedyes, Undoubtedly there ſhall be no lyttel fruite out

of them gathered. And if the vices in them expreſſed, ſhulde be cauſe, that myndes of the reders ſhuld be corrupted: than by the ſame argumente not onely enterludes in englyſhe but alſo ſermones, wherin ſome vyce is declared, ſhulde be to the beholders and herers lyke occaſion to encreace ſinners. And that by comedies, good coū
                  ſaylle is miniſtred: it appereth by the ſentence of Parmeno, in the ſeconde comedy of Therence.
               
                  
                     In this thing I triūphe in mine own cōceipte, Therent. in Euneu.
                     
                     That I haue foūden for al yong mē the way,
                     Howe they of harlots ſhal knowe the deceipt,
                     Their wittꝭ, their maners, y• therby they may
                     Them perpetnally hate: for ſo moch as they
                     Out of their own houſes be freſhe & delicate,
                     Fedynge curiouſely: at home all the daye
                     Lyuynge beggarly, in moſt wretched aſt ate.
                  
               
               ¶ There be many mo wordes ſpoken, whiche I purpoſelye omytte to tranſlate, not with ſtandynge the ſubſtaunce of the hole ſentence is herein compriſed. But nowe to come to other poetes. what may be better ſayde, thanne is witten by Plautus in his fyrſte comedie?
               
                  
                     ¶ Verily vertue doth all thinges excelle. Plautus 
                              •
                            Amphit. Alc. loqtur
                     
                     For if libertie, helthe, lyuynge, and ſubſtance,
                     Our countrey, our parētes & children do wel,
                     It hapneth by vertue, ſhe doth al aduaunce.
                     
                        
Vertue hath all thinge vnder gouernaunce,
                     And in whom of vertue is fouden gret plētie,
                     Any thinge that is good may neuer be deinte.
                  
               
               ¶ Alſo Ouidius, that ſemeth to be moſt of al poetes laſciuious, in his mooſte wanton bokes, hath ryghte commendable and noble ſentēces: as for proufe therof, I wil recyte ſome that I haue taken at aduenture.
               
                  
                     ¶ Tyme is in medicine, if it ſhall profytte. Ouidius de reme. amoris.
                     
                     Wyne giuen out of tyme, may be annoyaunce.
                     A man ſhall irritate vice, if he prohibite.
                     Whan time is not mete vnto his vtteraunce.
                     Therfore, if thou yet by counſayle arte recuperable
                     Fle thou from idelneſſe, and alway Be ſtable.
                  
               
               ¶ Martialis, whiche for his diſſolute wryting, is moſt ſeldome red of men of moche grauitie, hath not withſtanding many commendable ſentences and ryght wyſe counſailes, as among diuers, I wil reherce one, whiche is firſt come to my remembraunce.
               
                  
                     ¶ If thou wyit eſchewe byttev aduenture Wartialis li. xii. ad Julium.
                     
                     And aduoyde the gnawyng of a penſiful hart
                     Sette in no one perſon all holly thy pleaſure
                     The leſſe ſhalte thou ioye, But leſſe ſhalt thou ſmarte.
                  
               
               ¶ I could recite a great nombre of ſemblable good ſentences, out of theſe and other wanton poetes, whiche in latine do expres them incomparably, with more grace and

delectation to the reder, than our engliſhe tonge may yet comprehend. Wherfore ſens good and wyſe mater maye be pycked out of theſe poetes, it were no reaſon for ſome lyttel mater, that is in theyr verſes, to abā
                  done therfore all theyr warkes, noo more than it were to forbeare or prohibite a man to come into a fayre gardeyne, leſt the redolēt ſauours of ſwete herbes and floures, ſhall meue hym to wanton courage, or leſte in gadringe good and holſome herbes, he may happen to be ſtunge with a nettle. No wyſe man entreth into a gardeyne, but he ſone eſpieth good herbes from nettils, and treadeth the nettils vnder his feete, whiles he gadreth good herbes: wherby he taketh no damage. Or if he be ſtungen, he maketh lyght of it, and ſhortly forgetteth it.
               Semblably if he do rede wanton mattier, mixte with wiſedome, he putteth the worſt vnder fote, and ſorteth out the beſte: or if his courage be ſtered or prouoked, he remembreth the lyttel pleaſure and great detrimente that ſhulde enſue of it: and withdrawynge his mynde to ſome other ſtudy or exerciſe, ſhortely forgetteth it.
               ¶ And therfore among the iewes though it were prohibyte to chyldren, vntyll they came to rype yeres, to rede the bookes of Geneſis, of the iuges, Cantica Canticorum,
                  
and ſome parte of the booke of Ezechiel the prophete, For that in theym was conteyned ſome matter, whiche moughte happen to incenſe the yonge mynde, wherin were ſparkes of carnall concupiſcence, yet after certayne yeres of mennes aeges, it was lefull for euery man to rede and dilygently ſtudye thoſe warkes. So al though I approue not the leſſon of wanton poetes, to be taughte vnto al chyldren: yet thinke I conueniente and neceſſary, that whanne the mynde is become conſtaunte, and courage is aſſwaged, or that chyldren of theyr naturall dyſpoſition be ſhamefaſte and continente, none aunciente poete wolde be excluded frome the leſſon of ſuche one, as deſyreth to come to the perfecty on of wiſedome.
               ¶ But in defendyng of oratours and poetes, I had almoſt forgotten where I was. Ueryly there maye no man be an excellent poete, nor oratour, vnleſſe he haue parte of all other doctrine, ſpecially of noble philoſophy. And to ſaye the trouthe, no man can apprehende the very delectation, that is in the leſſon of noble poetes, vnleſſe he haue redde very moche, and in dyuers autours of dyuers lernynges. Wherfore, as I late ſayde, to the augmentation of vnderſtandynge, called in latine Intellectus et mens,
                  
is required to be moche redynge and vigilante ſtudye in euery ſcyence, ſpecially of that part of philoſophy named moral, whiche inſtructeth menne in vertue and polytike gouernance. Alſo no noble autour, ſpecially of them that wrate in greke or latine before .xii. C. yeres paſſed, is not for any cauſe to be omytted. For therin I am of Quintilians opinion, that there is fewe or none auncyente warke, that yeldeth not ſome fruite or commoditie to the diligente reders. And it is a very groſſe or obſtinate wytte, that by redyng moche, is not ſome what amended.
               ¶ Concernynge the election of other autours, to be redde, I haue (as I truſt) declared ſufficiently my conceipte and opinion, in the x. and .xi. chapiters.
               ¶ Fynally, like as a delycate tree, that cometh of a kernell, whiche as ſone as it burgeneth out leues, if it be plucked vppe, or it be ſufficiently rooted, and layde in a corner, becometh drye or rotten, and no fruite cometh of it: if it be remoued and ſette in an other ayre or erthe, whiche is of contrary qualities where it was before, it either ſēblably dieth, or beareth no fruite, or els the fruite that commeth of it, leſeth his verdure and taſt, and fynally his eſtimatiō. So the pure and excellent lerning, wherof

I haue ſpoken, thoughe it be ſowen in a chylde neuer ſo tymely, and ſpryngeth and burgeneth neuer ſo pleaſauntly, if before it take a depe rote in the minde of the childe, it be laide a ſide, eyther by to moch ſolace, or continuall attendaunce in ſeruice, or els is tranſlated to an other ſtudy, which is of a more groſſe or vnpleſaunt qualitie, before it be confirmed or ſtablyſhed by often redynge or dilygent exerciſe, in concluſion it vaniſheth and cometh to nothynge. Wherfore let men replie as they lyſt, in myne opinion, men be wonderfully diſceiued nowe a days (I dare not ſay with the perſuaſion of auarice) that doo put theyr chyldren at the age of xiiii. or .xv. yeres, to the ſtudy of the lawes of the realme of Englande. I wil ſhewe them reaſonable cauſes why, if they wil paciently here me, informed partely by myne owne experience.
            
            
               Howe the ſtudentes in the lawes of this realme, maye take excellent commoditie by the leſſons of ſōdry doctrines. ca. xiiii.
               IT maye not be denyed, but that al lawes be founded on the depeſt part of reaſon, and as I ſuppoſe, no one lawe ſo moche as our owne: and the deper men do inueſtigate reaſō, the more difficile or hard muſt nedes be the ſtudye. Alſo that reuerende

ſtudy is inuolued in ſo barbar ouſe a lāgage, that it is not only voide of al eloquence, but alſo beynge ſeperate from the exercyſe of our lawe onely, it ſerueth to no commoditie or neceſſary purpoſe, no man vnderſtandinge it, but they, whiche haue ſtudyed the lawes. Than chyldrē at .xiiii. or .xv. yeres olde, in whiche tyme ſpryngeth courage, ſet al in pleaſure, and pleſure is in nothing, that is not facile or elegant, beyng brought to the moſte difficulte and graue lernynge, whiche hath nothynge illecebrouſe or delicate to tickyll theyr tender wittes, and allure them to ſtudye (onles it be lucre, whiche a gentyl wyt littell eſtemeth) the more parte vainquyſſhed with tediouſeneſſe, eyther do abandone the lawes, and vnwares to theyr frendes, do gyue them to gamyng, and other (as I mought ſay) idle buſineſſe, nowe called paſtimes, orels if they be in any wyſe therto conſtrayned, they apprehē
                  dynge a piece therof, as if they being long in a darke dungeon, onely dydde ſe by the lyght of a candell. Than if after .xx. or .xxx. yeres ſtudie, they happen to come amonge wyſe men, herynge matters commened of, concernynge a publyke weale, or outward affayres betwene princis, they noo leſſe be aſtonyed, than if they commynge out of a darke houſe at none dayes, were ſodeynly

ſtrikē in the eies with a bright ſōne beame. But I ſpeake not this in reproch of lawyers, for I knowe dyuers of them, which in conſultation wyll make a ryght vehemente raiſon: and ſo do ſome other, whiche haue neyther lawe nor other lernynge, and if they were fournyſhed with excellente doctrine, theyr reaſon ſhuld be the more ſubſtanciall and certayne.
               ¶ There be ſome alſo, which by theyr frē
                  des, be coarted to aplye the ſtudye of the lawe only, and for lacke of plētuous exhybition be let of theyr liberte, wherfore they can not reſorte vnto paſtyme. Theſe of all other be moſte caſt away, for nature repug nyng, they vnneth taſt any thyng that may be profitable, and alſo theyr courage is ſo mortified (which yet by ſolace perchaunce mought be made quicke or apte to ſome other ſtudye or laudable exerciſe) that they liue euer after out of all eſtimation. Wherfore Tulli ſaith, we ſhuld ſo indeuour our ſelfes, that we ſtriue not with the vnyuerſal nature of man, but that being conſerued let vs folowe our owne propre natures, for though there be ſtudies of more grauytie and importaunce, yet ought we to regarde the ſtudies, wherto we be, by our own nature, inclined. And that this ſentēce is true, we haue dayely experience, in this realme

ſpecially. For howe many menne be there, whoſe ſonnes in chyldehode are aptly diſpoſed by nature to paynt, kerue, or graue, to embrowder, or do other lyke thynges, wherin is any arte commendable concernyng inuention, which as ſone as they eſpy it, be there with dyſpleaſed, and forth with byndeth theym apprentyſes to taylours, weyuers, towkers, and ſome tyme to coblers? whiche hath ben the ineſtimable loſſe of manye good wyttes, and hath cauſed, that in the ſayde artes, englyſſhemen be inferyours to all other people, and be conſtrayned, if we wyll haue any thynge well paynted, kerued, or embroudred, to leaue our owne countray menne, and reſorte vnto ſtrangers: but more of this ſhal I ſpeke in the nexte volume. But to reſorte vnto lawyers.
               ¶ I thinke verily, if childrē were brought vp, as I haue written, and continually were reteined in the right ſtudy of very philoſophy, vntil they paſſed the age of .xxi. yeres, and thā ſet to the lawes of this realme (being ones brought to a more certain & compendious ſtudy, and eyther in engliſhe, latine, or good french, written in a more clene and elegant ſtile) vndoubtedly they ſhulde become menne of ſo excellente wyſedome, that throughoute all the worlde ſhulde be

founden in no commune weale more noble counſaylours, our lawes not only comprehendynge moſte excellent reaſons, but alſo beyng gathered & compacte (as I mought ſaye) of the pure meale or floure, ſiſted out of the beſt lawes in all other countreys, as ſome what I do intende to proue euidently in the nexte volume, wherin I wyll rendre mine office or duetie, to that honorable ſtudy, wherby my father was aduaunced to a iuge, and alſo I my ſelfe haue attayned no lyttell commoditie.
               ¶ I ſuppoſe, there be dyuers men wil ſay, that the ſwetneſſe that is conteyned in eloquence, & the multitude of doctrines, ſhuld vtterly withdrawe the myndes of yonge men from the more neceſſary ſtudye of the lawes of this realme. To them wyl I make a briefe anſwere, but trewe it ſhall be, and I truſt ſufficient to wiſe men. In the great multitude of yonge men, whiche alway wil repayre, and the lawe beinge ones brought in to a more certayne and perfect langage, wyll alſo increaſe in the reuerent ſtudye of the lawe: vndoughtedly there ſhall neuer lacke, but ſome by nature inclyned, dyuers by deſire of ſōdry doctrines, many for hope of lucre or ſome other aduauncement, wyll effectually ſtudy the lawes, ne wyll be ther from withdrawen by any other leſſon, whiche

is more eloquent. Example we haue, at this preſent tyme, of dyuers excellent lerned men bothe in the lawes ciuile and alſo in phiſike, whiche beynge exactly ſtudied in all partes of eloquence, bothe in the Greke tonge and latine, haue not withſtandynge red and pervſed the great fardelles and truſſes of the moſt barbarouſe autours ſtuffed with innumerable gloſes: wherby the moſt neceſſary doctrines of lawe & phiſyke be mynced into fragmentes, and in all wyſe mens opinions, do perceyue no leſſe in the ſayd lerninges, than they, which neuer knew eloquence, or neuer taſted other but the fecis or dragges of the ſayde noble doctrines. And as for the multitude of ſciences can not indamage any ſtudent, but if he be meued to ſtudy the lawe by any of the ſayde motions, by me before touched, he ſhal rather increſe therin than be hindred, and that ſhall appere manyfeſtely to them, that eyther wyll gyue credence to my reporte, or elles wyl rede the warkes that I wyll alledge, whiche if they vnderſtande not, to deſyre ſome lerned man by interpretinge to cauſe them perceyue it. And firſte I wyll begynne at oratours, who beare the principall tytle of eloquence.
               ¶ It is to be remēbred, that in the lernyng The art of retorike in mootinge. of the lawes of this realme, there is at this

day an exerciſe, wherin is a maner of a ſhadowe or figure of the auncient rhetorike. I meane the pleading vſed in courte & Chancery called motes. Where fyrſt a caſe is appoynted to be moted by certayne yong mē, conteinynge ſome doubtefull controuerſy, which is in ſtede of the hede of a declamation called thema, the caſe beinge knowen, they which be appoynted to mote, do examyne the caſe, and inueſtygate what they therin can eſpie, whiche maye make a contention, wherof maye ryſe a queſtion to be argued, and that of Tulli is called conſtitutio, & of Quintilian ſtatus cauſae. Alſo they conſider what plees on euery parte ought to be made, and howe the caſe may be reaſoned. Whiche is the fyrſte parte of Rhetorike, named Inuention. Than appoynte they, howe many plees maye be made for euery parte, and in what formalytie they ſhulde be ſette, Whiche is the ſeconde part of Rhetoryke, called diſpoſition, wherin they do moche approche vnto Rhetorike. Than gather they al in to perfecte remembraunce, in ſuche order as it oughte to be pleaded, whiche is the parte of Rhetorike named memorie. But for as moche as the tonge, wherin it is ſpoken, is barberouſe, and the ſtering of affectiōs of the minde in this realme was neuer vſed: therfore there

lacketh Eloquution, and Pronunciatiō, two the pryncipall partes of Rhetorike. Notwithſtandyng ſome lawyers, if they be wel reteyned, wyll in a meane cauſe pronounce right vehemētly. More ouer, there ſemeth to be in the ſayd pledinges, certaine partes of an oration, that is to ſay, for Narrations, Partitions, Confirmations, and Confutatiōs, named of ſome Reprehentions, They haue Declarations, Barres, Replications, and Reioyndres, only they lacke pleaſaunt fourme of begynnynge, called in latine Exordium: nor it maketh therof no great matter, they that haue ſtudied rhetorike, ſhall perceyue what I meane. Alſo in arguynge theyr caſes, in myne opinion, they lacke very lytell of the hole art: for therin they do diligently obſerue the rules of Confirmation and Confutatiō, wherin reſteth proufe and diſproufe: hauing almoſt al the places, wherof they ſhall fetche theyr reaſons, called of oratours loci cōmunes, whiche I omyt to name, fearynge to be to longe in this matter. And verily I ſuppoſe, if there mought ones happen ſome man, hauing an excellēt wyt, to be brought vp in ſuche fourme, as I haue hytherto written, and may alſo be exactely or depely lerned in the arte of an oratour, and alſo in the lawes of this realme, the prynce ſo wyllynge and therto

aſsiſtinge, vndoubtedly it ſhuld not be impoſſible for hym, to brynge the pleadynge and reſonynge of the lawe, to the auncient fourme of noble oratours: and the lawes and exerciſe therof, beinge in pure latin or doulce frenche, fewe men in conſultations, ſhuld (in myne opinion) compare with our lawyars, by this meanes beyng brought to be perfect oratours, as in whom ſhuld than be founden the ſharpe wyttes of logitians, the graue ſentences of philoſophers, the elegancie of poetes, the memory of ciuilians, the voice and geſture of them that can pronounce comedies: which is al that Tulli, in the perſon of the moſte eloquente man Ci. de oratore. li. i. Marcus Antonius, coulde require to be in an oratour.
               ¶ But now to cōclude mine aſſertiō. What let was eloquence to the ſtudy of the lawe in Quintus Sceuola, whiche beyng an excellent autour in the lawes ciuile, was called of al lawiars moſt eloquente? Or howe moch was eloquence myniſhed by knowelege of the lawes in Craſſus, whiche was called of all eloquent men the beſt lawyar? ¶ Alſo Seruus Sulpitius, in his tyme one of the moſt noble oratours, next vnto Tulli, was not ſo let by eloquence, but that on the ciuile lawes he made notable commentes, and many noble warkes by all lawyers

approued. Who redeth the texte of Ciuile, called Pandectes or Digeſtes, and hath any cōmendable iugemēt in the latin tonge, but he wil affirme, that Ulpianus, Sceuola, Caius, and all the other there named, of wh
                     •
                  ſe ſayinges all the ſayde textes be aſſembled, were not onely ſtudyous of eloquēce, but alſo therin wonderful exerciſed: for as moche as their ſtile dothe approche nere to the antique & pure eloquence, than any other kynde of writers, that wrate aboute that tyme?
               ¶ Sēblably Tulli, in whom it ſemeth, that Eloquence hath ſet her glorious Throne moſte ryhcly and preciouſly adourned for al men to wonder at, but no man to approch it, was not let from beynge an incomparable oratour, ne was by the exact knowlege of other ſciences withdrawen, from pleadyng infinite cauſes before the Senate and iuges, and they beinge of moſte wayghtye importaunce: In ſoo moche as Cornelius Corn. Ta. de orator. Tacitus, an excellente oratour, hiſtorien, and lawiar, ſayth, Surely in the bookes of Tulli, men maye deprehende, that in hym lacked not the knowlege of geometrye, ne muſyke, ne grammer, fynally of no maner of arte that was honeſt, he of logike perceyued the ſubtiltie, of that parte that was moral al the commoditie, and of al thinges

the chiefe motions and cauſes. And yet for all this abundaunce, and as it were a garnerde heaped with al maner ſciēces: there fayled not in hym ſubſtaunciall lernynge in the lawes Ciuile, as it maye appere as wel in the bookes, whiche he hym ſelfe 
                     •••
                  de of lawes, as alſo, and mooſte ſpecially, in many of his moſte eloquent orations: whiche if one well lerned in the lawes of this realme, dydde rede and well vnderſtande, he ſhulde fynde, ſpecially in his orations called Actiones agayne Uerres, many places, where he ſhulde eſpye by lykelyhode the fountaynes, from whens proceded dyuers groundes of our cōmune lawes. But I wyll nowe leue to ſpeake any more therof at this tyme.
               ¶ Moreouer, when yonge men haue red lawes, expouned in the orations of Tulli, and alſo in hiſtories, of the begynnynge of lawes, and in the warkes of Plato, Xenophon, and Ariſtotell, of the dyuerſyties of lawes and publyke weales, if nature (as I late ſayde) wyl dyſpoſe them to that maner ſtudy: they ſhall be therto the more incenſed, and come vnto it the better prepared and furnyſſhed. And they whom nature therto nothynge meueth, haue not only ſaued al that time, which many nowe a dayes do conſume in idleneſſe, but alſo haue won

ſuche a treaſure, wherby they ſhall all waye be able to ſerue honourably theyr prynce, & the publike weale of theyr countraye, pryncipally if they conferre all their doctrines to the moſte noble ſtudie of morrall philoſophy, which teacheth both vertues maners, and ciuile policie: wherby at the laſt we ſhuld haue in this realme ſufficiencie of worſhyppefull lawyers, and alſo a publyke weale equiualente to the Grekes or Romaynes.
            
            
               For what cauſe at this daye there be in this realme fewe perfecte ſchole mayſters. Capitulo. xv.
               
                  LOrde god howe many good and clene wittes of chyldren be nowe adayes periſhed by ignoraunte ſchole mayſters. Howe lyttell ſubſtancial doctrine is apprehēded by the feweneſſe of good grammariens? Not with ſtāding I know that there be ſome wellerned, which haue taught, and alſo do teche, but god knowethe a fewe, and they with ſmal effect, hauing therto no comfort: their aptiſt and moſt propre ſcholers, after they be well inſtructed in ſpekynge latine, and vnderſtandynge ſome poetes, beinge taken

from theyr ſchole by theyr parentes, and eyther be brought to the courte, and made lakaies or pages, or elles are bounden prē
                  tiſes, wherby the worſhyp that the maiſter aboue any rewarde, couayteth to haue by the prayſe of his ſcholer, is vtterly drowned. Wherof I haue harde ſchole maiſters very wel lerned, of good right, complaine. But yet (as I ſayd) the feweneſſe of good grammariens is a great impediment of doctrine. And here I wolde the reders ſhuld marke, that I note to be fewe good grāmariens, and not none. I cal not them gramariens, whiche only can teache or make rules, wherby a chylde ſhall onelye lerne to ſpeake congrue latine, or to make ſixe verſis ſtandyng in one fote, wherin perchance ſhall be neyther ſentence nor eloquence. But I name hym a grammarien by the auctorytie of Quintilian, that ſpeakynge latine Fab. Quintilian. li. i. elegantly, can expounde good autors, expreſſynge the inuention and dyſpoſition of the mater, theyr ſtyle or fourme of eloquence, explycatinge the figures, as well of ſentences as wordes, leuynge nothing, perſon or place named by the auctour, vndeclared, or hyd from his ſcholers. Wherfore Quintilian ſayth, It is not inough for hym to haue red poetes, but all kyndes of wryting muſt alſo be ſought for, not for the

hiſtories only, but alſo for the propretie of wordes, which cōmunely doo receiue their auctoritie of noble auctours. More ouer, without muſike, grammer may not be perfecte: for as moche as therin muſte be ſpoken of metres & harmonies, called rythmi in greke. Neither if he haue not the knowlege of ſtorres, he maye vnderſtande poetes, whiche in deſcription of tymes (I omytte other thynges) they traict of the riſinge and goinge downe of planettes. Alſo he may not be ignorant in philoſophye, for many places that be almoſt in euery poete, fetched out of the moſt ſubtile parte of naturall queſtions. Theſe be well nyghe the wordes of Quintilian. Than beholde how fewe grammariens, after this deſcription, be in this realme.
               ¶ Undoutedly there be in this realme many wel lerned, which if the name of a ſchole mayſter were not ſoo moche hadde in contempte, and alſo if theyr labours with abundante ſalaries moughte be requited, were ryghte ſufficiente and able to induce theyr herers to excellente lernynge: ſo they be not plucked away grene, and er they be in doctrine ſufficiently rooted. But nowe adayes, if to a bachelar or mayſter of arte, ſtudy of philoſophy waxeth tedious, if he haue a ſpone full of latine, he wyll ſhewe

forth a hoggeſheed, without any lerninge, and offre to teache grammer, and expoune noble wryters: and to be in the roume of a mayſter, he wyll for a ſmalle ſalarie, ſette a falſe colour of lernynge on propre wyttes, whiche wyll be waſſhed awaye with one ſhoure of rayne. For if the chyldren be abſente from ſchole, by the ſpace of one moneth, the beſte lerned of them, wyll vnneth tell whether FATO, wherby Eneas was broughte in to Itali, were other a manne, a horſe, a ſhyp, or a wylde gooſe: Al though Uirgilius Aeneid 
                        •
                      ſu ſecūdo. theyr mayſter wyll perchance auaunte him ſelfe to be a good philoſopher.
               ¶ Some men peraduenture do thinke, that at the begynnynge of lernynge, it forceth not, all thoughe the mayſters haue not ſoo exacte doctryne as I haue reherced, but let them take good hede, what Quintilian ſaythe, It is ſo moche the better, to be inſtructed Fab Qui. lib. i. by them that are beſte lerned, for as moch as it is dyfficultie to put out of the mynde, that whiche is ones ſettylled, the double bourden beynge paynefull to the mayſters that ſhal ſuccede, and veryly moche more to vnteache than to teache. Wherfore it is writen, that Timothe the noble muſitian, demaunded alwaye a greatter rewarde of them, whom other had taughte, than of them that neuer any thinge lerned.

Theſe be the wordes of Quintilian or like.
               ¶ Alſo the commune experiēce teacheth, that no man wyl put his ſonne to a botcher to lerne, or he bynde hym prentyſe to a tailour. Or if he wil haue him a conning goldſmyth, wyll bynde hym fyrſte prentiſe to a tynkar. In theſe thinges poore men be circumſpect, and the nobles and gentyll men, who wolde haue theyr ſonnes by excellent lernynge come vnto honour, for ſparyng of coſte, or for lacke of dyligente ſerche for a good ſchole maiſter, wilfully dyſtroy theyr chyldren, cauſynge them to be taught that lernynge, whiche wolde require ſixe or ſeuen yeres to be forgoten, by whiche tyme the more parte of that age is ſpente, wherin is the chiefe ſharpneſſe of wyt, called in latin acumen, and alſo than approcheth the ſtubborne age, where the chylde broughte vp in pleaſure, dyſdayneth correction.
               ¶ Nowe haue I all declared (as I do ſuppoſe) the chiefe impechementes of excellent lernynge, of the reformation I neede not to ſpeake, ſens it is apparaunt, that by the contraries, men purſuing erneſtly with diſcrete iugement, and liberalitie, it ſhulde ſone be amended.
            
            
               Of ſondry fourmes of exerciſe neceſſary for euery gentyll man. Cap. xvi.
               
                  
                  AL thoughe I haue hitherto aduaunced the commendation of lernynge, ſpecially in gentyll men: Yet it is to be conſidered, that continuall ſtudye, without ſomme maner of exerciſe, ſhortely exhauſteth the ſpirytes vytall, and hyndereth natural decoction and dygeſtion, wherby mannes body is the ſooner corrupted and broughte in to dyuers ſickeneſſis, and fynally the life is therby made ſhorter. Where contrary wiſe, by exerciſe, whiche is a vehement motion (as Galene prince of phiſytions defineth) the helthe of manne is preſerued, and his ſtrength increaſed: for as moch as the mē
                  bres by meuynge and mutuall touchynge, do waxe more harde, and naturall heate in all the body is therby augmented. More ouer it maketh the ſpyrytes of a man more ſtronge and valiant, ſo that by the hardnes of the membres, all labours be more tollerable, by naturall heate, the appetite is the more quicke: the chaunge of the ſubſtance receiued, is the more redy, the nouriſſhing of all partes of the body, is the more ſufficiente and ſure. By valyaunt motion of the ſpirites, all thynges ſuperfluous be expelled, and the conduitis of the body clenſed.
               
                  
¶ Wherfore this parte of phiſike, is not to be contempned or neglected in the education of chyldren, and ſpecially from the age of .xiiii. yeres vppewarde, in whiche tyme ſtrength, with courage increaſeth.
               ¶ More ouer, there be dyuers maners of exercyſes, wherof ſome, onely prepareth and helpeth dygeſtyon, ſome augmenteth alſo ſtrength and hardyneſſe of body, other ſerue for agilitie and nymblenes, ſome for celeritie or ſpedines. There be alſo, which ought to be vſed for neceſſite only. Al theſe oughte he that is a tutor to a noble man, to haue in remembraunce: and as aportunitie ſerueth, to put them in experiēce. And ſpecially them, whiche with helthe do ioyne commoditie (and as I mought ſay) neceſſitie: conſiderynge that be he neuer ſo noble or valyant, ſome tyme he is ſubiecte to peryle, or (to ſpeake it more pleaſauntely) ſeruaunte to fortune. Touchinge ſuche exerciſes, as many be vſed within the houſe, or in the ſhadowe (as is the olde maner of ſpeakynge) as deambulations or moderate walkynges, laborynge with poyſes made of leade or other metall, called in latin Alteres, Lyftynge and throwynge the heuy ſtone or barre, playing at tenyſe, and dyuers ſemblable exercyſes, I wyll for this tyme paſſe ouer, exhortynge them, whiche

do vnderſtande latine, and doo deſyre to knowe the commodities of ſondry exerciſes, to reſorte to the booke of Galene, of the gouernaunce of helthe, called in latine De ſanitate tuenda, where they ſhall be in that matter abundantly ſatiſfied, and finde in the readynge moche delectation: which booke is tranſlated into latine, wonderfull eloquently by doctor Linacre, late mooſte worthy phiſition, to our moſte noble ſoueraygne lorde kynge Henry the .viii. And I wyl nowe onely ſpeake of thoſe exerciſes, apte to the furniture of a gentyll mannes perſonage, adaptynge his body to hardeneſſe, ſtrengthe, and agilitie, and to helpe therwith hym ſelfe in peryle, whiche maye happen in warres or other neceſſitie.
            
            
               Exerciſes, wherby ſhulde growe both recreation and profite. Cap. xvii.
               VUraſtlynge is a very good exercyſe in the begynnyng of youth, ſo that it be with one that is equal in ſtrength, or ſomwhat vnder, & that the place be ſofte, that in fallinge their bodies be not bruſed.
               ¶ There be diuers maners of wraſtlinges, Wraſtling. Galenus. but the beſt, as well for helthe of body, as for exerciſe of ſtrength is, when laying mutuallye theyr handes one ouer a nothers

necke, with the other hand they holde faſt eche other by the arme, and claſpyng their legges together, they inforce them ſelfes with ſtrength and agilitie, to throwe down eche other, whiche is alſo prayſed by Galene. And vndoubtedly it ſhall be founde profytable in warres, in caſe that a Capytayne ſhall be conſtrayned to cope with his aduerſarye hande to hande, hauynge his weapon broken or loſte. Alſo it hath benne ſene, that the weaker perſon, by the ſleight of wraſtlyng, hath ouerthrowen the ſtronger, almoſt or he coulde faſten on the other any violent ſtroke.
               ¶ Alſo rennynge is bothe a good exerciſe Renninge. and a laudable ſolace. It is written of Epaminondas, the valiant capitayne of Chebanes (who as wel in vertue and proweſſe, as in lernyng, ſurmounted al noble men of his tyme) that dayly he exerciſed hym ſelfe in the morning, with rennynge and leapinge, in the eueninge in wraſtling, to the intente that lykewyſe in armure he moughte the more ſtrongely, embracinge his aduerſary, putte hym in daunger. And alſo that in the chaſe rennynge and leapinge, he moughte either ouertake his enemy, or beinge purſued, if extreme nede required, eſcape him.
               ¶ Semblably before hym dyd the worthye Achilles, for whyles his ſhyppes laye at

rode, he ſuffred not his people to ſlomber in idleneſſe, but dayly exerciſed them and hym ſelfe in rennynge, wherin he was moſt excellent, and paſſed al other: and therfore Homere through out all his warke, calleth hym ſwyfte fote Achilles.
               ¶ The great Alexander, beynge a childe, excelled all his companions in rennynge, wherfore on a tyme, one demanded of him, if he wolde renne at the great game of Olympus, wherto out of al partes of Grece, came the moſte actife and valiant perſones, to aſſay maiſtries. Whervnto Alexāder anſwered in this fourme, I wolde very gladly renne there, if I were ſure to renne with kynges: for if I ſhuld contende with a priuate perſon, hauynge reſpecte to our both aſtates, our victories ſhulde not be equall.
               ¶ Nedes muſt rennyng be taken for a laudable exerciſe, ſens one of the mooſt noble capitaynes of all the Romaynes, toke his name of rennynge, and was called Papirius Curſor, whiche is in engliſhe, Papirius the Renner. And alſo the valiant Marius the Romayne, whan he had bene ſeuen tymes Conſull, and was of the age of foure ſcore yeres, exerciſed him ſelfe dayly among the yonge menne of Rome, in ſuche wyſe, that there reſorted people out of farre partes, to beholde the ſtrength and agilitie of that

olde Conſul, wherin he compared with the yonge and luſty ſoudiours.
               ¶ There is an exerciſe, whiche is ryghte Swymmynge. profitable in exſtreme daunger of warres, but bicauſe there ſemeth to be ſome peril in the lernyng therof, and alſo it hath not ben of longe tyme moche vſed, ſpecially among noble men, perchaunce ſome reders wyll lyttle eſteme it, I meane ſwymmynge. But not withſtandynge, if they reuolue the imbecilitie of our nature, the haſardes and daungers of battayle, with the exaumples, whiche ſhal here after be ſhewed, they wil (I doubt not) thinke it as neceſſary to a capitayne or man of armes, as any that I haue yet reherſed.
               ¶ The Romaines, who aboue all thinges, had mooſte in eſtimation martiall proweſſe, had a large and ſpaciouſe fielde, withoute the citie of Rome, which was called Marces field, in latine Campus Martius, wherin the youth of the citie was exerciſed. This Campus Martius. fielde adioyned to the ryuer of Cyber, to the intente that as well menne as chyldren ſhulde waſhe and refreſhe them in the water after theyr labours, as alſo lerne to ſwymme, And not men and chyldren only, but alſo the horſes: that by ſuch vſage they ſhulde more aptely and boldely paſſe ouer greatte ryuers, and be more able to reſyſte

or cut the waues, and not be aferde of pirries or great ſtormes. For it hath ben often tymes ſene, that by the good ſwymming of horſes, many men haue benne ſaued: and contrary wiſe, by a timorouſe royle, where the water hath vnneth come to his bealy, his legges hath foltred, wherby many a good and propre man hath periſhed. What benefite receyued the hole citie of Rome, by the ſwymmynge of Oratius Cocles? Oratins Cocles. whiche is a noble hyſtorie, and worthy to be remembred.
               ¶ After the Romaines had expelled Carquine theyr king, as I haue before remembred, he deſired ayde of Porſena, kinge of Chuſcanes, a noble and valiaunt prince, to recouer eftſones his realme and dignitye: who with a great and puiſſaunt hoſt, beſieged the citie of Rome, and ſo ſodeinely and ſharpely aſſaulted it, that it lacked but litle, that he ne hadde entred into the citie with his hoſt, ouer the brydge, called Sublitius: where encountred with hym this Oratius with a fewe Romaynes. And whyles this noble capitayne, beynge alone, with an incredible ſtrengthe reſyſted all the hoſte of Porcena, that were on the bridge, he commaunded the bridge to be broken behynde hym, where with all the Chuſcanes theron ſtandynge, fell into the greatte ryuer of

Ciber, but Oratius al armed lepte into the water, and ſwamme to his company. Al be it that he was ſtriken with many arowes & dartes, and alſo greuouſlye wounded, not with ſtandynge by his noble courage and feate of ſwymmynge, he ſaued the cytie of Rome from perpetuall ſeruitude, whiche was likely to haue enſued by the returne of the proude Carquine.
               ¶ Howe moch profited the feate in ſwimmynge Iuliꝰ Ceſar ſwimmynge. to the valiaunt Iulius Ceſar? who at the batayle of Alexandri, on a bridge beinge abandoned of his people for the multitude of his ennemyes, whiche oppreſſed them, whan he mought no lenger ſuſteyne the ſhotte of dartes and arowes, he boldly lepte in to the ſee, and dyuynge vnder the water, eſcaped the ſhotte, and ſwamme the ſpace of .CC. paſis to one of his ſhyppes, drawynge his cote armure with his teethe after hym, that his enemies ſhulde not atteyne it, and alſo that it moughte ſomwhat defende hym from theyr arowes: And that more meruayle was, holdynge in his hande aboue the water, certayne letters, which a littel before he had receyued from the Senate. Sertorius
               
               ¶ Before hym Sertoryus (who of the ſpanyardes was named the ſeconde Anniball for his proweſſe) in the battaylle that

Scipio faught agayne the Cimbres, which muaded Fraunce, when by negligence of his people, his enemyes preuailed, and put his hoſte to the warſe, he beinge ſore woū
                  ded, and his horſe beinge loſt, armed as he was in a geſſeron, holdynge in his handes a tergate, and his ſworde, lept into the riuer of Rone, whiche is wonderfull ſwyft, and ſwymmynge agayne the ſtreme, came to his company, not without greatte wondrynge of all his enemies, which ſtode and behelde hym.
               ¶ The great kynge Alexander lamented, that he had not wel lerned to ſwimme. For in Indee whan he wente againſte the puiſſaunt kynge Porus, he was conſtrained, in folowynge his enterpriſe, to conueye his hoſte ouer a ryuer of wonderful greatnes: than cauſed he his horſe men to gage the water, wherby he firſte perceyued, that it came to the breſtes of the horſes, and in the myddle of the ſtreme, the horſis wente in water to the necke, wherwith the fotemen beinge aferde, durſt not aduenture to paſſe ouer the ryuer. Alexaunder perceyuynge that, with a dolorous maner in this wiſe lamented, O howe mooſte vnhappy am I of all other, that haue not or this tyme lerned to ſwymme? And therwith he pulled a tergate from one of his ſoudiours, and caſting

it in to the water, ſtandynge on it, with his ſpere cōueyed hym ſelfe with the ſtreme, & gouernynge the tergate wyſely, broughte hym ſelfe vnto the other ſyde of the water. wherof his people beinge abaſſhed, ſome aſſayed to ſwymme, ſome holdynge faſte by the horſes, other by ſpeares, & other lyke weapons, many vpon fardels and truſſes, gate ouer the ryuer: in ſo moch as nothing was periſhed ſaue a litell baggage, and of that no great quantitie loſte.
               ¶ What vtilitie was ſhewed to be in ſwymmynge at the fyrſt warres, which the Romaynes had agaynſt the Carthaginenſys? It happened a batayle to be on the ſee betwene them, where they of Carthage, beinge vainquiſhed, wolde haue ſet vp theyr ſayles to haue fled, but that perceyuyng diuers yong Romaynes, threwe them ſelfes in to the ſee, and ſwymmyng vnto the ſhippes, enforced theyr ennemies to ſtryke on lande, and there aſſaulted them ſo aſprely, that the capitaine of the Romaynes, called Luctatius, mought eaſily take them.
               ¶ Nowe to beholde, what excellent commoditie is in the feate of ſwymmynge, ſens no kynge, be he neuer ſo puiſſaunte or perfecte in the experience of warres, maye aſſure hym ſelfe from the neceſſities, whiche fortune ſoweth among men that be mortal,

And ſens on the helth and ſaulfegarde of a noble capitaine, often tymes dependeth the weale of a realme, nothing ſhulde be kepte from his knowlege, wherby his perſonne maye be in euery ieoperdie preſerued.
               ¶ Amonge theſe exerciſes, it ſhall be conuenyente, Defence with waipons. to lerne to handle ſondry waypōs, ſpecyally the ſword & the bataile axe: which be for a noble man moſt conuenient.
               ¶ But the moſt honorable exerciſe in mine opynion, and that beſemeth the aſtate of euery Rydynge and vauntynge of horſis. noble perſonne, is to ryde ſurely and cleane, on a great horſe and a roughe, whiche vndoubtedly not only importeth a maieſtie and drede to inferiour perſones, beholdyng hym aboue the common courſe of other men, daūting a fierce and cruel beaſt, but alſo is no lyttell ſocour, as well in purſuete of ennemyes and confoundyng them, as in eſcapynge imminente daunger, whan wyſedome therto exhorteth. Alſo a ſtrong and hardy horſe doth ſome tyme more domage vnder his mayſter, than he with all his weapon: and alſo ſetteth forwarde the ſtroke, and cauſeth it to lyghte with more vyolence.
               ¶ Bucephall, the horſe of greatte kynge Alexander, who ſuffred none on his backe Bucephal. ſaulfe onely his mayſter, at the battayle of Thebes beinge ſore wounded, wolde not

ſuffre the kynge to departe from hym to a nother horſe, but perſyſtynge in his furyouſe courage, wonderfully continued out the batayle, with his fete and tethe beating downe and deſtroyenge many ennemyes: and many ſēblable maruailes of his ſtrēgth he ſhewed. Wherfore Alexander, after the horſe was ſlayne, made in remembrance of hym a citie in the countreye of India, and called it Bucephal, in perpetuall memorie of ſo worthy a horſe, which in his lyfe had ſo well ſerued hym.
               ¶ What wonderful enterpriſes dyd Iulius Ceſar achieue by the helpe of his horſe? whiche not onely dyd excell al other horſis in fierceneſſe and ſwyſte rennyng, but alſo was in ſome partes diſcrepante in fygure from other horſes, hauyng his fore houes like to the fete of a man. And in that figure Plinius writeth, that he ſawe hym kerued before the temple of Uenus.
               ¶ Other remembrance there is of dyuers horſes, by whoſe monſtruous power, men did exploite incredible affaires: but by cauſe the reporte of them conteynethe thynges impoſſyble, and is not writen by any approued auctour, I wyll not in this place reherce them. Sauynge that it is yet ſuppoſed, that the caſtell of Arundell in Suſſex, was made by one Beauuize, erle of South Arundell.
                  
hamton, for a monument of his horſe called Arundell, whiche in farre countreyes had ſaued his mayſter from many peryls.
               ¶ Nowe conſyderynge the vtilitie in rydynge great horſes, it ſhal be neceſſary (as I haue ſayde) that a gentylman do lerne to ryde a great and fierce horſe whyles he is tender, and the braunes and ſinewes of his thighes not fully conſolidate.
               ¶ There is alſo a ryghte good exercyſe, whiche is alſo expedient to lerne, which is named the vauntynge of a horſe: that is to leape on hym at euery ſide without ſtyrope or other helpe, ſpecially whyles the horſe is goinge. And beinge therin expert, than armed at all poyntes to aſſaye the ſame, the commoditie wherof is ſo manifeſte, that I nede no further to declare it.
            
            
               The auncient hyuntynge of Greckes and Romaynes. Cha. xviii.
               BUt nowe wyll I procede to write of exerciſes, whiche be not vtterly reproued of noble auctours, if they be vſed with oportunitie & in meaſure, I mene huntynge, haukynge, and daunſing. In hū
                  tynge maye be an imitation of batayle, if it be ſuche as was vſed among them of Perſia: wherof Xenophon, the noble and moſt

eloquent philoſopher, maketh a delectable mention, in his boke, called the doctrine of Cirus: and alſo maketh a nother ſpecyall booke, conteynynge the hole diſciplyne of the auncient huntynge of the Grekes, and in that fourme beynge vſed, it is a laudable exercyſe, of the whiche I wyll nowe ſome what write.
               ¶ Cirus, and other auncyente kynges of The huntynge of Perſians. Xenophon pedia Cyri. ii. i. Perſia (as Xenophon wryteth) vſed this maner in all theyr huntynge. Fyrſte, where as it ſemeth, there was in the realme of Perſia but one Citie, whiche as I ſuppoſe, was called Perſepolis, there were the children of the Perſians, from theyr infancye, vnto the aege of ſeuentene yeres, broughte vp in the lerning of iuſtice and temperance, and alſo to obſerue continēce in meate and drynke: in ſo moche, that whyther ſo euer they wente, they toke with them for theyr ſuſtenaunce, but onely breade and herbes, called Creſsis, in latine Naſturtium: and for theyr drynke, a dyſhe to take water out of the ryuers as they paſſed. Alſo they lerned to ſhote, and to caſte the darte or iauelyn. Whan they came to the aege of .xvii. yeres, they were lodged in the palayſes, that were there ordeyned for the kyng and his nobles, whiche was as wel for the ſaue garde of the citie, as for the example of tē
                  peraunce,

that they dayly had at theyr eies gyuen to them by the nobles: whiche alſo mought be called Peeres, by the ſignification of the greeke word, wherin they were called Omotimi. More ouer, they were accuſtomed to ryſe alwaye in the fyrſt ſpring of the daye, and pacyentely to ſuſteyne alwaye bothe cold and heate: And the kyng dydde ſe them exerciſed in goinge and alſo in rennynge. And whan he intended, in his owne perſonne, to hunte, which he dydde commenly euery moneth, he toke with him the one halfe of the company of yonge mē, that were in the palayſes. Than toke euery man with hym his bowe and quiuer with arowes, his ſworde or hache of ſteele, a litel tergate, and two dartes. The bowe and arowes ſerued to purſue beaſtes that were ſwyft: and the dartes, to aſſayle them and all other beaſtes. And whan theyr courage was chaufed, or that by fierſeneſſe of the beaſt they were in daunger, than force conſtrayned them to ſtrike with the ſworde, or hache, and to haue good eye at the violent aſſaulte of the beaſte, and to defende them if nede were, with theyr tergates, wherin they accounted to be the treweſt and moſte certayn meditation of warres. And to this huntynge the kynge didde conducte them, and he hym ſelfe fyrſt hunted ſuche beaſtes

as he hapned to encounter. And whan he had taken his pleaſure, he than with moſte dilygence didde ſet other forwarde, beholdynge who hunted valyauntly, and refourmynge them, whom he ſawe negligente or ſlouthfull. But er they wente forth to this huntynge, they dyned competentely: and duryng theyr huntyng they dined no more. For if by any occaſyon theyr hyntinge continued aboue one daye, they toke the ſaide dyner for theyr ſupper: and the next daye, if they kylled no game, they hunted vntyll ſupper tyme: accountynge thoſe two daies but for one. And if they toke any thynge, they eate it at theyr ſupper with ioye and pleaſure. If nothynge were kylled, they eate only bread and creſſis, as I before reherſed, and dranke therto water. And if any man wyll diſpreyſe this diete, lette hym thinke what pleaſure there is in breade, to hym that is hungry: and what dylectation is in drinkynge water to hym that is thurſty. Surely this maner of huntyng may be called a neceſſary ſolace and paſtyme, for therin is the very imitation of battaile. For not onelye it doth ſhewe the courage and ſtrengthe, as well of the horſe as of hym that rydeth, trauerſynge ouer mountaines and valeys, encountrynge and ouerthrowyng great and myghty beaſtes: but alſo it

increaſeth in them both agilitie and quickneſſe, alſo ſleyght and policie to fynde ſuch paſſages and ſtraites, where they may preuent or intrap theyr enemies. Alſo by continuaunce therin, they ſhall eaſyly ſuſteyne trauayle in warres, hunger & thurſt, colde and heate. Hytherto be the wordes of Xenophon, although I haue not ſette them in lyke order as he wrate them.
               ¶ The chiefe huntynge of the valyaunte The huntynge of the grekes Grekes was at the lyon, the libarde, the tigre, the wylde ſwyne, and the beare, and ſometime the wolfe, and the harte. Theſeus, which was companion to Hercules, atteyned the greateſt parte of his renoume, for fightynge with the greate bore, whiche the Grekes called Phera, that waſted and conſumed the fieldes of a great countrey.
               ¶ Meleager likewiſe for ſleinge the great bore in Calidonia, whiche in greatnes and fiercenes, excelled al other bores: and had ſlayne many noble and valyaunt perſones.
               ¶ The great Alexander, in tymes vacante from bataile, delited in that maner hunting. On a tyme he faughte alone with a lyon, wonderfull great and fierce, being preſent amonge other ſtraungers, the ambaſſadour of Lacedemonia. And after longe trauaile, with incredible myght, he ouerthrewe the lyon, and ſlewe hym, wherat the ſayde ambaſſadour,

wondrynge maruaylouſly, ſayd to the kynge, I wold to god (noble prince) ye ſhulde fighte with a lyon for ſome great empire. By whiche wordes it ſemed, that he nothynge approued the valiauntnes of a prince by fighting with a wild beaſt, wherin moch more was aduentured, thā mought be by the victorie goten.
               ¶ All be it Pompei, Sertorius, and diuers The huntynge of the Romanes. other noble Romaynes, whan they were in Numidia, Libia, and ſuch other countreys, whiche nowe be called Barbary and Moriſco, in the vacaty on ſeaſon from warres, they hunted lions, liberdes, and ſuch other beaſtes, fierce and ſauage, to thentēt therby to exerciſe them ſelfes and theyr ſouldiours. But al mgihty god be thāked, in this realme be no ſuche cruel beaſtis to be purſued. Not withſtandyng, in the huntyng of redde dere and falowe, mought be a great parte of ſemblable exerciſe, vſed by noble men, ſpecially in foreſtis, whiche be ſpaciouſe: if they wolde vſe but a fewe nombre of houndes, onely to harborowe or rouſe the game, by theyr yornyng to giue knowlege, whiche waye it fleeth, the remenaunt of the diſporte to be in purſuing with iauelins and other waipons, in maner of warre. And to them, whiche in this huntynge doo ſhewe moſte proweſſe and actiuitie, a garlande,

or ſome other lyke token, to be gyuen in ſygne of victory, and with a ioyfull maner to be brought in the preſence of him that is chiefe in the companye, there to receyue condygne prayſe for theyr good endeuour.
               ¶ I dyſpraiſe not the huntynge of the foxe with rennynge houndes, but it is not to be compared to the other huntyng in commoditie of exerciſe. Therfore it wolde be vſed in the depe wynter, whan the other game is vnſeaſonable.
               ¶ Hunting of the hare with grehoundes, is a ryght good ſolace for men that be ſtudyouſe, or them to whom nature hath not gyuen perſonage, or courage apte for the warres. And alſo for gentylwomen, which feare neyther ſonne nor wynde for appayringe theyr beautie. And perauenture they ſhall be there at, laſſe idell, than they ſhulde be at home in theyr chambres.
               ¶ Kylling of dere with bowes or greyhoū
                  des, ſerueth well for the pot (as is the cō
                  mune ſaying) and therfore it muſt of neceſſitie be ſome tyme vſed. But it conteynethe therin no commendable ſolace or exerciſe, in compariſon to the other fourme of huntinge, if it be diligently perceyued.
               ¶ As for haukynge, I can finde no notable Haukinge. remembrance, that it was vſed of auncient

tyme amonge noble pryncis. I call auncyente tyme, before a thouſand yeres paſſed, ſens whiche tyme, vertue and nobleneſſe hath rather decayed than increaſed. Nor I coulde neuer knowe, who founde fyrſt that dyſporte.
               ¶ Plinius maketh menciō in his .viii. boke of the hyſtorye of nature, that in the partes of Grece, called Thracia, menne and haukes, as it were by a confederacie, toke byrdes to gether in this wyſe. The menne ſprange the byrdes out of the buſihes, and the haukes ſorynge ouer them, beate them downe, ſoo that the men moughte eaſyly take them. And than dyd the men departe equally the praye with the faukons, which beynge well ſerued, eftſoones and of a cuſtome repayred to ſuche places, where beinge a lofte, they perceyued men to that purpoſe aſſembled.
               ¶ By whiche reherſal of Plinius, we may coniecte, that from Thratia came this diſporte of haukynge. And I doubt not, but many other as well as I, haue ſene a ſemblable experience of wilde hobies, whiche in ſome countreys., that be champaine, will ſore and lie a lofte, houeringe ouer larkes and quayles, and kepe them downe on the ground, whiles they, which awayte on the

praye, do take them. But in what wyſe, or where ſo euer the beginninge of haukynge was, ſurely it is a ryghte delectable ſolace, thoughe therof commeth not ſo moch vtilitie (concernynge exerciſe) as there doth of huntynge. But I wolde oure faukons moughte be ſatisfied with the dyuyſion of their pray, as the faukons of Tracia were, that they nedeed not to deuour the hennes of this realme, in ſuche nombre, that vnles it be ſhortely conſidered, and that faukons be broughte to a more homely dyete, it is ryght lykely, that within a ſhorte ſpace of yeres, our familiar pultrie ſhalbe as ſcarce, as be nowe partriche and feſaunt. I ſpeake not this in diſprayſe of the faukons, but of them whiche kepeth them lyke cokneyes. The meane gentyl men and honeſte houſeholders, whiche care for the gentyl enterteinement of their frendes, do find in their dyſhe, that I ſaye trouthe, and noble men ſhal ryght ſhortly eſpie it, whan they come ſodeinly to theyr frendes houſe, vnpurueied for lacke of longe warnynge.
               ¶ But now to returne to my purpoſe. Undoubtedly haukynge, meaſurably vſed and for a paſſetyme, gyueth to a man good appetite to his ſupper. And at the leaſt waye withdraweth hym from other daliaunce or diſportes diſhoneſt, and to body and ſoule

perchaunce pernicious.
               ¶ Nowe I purpoſe to declare ſome thing, concernynge daunſynge, wherin is merite of prayſe and dyſprayſe, as I ſhall expreſſe it in ſuche fourme, as I truſt the reder ſhal fynde therin a rare and ſynguler pleaſure, with alſo good lernynge in thinges not yet communely knowen in our vulgare. Which if it be red of hym, that hath good opportunitie and quyete ſylence, I doubte not, but he ſhall take therby ſuche commoditie, as he loked not to haue founden in that exerciſe, whiche of the more parte of ſad men is ſo lyttell eſtemed.
            
            
               That all daunſynge is not to be reproued. Capitulo. xix.
               
                  I Am not of that opinion, that all daunſing generally is repugnaunt vnto vertue, all thoughe ſome perſones excellently lerned, ſpecially diuines, ſo do affirme it: whiche alwaye haue in theyr mouthes (whan they come into the pulpette) the ſayinge of the noble doctour, ſainct Auguſtine, That better it were, to delue or to go to ploughe on the ſondaye, thanne to daunce. Whiche moughte be ſpoken of that kynde of daunſynge, which was vſed in the tyme of ſainct Auguſtine, whan euery thing with the empire

of Rome, declined from their perfection, and the olde maner of danſynge was forgoten, & none remayned, but that which was laſciuious, and corrupted the myndes of them that daunſed, and prouoked ſynne, as ſemblably ſome do at this daye. Alſo at that tyme idolatry was nat clerely extinct, but diuers fragmentes therof remayned in euery region. And perchance ſolemne daū
                  ſes, whiche were celebrate vnto the paynims falſe goddis, were yet continued, for aſmoch as the pure religion of Chriſt was nat in al places conſolidate, and the paſtors and curates dyd winke at ſuche recreatiōs, fearynge, if they ſhulde haſtily haue remeued it, & induced ſodaynly the ſeueritie of goddis lawes, they ſhulde ſtyre the people therby to a generall ſedition, to the imminent daunger and ſubuertion of Chriſtis hole religion, late ſowen among them, and nat yet ſufficiently rooted. But the wyſe & diſcrete doctour ſaynte Auguſtine, vſynge the art of an oratour, wherin he was right excellent, omytting all rigorous menace or terrour, diſſuaded theym by the moſte eaſieſt way, from that maner ceremony, belō
                  gyng to idolatrie, preferryng before it bodyly occupation, therby aggrauatynge the offence to god, that was in that ceremony, ſens occupation, whiche is neceſſarye for

mans ſuſtinaunce, and in due tymes vertuous, is nat withſtandynge prohibited to be vſed on the ſondayes. And yet in theſe wordes of this noble doctour, is not ſo generall diſprayſe to all daunſynge as ſome men do ſuppoſe. And that for two cauſes. Fyrſt in his compariſon, he preferreth nat before daunſynge, or ioyneth therto any vycious exercyſe, but annecteth it with tyllyng and diggynge of the erthe, whiche be labours incident to mans lyuyng, and in them is cō
                  teyned nothynge that is vycyous. Wherefore the preemynence therof aboue daunſynge, qualifyeng the offence, they beinge done out of due tyme, that is to ſaye, in an holy daye, concludeth nat daunſynge to be at all tymes and in euery maner vnlaufull or vicious, conſyderynge, that in certayn caſes of exſtreme neceſſytie, menne mought bothe ploughe and delue without doing to god any offence. Alſo it ſhall ſeme to them, that ſeriouſly do examyne the ſaid wordes, that therein, Sayncte Auguſtine dothe nat prohybyte daunſynge ſo generally, as it is taken, but onely ſuche daunſes, whiche (as I late ſayde) were ſuperſtytious, and conteyned in theym a ſpyce of ydolatrie, or elles dydde with vncleane motions or countynances irritate the myndes of the dauncers to venereall luſtes. Wherby fornicatiō
                  
and auoutry were dayly increaſed. Alſo in thoſe daūces were enterlaſed dities of wan ton loue or rybaudry, with frequente remembraūce of the moſt vile idolles, Uenus & Baccus, as it were that the daunce were to their honour and memory, whiche moſte of all abhorred from Chriſtis religion, ſauering the auncient errour or paganiſme.
               ¶ I wold to god thoſe names were not at this day, vſed in balades and ditties, in the courtes of pryncys and noble men, where many good wittes be corrupted with ſemblable fantaſies, whiche in better wyſe employed, moughte haue bene more neceſſary to the publyke weale, and theyr princes honour. But nowe wyll I leaue this ſeryouſe matter to diuines, to perſwade or dyſſuade herein, accordynge to theyr offyces. And ſens in myne opinion ſayncte Auguſtine, that bleſſed clerke, reproueth not ſo generally all daunſynge, but that I maye laufully reherſe ſome kynde therof, which maye be neceſſary, and alſo commendable, takynge it for an exerciſe: I ſhal nowe procede to ſpeake of the fyrſt beginnyng therof, and in how great eſtimation it was had in dyuers regions.
            
            
               Of the fyrſt beginning of daunſinge, and the olde eſtimation therof. Cap. xx.
               
                  
THere be ſendry opinions of the oryginall beginninge of daunſynge. The poetes do faine, that whan Saturne, whiche deuoured dyuers his children, and ſemblably wolde haue done with Iupiter, Bhea the mother of Iupiter, deuiſed, that Curetes (whiche were mē of armes in that countrey) ſhuld daunſe in armour, playing Curetes. with theyr ſwordes and ſheldes, in ſuche fourme, as by that newe and pleaſaunt deuiſe they ſhulde aſſuage the melancolye of Saturne, and in the meane tyme, Iupyter was cōueyed into Phrigia, where Saturne alſo purſuyng hym, Bhea ſemblably taught the peple there, called Coribantes, to cāce in a nother fourme: where with Saturne Choribā
                     tes. was eftſones demulced and appaiſed. Whiche fable hath a reſemblaunce to the hiſtory of the bible, in the fyrſte boke of kinges, where it is remēbred, that Saul, whō god chaſe from a keper of aſſes, to be kynge of iewes (who in ſtature excelled, and was aboue all other men by the heed) declinyng from the lawes and preceptes of god, was poſſeſſed of an iuell ſpirite, which often times turmented and vexed hym: and other remedye founde he none, but that Dauid, whiche after hym was kynge, being at that tyme a propre childe, and playinge ſwetely on a harpe, with his pleaſaunt and perfect

harmonie, reduced his mynde into his priſtinate eſtate: and durynge the tyme that he played, the ſpirite ceſſed to vexe hym: whiche I ſuppoſe hapned nat onely of the efficacie of muſyke (albeit therin is moche power, as well in repreſſynge as excytinge naturall affectes) but alſo of the vertue ingenerate in the chylde Dauyd, that playd, whom god alſo had p̄deſtinate to be a great kyng, and a great prophete. And for the ſouerayn gyftes of grace and of nature, that he was endowed with, all myghty god ſaid of him, that he had founde a man after his harte and pleaſure. But nowe to retourne to ſpeake of daunſynge.
               ¶ Some interpretours of poetes do imagin, Proteus. that Proteus, who is ſuppoſed to haue turned him ſelf into ſondry figures, as ſom tyme to ſhew hym ſelfe like a ſerpent, ſome tyme lyke a lyon, otherwhyles lyke water, an other tyme like the flame of fyre, ſignifieth to be none other, but a delyuer & crafty daunſer, whiche in his daunſe coulde imagyne the inflexions of the ſerpent, the ſoft and delectable flowynge of the water, the ſwiftnes and mountynge of the fyre, the fierſe rage of the lyon, the violence & furye of the lybarde. Whiche expoſition is nat to be diſpraiſed, ſins it diſcordeth nat from reſon. But one opinyon there is, whiche I

wylle reherſe, more for the merye fantaſy, that therin is cōteined, than for any faythe or credite that is to be gyuen therto.
               ¶ Ouer Syracuſis (a greate and auncient citie in Sicile) there raigned a cruel tyrant Gelo the kynge of Sicile. called GELO, which by horryble tyrannies and oppreſſions, brought hym ſelfe into the hatrede of all his people, whyche he perceyuynge, leſte by mutuall communication, they ſhulde conſpyre agaynſt hym any rebellyon, he prohibited all men vnder terrible menaces, that no man or woman ſhulde ſpeake vnto an nother, but in ſtede of wordes, they ſhoulde vſe in their neceſſary affayres, countenaunces, tokens, and mouynges, with theyr fete, handes, and eien, whiche for neceſſitie fyrſte vſed, at the laſte grewe to a perfecte and delectable daunſynge. And GELO, nat withſtandynge his folyſhe curioſite, at the laſte was ſlayne of his people moſte myſerably. But although this hyſtorie were true, yet was nat daunſynge at this tyme fyrſt begon: for Orpheus and Muſeus, the moſte auncient of poetes, and alſo Homere, whiche were longe afore GELO, do make mention of daūſing. And in DELVS, whiche was the moſte ancient temple of Apollo, no ſolemnitie was done without daunſynge.
               ¶ Alſo in Indie, where the people honoreth

the ſonne, they aſſemble togyther, and whanne the ſonne fyrſte appereth, ioyned all in a daunce, they ſalute hym, ſuppoſinge that for as moche as he mouethe without ſenſible noyſe, it pleaſeth him beſt to be like wyſe ſaluted, that is to ſay with a pleaſante motion and ſilence.
               ¶ The interpretours of Plato do thinke, that the wonderful and incōprehenſible ordre of che celeſtiall bodies, I meane ſterres and planettes, and theyr motions harmonicall, gaue to them, that intentifly, and by the depe ſerche of reaſon beholde their courſys, in the ſondry dyuerſities of nombre and tyme, a fourme of imitation of a ſē
                  blable motion: whiche they called daunſynge. Wherfore the more nere they approched to that temperaunce, and ſubtyle modulation, of the ſayd ſuperiour bodyes, the more perfect and commēdable is theyr daunſynge: whiche is mooſte lyke to the trouthe of any opinion that I haue hitherto founden.
               ¶ Other fables there be, which I omytte for this preſente tyme: And nowe I wyll expreſſe, in what eſtymation daunſyng was hadde in the aunciente tyme, and alſo ſondry fourmes of daunſynge, not all; but ſuch as hadde in them a ſemblaunce of vertue or kunnynge.
               
                  
¶ Whan the arke of god (wherin was put Archa federis. the tables of the commaundementes, the yerde, wherwith Moiſes deuided the red ſee, and did the miracles in the preſence of Pharao, kynge of Egipte: alſo a parte of manna, wherwith the chyldren of Iſrael were fedde fourty yeres in deſert) was recouered of the Philiſties, and brought vnto the citie of Gaba, the holy kyng Dauid, Kyng Dauid daunſing opēty. wearynge on hym a linen ſurpleſſe, daunſed before the ſayd arke, folowynge hym a gret nombre of inſtrumētis of muſike: wher at his wyfe Micol, the daughter of kynge Saul, diſdayned and ſcorned hym, wherwith (as holy ſcripture ſaythe) all myghty god was moche diſpleaſed. And Dauid not ceſſinge, daunſed ioyouſely through the citie, in that maner honourynge that ſolemne feaſte, whiche amonge the iewes was one of the chiefe and principall, wherwith god was more pleaſed, than with all the other obſeruances that then were done vnto hym at that time.
               ¶ I wyll not trouble the reders with the innumerable ceremonyes of the gentyles, which were comprehended in daunſinges, ſens they oughte to be noumbred amonge ſuperſtytions. But I wyll declare, howe wyſe menne and valiaunte capitaynes imbraced daunſyng for a ſoueraygne and profytable

exerciſe.
               ¶ Licurgus, that gaue firſte lawes to the Lacedemones (a people in grece) ordeyned that the children there ſhuld be taught as diligētly to daūſe in armure, as to fight. And that in tyme of warres, they ſhoulde meue them in bataile againe their enemies, in fourme and maner of daunſynge.
               ¶ Semblably the old inhabitātes of Ethiopia, at the ioynyng of theyr batayles, and whan the trumpettes and other inſtrumentes ſoune, they daūce: and in ſtede of a quiuer, they haue theyr dartes ſet about theyr heades, lyke to rayes or beames of the ſonne, wherwith they beleue that they put theyr enemies in feare.
               ¶ Alſo it was not lefull for any of them, to caſte any darte at his enemie but daunſyng. And not onely this rude people eſtemed ſo moche daunſynge, but alſo the moſte noble of the grekes, whiche for theyr excellencie in proweſſe and wiſedome, were called half goddis, as Achilles, and his ſonne Pirrhus, and diuers other. Wherfore Homere, among the highe benefites that god giueth to man, reciteth daunſynge. For he ſaythe in the fyrſte boke of Iliados,

                     God graunteth to ſome man proweſſe martiall
                     To a nother daunſinge, with ſong harmonical.
                  
               
               ¶ Suppoſe ye, that the Romaynes, which

in grauitie of maners paſſed the Greekes, had not gret pleaſure in daunſing? Did not Romulus, the fyrſt kyng of Romaines, and builder of the citie of Rome, ordeyne certain prieſtes & miniſters to the god Mars. whom he aduaunted to be his father? whiche preſtes, for as moch as certayne times they daūſed about the citie with tergates, that they imagined to fal from heuen, were called in latine Salij, whiche in to englyſhe may be tranſlated daūſers: who cōtinued ſo long time in reuerēce amōg the Romayns, that vnto the tyme that they were chriſtned, the noble men & princis childrē there, vſing moch diligence and ſuite, coueyted to be of the college of the ſayde daunſers
               ¶ More ouer, the emperours, that were moſt noble, delited in daunſyng, perceiuing therin to be a perfecte meaſure, which may be called modulation: wherin ſome daunſers of olde tyme ſo wonderfully excelled, that they wolde playnely expreſſe in daunſynge, without any wordes, or dyttie, hiſtories, with the hole circumſtaunce of affaires in them conteyned: wherof I ſhal reherſe two maruailouſe experiences.
               ¶ At Rome, in the tyme of Nero, there was a philoſopher called Demetrius, whiche was of that ſecte, that for as moche as they abandoned all ſhame faſtenes in theyr

wordes and actes, they were called Cinici in engliſhe doggyſhe. This Demetrius often reprouinge daunſynge, wolde ſaye, that there was nothynge therin of any importaunce, and that it was none other, but a counterfaytyng with the feete and handes, of the armonye that was ſhewed before in the rebecke, ſhalme, and other inſtrument, and that the motyons were but vayne and ſeperate from all vnderſtandyng, and of no purpoſe or efficacie. Wherof herynge a famouſe daunſer, and one as it ſemed, that was not without good lernynge, and had in remembraunce many hiſtories, he came to Demetrius, and ſayde vnto hym, Syre I humbly deſire you, refuſe not to do me that honeſtie with your preſence, in beholdyng me daunce, whiche ye ſhall ſe me do without ſoune of any inſtrument. And than if it ſhall ſeme to you worthy diſprayſe, vtterly banyſhe and confounde my ſcience. Whervnto Demetrius graunted. The yong man daūſed the aduoutry of Mars and Uenus, and therin expreſſed howe Uulcane, housbande to Uenus, therof beinge aduertyſed by the ſonne, layde ſnares for his wyfe and Mars: alſo howe they were wounden and tyed in Uulcanes nette: more ouer, howe al the goddes came to the ſpectable: finally howe Uenus all aſhamed and bluſſhynge,

fearefully deſyred her louer Mars to deliuer her from that peril, and the reſidue cō
                  teyned in the fable: whiche he dyd with ſo ſubtile & crafty geſture, with ſuche a playne declaration of euery acte in the mater (whiche of all thynge is mooſte dyfficyle) with ſuche a grace and beautie, alſo with a wytte ſo wonderfull and pleaſaunte, that Demetrius, as it ſemed, therat reioyſyng and delytynge, cried with a loude voyce, O man I do not onely ſe, but alſo here what thou doeſt: And it ſemeth alſo to me, that with thy handes thou ſpekeſte. Whiche ſayinge was confirmed by al them that were at that tyme preſent.
               ¶ The ſame yonge man ſonge and daunſed on a tyme before the emperour Nero, whan there was alſo preſente a ſtraunge kynge, whiche vnderſtode none other langage but of his owne countreye: yet notwithſtandynge, the man daunſed ſo aptely and playnely, as his cuſtome was, that the ſtraunge kynge, all thoughe he perceyued not what he ſayde, vnderſtode euery deale of the matter. And whan he hadde taken his leaue of the emperour to departe, the emperour offered to gyue hym any thynge that he thoughte moughte be to his commoditie. Ye maye (ſayde the kynge) bounteouſelye rewarde me, if ye lende me the

yonge man that daunſed before your maieſtie. Nero wondring, and requiring of him, why he ſo importunately deſyred the daū
                  ſer, or what cōmoditie the daunſer mought be vnto hym. Syr, ſadie the kynge, I haue dyuers confins and neyghbours, that be of ſondry langages and maners, wherfore I haue often tymes nede of many interpretours. Wherfore if I hadde this man with me, and ſhulde haue any thynge to do with my neyghbours, he wolde ſo with his faciō and geſture expreſſe euery thing to me, and teche them to do the ſame, that from henſforth I ſhulde not haue nede of any interpretour.
               ¶ Alſo the auncient philoſophers commended daunſynge: in ſo moche, as Socrates, the wyſeſt of al the grekes in his tyme, and from whom all the ſectes of philoſophers, as from a fountaine were deriuied, was not aſhamed to account daunſynge amonge the ſeriouſe diſciplines, for the commendable beautie, for the apte and proportionate meuynge, and for the crafty diſpoſition and facionynge of the body.
               ¶ It is to be cōſidered, that in the ſayd anciente tyme, there were dyuers maners of daunſyng, which varied in the names, lyke wyſe as they dydde in tunes of the inſtrumente, as ſemblably, we haue at this daye.

But thoſe names, ſome were general, ſome were ſpeciall: the general names were giuen of the vniuerſall fourme of daunſynge, wherby was repreſented the qualyties or conditions of ſondry aſtates: as the maieſtie of princis was ſhewed in that daunſe whiche was named Eumelia, and belōged to tragedies: diſſolute motiōs, and want on countenaunces, in that whiche was called Cordax, and pertained to comedies: wherin men of baſe hauiour onely daunſed. Alſo the fourme of battayle and fyghting in armure, was expreſſed in thoſe daunſes, whiche were called Enopliae. Alſo there was a kynde of daunſynge called Hormus of all the other moſte lyke to that, whyche is at this tyme vſed, wherin daunſed yonge men and maydens: the manne expreſſyng in his motion and countenance ſtrength and courage, apte for the warres: the mayden moderation and ſhamefaſtnes, whiche repreſented a pleaſant coniunction of fortitude and temperance.
               ¶ In ſtede of theſe we haue now baſe daū
                  ſes, bargenettes, pauyons, turgions, and roundes. And as for the ſpecialle names, they were taken as they be nowe, either of the names of the fyrſte inuentours: or of the meaſure and noumbre that they do cō
                  teyne: or of the fyrſte wordes of the ditie,

whiche the ſonge comprehendeth, wherof the daunſe was made. In euery of the ſayd daunſes, there was a cōcinnitie of meuing the foote and body, expreſſyng ſome pleaſant or profitable affectes or motions of the mynde.
               ¶ Here a man maye beholde, what crafte was in thauncient tyme in daunſynge, whiche at this day no man can imagine or coniecte. But yf men wolde nowe applye the fyrſte parte of their youthe, that is to ſaye from ſeuen yeres to twentie, effectually in the ſcyences liberall, and knowlege of hyſtoryes, they ſhoulde reuiue the aunciente fourme as welle of daunſynge, as of other exerciſes. Wherof they moughte take nat only pleſure, but alſo profit and cōmoditie.
            
            
               ¶ Wherfore in the good order of daunſing a man and a woman daunſeth togyther. Cap. xxi.
               IT is diligently to be noted, that the cō
                  panye of man and woman in daunſynge, they bothe obſeruynge one nombre and tyme in their meuynges, was nat begonne without a ſpeciall conſyderation, as welle for the neceſſarie coniunction of thoſe two perſons, as for the intimation of ſondry vtues: whiche be by them repreſented.
               
                  
¶ And for as moche as by the ioynyng of a man and a woman in daunſynge may be ſignified matrimonye, I coulde in declaryng the dignitie and commoditie of that ſacrament, make intiere volumes, if it were nat ſo cōmunely knowen to all men, that almoſt euery frere limit our carieth it writen in his boſome. Wherfore leſte in repeting a thing ſo frequent and commune, my boke ſhulde be as faſtidious or fulſome to the reders, as ſuche marchaunt preachers be nowe to their cuſtomers, I wylle reuerentely take my leaue of diuines. And for my parte, I wyll endeuour my ſelfe, to aſſemble oute of the bookes of auncient poetes, and philophers, matter as well apte to my purpoſe, as alſo newe, or at the leſte wyſe infrequēt or ſeldome harde of theym, that haue nat radde very many autours in greke & latine.
               ¶ But now to my purpoſe. In euery daūſe of a moſte auncient cuſtome, there daūſeth to gyther a man and a woman, holdyng ech other by the hande or the arme, whych betokeneth concorde. Nowe it behoueth the daunſers, and alſo the beholders of them, to knowe al qualities incident to a man, and alſo all qualities to a woman lykewiſe appertaynynge.
               ¶ A man in his natural perfection is fiers, A mannes qualities. hardye, ſtronge in opynyon, coueytous of

glory, deſirous of knowlege, appetiting by generation to brynge forthe his ſemblable. The good nature of a womā is to be myld, timerous, tractable, benigne, of ſure remē
                  brāce, & ſhamfaſt. Diuers other qualites of eche of them mought be foūd out, but theſe be moſt apparant, and for this time ſufficiēt.
               ¶ Wherfore whan we beholde a man and a woman daunſing to gether, let vs ſuppoſe there to be a concorde of al the ſayd qualities, beinge ioyned togyther, as I haue ſet them in order. And the meuynge of the mā wold be more vehemēt, of the woman more delycate, and with leſſe aduanſynge of the body, ſignifienge the courage and ſtrength that ought to be in a mā, & the pleſant ſobreneſſe that ſhuld be in a woman. And in this wſſe Fierſenes, ioyned with Myldeneſſe, makethe Seueritie: Hardyneſſe with Timeroſitie, maketh Magnanimitie, that is to ſay, valiant courage: wilful opinion and Tractabilitie, (which is to be ſhortly perſwaded and meued) makith Cōſtance, a vertue: Couetiſe of glorie, adourned with benignitie, cauſith honour: Deſire of knowlege, with ſure remembrance, procureth Sapience: Shamfaſtnes ioyned to appetite of generatiō, maketh Continence: which is a meane betwene Chaſtitie and inordinate luſt. Theſe qualities, in this wiſe being knyt togither, and ſignified

in the perſonages of man and woman daū
                  ſinge, do expreſſe or ſette out the figure of very nobilitie: whiche in the higher aſtate it is contained, the more excellente is the vertue in eſtimation.
            
            
               ¶ Howe daunſing may be an introduction vnto the fyrſte morall vertue called prudence. Cap. xxii.
               AS I haue all redy affirmed, the principall cauſe of this my lyttell enterpryſe, is to declare an induction or meane, howe children of gentyll nature or diſpoſition may be trayned into the way of vertue with a pleaſant facilitie: And for as moch as it is very expedient, that there be myxte with ſtudye ſome honeſt & moderate diſport, or at the leſt way recreation, to recōfort and quicken the vitall ſpirites, leſte they longe trauaylynge or being moch occupied in contemplation or remembrāce of thinges graue and ſerious, moughte happen to be fatigate, or perchance oppreſſed. And therfore Tulli, who vneth found euer any tyme vacaunt from ſtudye, permytteth in his fyrſte boke of offyces, that men may vſe playe and diſport: yet nat withſtanding in ſuche wiſe as they do vſe ſlepe and other maner of quyete, whanne they haue ſufficiētly

diſpoſed erneſt matters & of weighty importaunce.
               ¶ Nowe bycauſe there is no paſſe tyme to be cōpared to that, wherin may be founden both recreation and meditation of vertue: I haue among all honeſt paſtymes, wherin is exerciſe of the body, noted daunſyng to be of an excellent vtilitie comprehēding in it wonderfull fygures (whiche the grekes do call Idea, of vertues and noble qualities, and ſpecially of the cōmodious vertue called prudence, whom Tulli defyneth Ci. offi. i. Prudence. to be the knowlege of thīges, which ought to be deſyred & folowed: and alſo of them, whiche ought to be fled from or eſchewed. And it is named of Ariſtotel the mother of vertues, of other philoſophers it is called the capytayne or mayſtres of vertues, of ſome the houſe wyfe, for as moche as by her diligēce ſhe doth inueſtigate & prepare places apt and cōuenient, where other vertues ſhall execute theyr powers or offices. Wherfore as Salomon ſaith, lyke as in water be ſhewed the vyſages of them that beholde 
                     Prov. 27. it, ſo vnto menne that be prudent, the ſecretes of mens hartes be openly diſcouered. This vertue beinge ſo cōmodious to man, and as it were the porche of the noble palayce of mannes Reaſon, wherby all other vertues ſhall entre, it ſemeth to me

ryght expediēt, that as ſone as oportunitie may be founden, a chylde, or yonge man, be therto induced. And bicauſe that the ſtudy of vertue is tedyous for the more parte to them that do flouryſſhe in yonge yeres, I haue deuiſed, how in the fourme of daūſing nowe late vſed in this realme amonge gentylmen, the hole deſcription of this vertue prudence may be founden out and wel perceyued, as wel by the daunſers, as by them whyche ſtandynge by, wylle be dylygente beholders and markers, hauynge firſt myn inſtructiō ſurely grauē in the table of their remembrance. wherfore all they that haue their courage ſtered towarde very honour or perfecte nobilitie, let them approche to this paſſe tyme, and either them ſelfes prepare them to daunſe, or els at the leſte way beholde with watchynge eyen, other that can daunſe truely, kepyng iuſt meaſure and tyme. But to the vnderſtanding of this inſtruction, they muſt marke well the ſondry motions and meaſures, which in true form of daunſinge is to be ſpecially obſerued.
               ¶ The firſt meuing in euery daunſe is called honour, which is a reuerent inclinatiō or curteſie, with a lōge deliberatiō or pauſe, and is but one motion, comprehending the tyme of thre other motions or ſetting forth of the foote: By that may be ſignified, that

at the begynning of all our actes, we ſhulde do due honour to god, whiche is the roote of prudence, whiche honour is compact of theſe thre thinges, feare, loue, & reuerēce. And that in the begynnynge of al thinges, we ſhoulde aduyſedly, with ſome tracte of tyme, beholde and foreſee the ſucceſſe of our enterpryſe.
               ¶ By the ſeconde motion, which is two in nombre, may be ſignified celerite and ſlowneſſe: Celeritie, or quiknes & ſlownes. whiche two, all be it they ſeme to diſcorde in their effectes and natural propreties: therfore they maye be welle reſembled to the braule in daunſynge (for in our A braule. englyſhe tonge we ſay men do braule, whan betwene them is altercation in wordis) yet of them two ſpringeth an excellent vertue, wherevnto we lacke a name in englyſhe. Wherfore I am cōſtrained to vſurpe a latin worde, callynge it Maturitie, whiche worde though it be ſtrange and darke, yet by declaryng the vertue in a few mo wordes, the name ones brought in cuſtome, ſhall be as eaſy to vnderſtande as other wordes late comen out of Italy and Fraunce, and made denyſens amonge vs.
               ¶ Maturitie is a mean betwene two extre Matnritie. mities, wherin nothynge lacketh or excedeth, and is in ſuch aſtate, that it may neyther encreaſe nor minyſſhe without loſinge

the denomiation of Maturitie. The grekes in a prouerbe do expreſſe it proprely in 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   two wordes, whiche I can none otherwiſe 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   interprete in englyſh, but ſpede the ſlowly.
               ¶ Alſo of this worde Maturitie, ſprange 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . a noble and precious ſentence, recyted by Feſtin
                        •
                      lente. Saluſt in the battayle agayn Catiline, whiche is in this maner or lyke, Cōſulte before thou enterpriſe any thynge, and after thou Priuſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      in cipias cō
                     ſulto haſte taken counſayle, it is expedient to do it maturely.
               Maturum in latyn may be interpretid ripe Maturum. or redy: as fruite whan it is ripe, it is at the very poynt to be gathered and eaten. And euery other thynge, whan it is redye, it is at the inſtante after to be occupied. Therfore that worde maturitie, is tranſlated to the actes of man, that whan they be doone with ſuche moderation, that nothing in the doinge may be ſene ſuperfluous or indigēt, we may ſay, that they be maturely doone: reſeruyng the wordes rype & redy, to frute and other thiges ſeperate from affaires, as we haue now in vſage. And this do I now remembre for the neceſſary augmentation of our langage.
               ¶ In the excellent & moſt noble emperour Octauius Auguſtus, in whome reygned all nobilitie, nothinge is more cōmended, than that he had frequently in his mouthe this

worde Matura, do maturelly. As he ſhulde haue ſayde, do neyther to moche ne to litle, to ſoone ne to late, to ſwyftely nor ſlowely, but in due tyme and meaſure.
               ¶ Nowe I truſt I haue ſufficiently expoū
                  ded the vertue called Maturitie, which is the meane or mediocritie betwene ſlouthe and celeritie, communely called ſpedineſſe: and ſo haue I declared, what vtilitie maye be taken of a braule in daunſynge.
            
            
               The thyrde and fourthe braunches of prudence. Capitu. xxiii.
               THe thyrde motion, called ſingles, is of two vnities ſeperate in paſinge forwarde: Singles in daūſing. by whom maye be ſygnifyed prouidence and induſtry, whiche after euery thynge maturely achieued, as is before written, maketh the firſte paſe forwarde in daunſynge. But it ſhall be expedient to expounde, what is the thynge called Prouydence, for as moch as it is not knowen to euery man.
               ¶ Prouidence is, wherby a man not onely Pronidēce what it is. foreſeeth commodytie and incommoditye, proſperitie and aduerſitie, but alſo conſulteth, and there with endeuoureth as well to repell anoyaunce, as to attayne and get profite and aduauntage. And the difference

betwene it and conſideration is, that conſideration Cōſideration what it is. onely conſiſteth in pondering and examinyng thinges, cōceiued in the mynd: Prouidence in helpynge them with counſayle and acte. wherfore to conſyderation pertayneth excogitation and auyſement, to prouydence, prouiſyon and execution. For lyke as the good huſbande, whan he hath ſowen his grounde, ſetteth vp cloughtes or thredes, whiche ſome call ſhailes, ſome blēchars, or other lyke ſhewes, to feare away byrdes, whiche he foreſeeth redye to deuoure and hurte his corne, alſo perceyuynge the improfytable weedes appering, which wyll anoy his corne or herbes, forth with wedeth thē clene out of his ground, and wylle nat ſuffre them to growe or encreaſe. Semblably, it is the parte of a wyſe man, to foreſee and prouyde, that eyther in ſuche thinges, as he hath acquired by his ſtudy or diligence, or in ſuche affaires ás he hath in hande, he be nat indomaged or empeched by his aduerſaries.
               ¶ In lyke maner a gouernour of a publyke weale ought to ꝓuide as well by menaces, as by ſharpe and terrible punyſſhementes, that perſons yuell and vnprofitable, do nat corrupte and deuoure his good ſubiectes. Fynally there is in prouydence ſuch an admyration and maieſtie, that nat onely it is,

attributed to kinges and rulers, but alſo to god creatour of the worlde.
               ¶ Induſtrie hath nat ben ſo longe tyme vſed Induſtry. in the englyſhe tonge, as Prouydence: wherfore it is the more ſtrange, and requireth the more plain expoſition. It is a qualitie, procedyng of wytte and experiēce, by the whiche a man perceyueth quickely, innenteth freſhely, and counſayleth ſpedily: wherfore they that be called Induſtrious, do moſt craftely and depely vnderſtande in al affayres, what is expedient, and by what meanes & wayes, they may ſoneſt exployte them. And thoſe thinges, in whome other men trauayle, a perſon induſtrious lyghtly and with facilitie ſpedeth, and findeth new wayes and meanes to bryng to effecte that he deſyreth.
               ¶ Amonge dyuers other remēbred in hyſtories, ſuche one amonge the grekes was Alcibiades, who beynge in chyldehoode Alcibiades. mooſte amyable of all other, and of moſte ſubtile wytte, was inſtructed by Socrates. The ſaide Alcibiades, by the ſharpenes of his wyt, the doctrine of Socrates, and by his owne experience in ſondry affaires in the cōmune weale of the Athenienſes, became ſoo induſtrious, that were it good or yuel that he enterpriſed, nothing almoſt eſcaped that he acheued nat, were the thing

neuer ſo difficyle (or as who ſayth) impenitrable: and that many ſondrye thinges, as well for his countrey, as alſo again it, after that, he for his inordinate pryde and lechery, was out of Athenes exyled.
               ¶ Among the Romains, Caius Iulius Ce Iul. Ceſar. ſar, which firſte toke vpon hym the perpetuall rule and gouernaunce of the empire, is a noble exaumple of induſtrie, for in his incomparable warres, and buſynes almoſt incredible, he dydde nat onely excogitate moſt excellēt pollycies and deuyſes, to vā
                  quyſhe or ſubdewe his ennemyes, but alſo proſecuted them with ſuche celeritie and effecte, that diuers and many times he was in the campe of his ennemyes, or at the ga tes of their townes, or fortreſſes, whanne they ſuppoſed, that he and his hooſte had ben two days iourney from thens, leauing to them no tyme or leyſure, to conſulte or prepare ageyne hym ſufficient reſiſtence.
               And ouer that, this qualitie, INDVSTRIE, ſo reigned in him, that he hym ſelfe wolde miniſtre to his ſecretaries at one tyme and inſtant, the cōtentes of thre ſondry epiſtles or letters. Alſo it is a thynge wonderfulle to remembre, that he being a prince of the moſte auncient and noble houſe of the Romaynes, and frome the tyme that he came to mans aſtate, almoſte continually in warres,

alſo of glorie inſatiable, of courage inuincible: coulde in affaires of ſuche importaunce and difficultie, or (whiche is moche more to be meruayled at nowe) wolde ſoo exactly write the hyſtory of his owne actis and geſtes: that for the natiue & inimitable eloquence, in expreſſing the coūſailes, deuiſes, conuentiōs, progreſſions, enterpriſes, exploitures, fourmes, and ſacions of imbataylynge, he ſeemeth to put all other wryters of lyke matters to ſylence.
               ¶ Here is the perfect paterne of induſtry, which I truſt ſhall ſuffyce to make the propre ſignification therof, to be vnderſtād of the reders. And conſequentely to incenſe thē to apꝓch to the true practiſing therof.
               ¶ So is the ſengles declared in theſe two qualities, Prouidēce and Induſtrie, which ſeriouſely noted, and often remēbred of the daunſers and beholders, ſhall acquire to them no lytel fruite and cōmoditie, if there be in their myndes any good and laudable matter for vertue to warke in.
            
            
               ¶ Of the fifte braunche called circumſpection, ſhewed in reprinſe. Cap. xxiii.
               COmmonly next after ſingles in daū
                  ſing Reprinſe in daūſing. is a reprinſe, whiche is one mouyng only, puttynge backe the right

fote to his felowe: And that may be welle called circūſpection, whiche ſygnyfieth as moche, as beholdynge on euery part, what is well and ſufficiente, what lacketh, howe, and from whens it may be prouided: Alſo what hath cauſed profyte or damage in the tyme paſſed, what is the aſtate of the time preſent, what aduauntage or perylle maye ſuccede, or is immynent. And bycauſe in it is conteyned a delyberation, in hauyng regarde to that that foloweth, and is alſo of affinytie with prouydence and induſtrie, I make hym in the fourme of a retreate. In this motion a man may, as it were on a moū
                  tayne or place of eſpiall, beholde on euery ſyde farre of, meaſurynge and eſtemyng euery thyng: and eyther purſewe it, if it be commendable, or eſchewe it, yf it be noyful. This qualitie (lyke as prouydence and induſtre be) is a braunche of Prudence, whiche ſome call the prynceſſe of vertues: and it is nat onely expedient, but alſo nedefull to euery aſtate and degree of men, that do contynue in the lyfe called actiue.
               ¶ In the Iliados of Homere, the noble Neſtor. duke Neſtor, a mā of meruaylous eloquēce and long experience, as he that lyued thre mennes lyues, as he there auanteth, in the counſayle that he gaue to Agamemnon, to reconcile to him Achilles, the moſt ſtronge

and valyant man of all the grekes, he perſuaded Agamemnon ſpecially to be circū
                  ſpecte, declarynge, howe that the pryuate contention betwene them, ſhuld repleniſhe the hooſte of the Grekes with moche dolour: wherat kyng Priamus and his chyldren ſhulde laughe, and the reſydue of the Troyanes in their mindes, ſhould reioyce and take courage.
               ¶ Among the Romayns Quintus Fabius Fabius. for this qualitie is ſoueraignely extolled amonge hiſtoriens: and for that cauſe he is often times called of them Fabius cūctator, that is to ſay, the tarier or delayer. For in the warres betwene the Romayns and Anniball, he knowynge all coſtes of the countray, contynuelly kept him and his hoſt on mountaines and high places, within a ſmall diſtaunce of Hanniballes armie: ſo that neither he wolde flee from his enmies, nor yet ioyne with them battayle. By which wonderfull policie, he cauſed Annibal ſo to trauayle, that ſome tyme for lacke of vittayle, and for weryneſſe, great multitudes of his hoſte periſhed. Alſo he oftentymes awaited them in dangerous places, vnredy, and than ſkyrmyſhed with theym, as longe as he was ſure to haue of theym aduauntage: and after he repayred to the hyghe places adioynyng, vſyng his accuſtomed maner to

beholde the paſſage of Anniballe. And by this meanes, this moſte circumſpect capitayn Fabius, wonderfully infeblyd the powar of the ſayd Anniball, which is no laſſe eſtemed in praiſe, thā the ſubduing of Cartage by the valyant Scipio. For yf Fabius had nat ſo fatigate Anniball and his hoſte, he had ſhortly ſubuerted the cite of Rome, and than coulde nat Scipio haue bene able to acheue that enterpriſe.
               ¶ What more clere mirror or ſpectacle can King Hēry the ſeueth. we deſire of circūſpectiō, thā king HENRY the SEVENTH, of moſt noble memorie, father vnto our moſte drad ſoueraigne lorde, whoſe worthy renome, like the ſonne in the myddes of his ſphere, ſhyneth & euer ſhall ſhyne in mennes remembrance? what incō
                  parable circumſpection was in him alwaye founden, that nat withſtandynge his longe abſence out of this realme, the diſturbance of the ſame by ſondrye ſeditions amonge the Nobilitie, Ciuile warres and batayles, wherin infinite people were ſlayne, beſide ſkirmyſſhes and ſlaughters in the pryuate contentions and factions of dyuers gentilmen, the lawes layde in water (as is the ꝓuerbe) affection & auaryce, ſubduing iuſtice & equitie: Yet by his moſte excellent witte, he in fewe yeres, nat onely broughte this realme in good order, and vnder due obediēce,

reuiued the lawes, auanced Iuſtyce, refurnyſhed his dominyons, and repayred his manours, but alſo with ſuche circumſpection treated with other princis and realmes, of leages, of aliaunce, and amities, that durynge the more part of his reigne, he was lytle or nothyng inquieted without warre hoſtilitie or martiall buſyneſſe. And yet all other princis eyther feared hym, or had him in a fatherly reuerence. Whyche prayſe with the honour thervnto dewe, as inheritaunce diſcendeth by ryght vnto his moſte noble ſonne, our moſt dere ſouerayn lorde that nowe preſently reigneth. For as Tulli ſayth, The beſt inheritance, that the fathers leaue to their children, excelling al other patrimonie, is the glorie or prayſe of vertue and noble actis: and of ſuche fayre inheritance his highnes may cōpare with any prynce that euer reygned, whyche he dayly augmenteth, adding therto other ſō
                  dry vertues, whyche I forbeare nowe to reherſe, to the intent I wyll exclude all ſuſpition of flatterie, ſens I my ſelfe in this warke doo ſpecially reproue it. But that whiche is preſently knowen, and is in experience nedeth no monument. And vnto ſo excellēt a prince, there ſhal nat lacke herafter condigne writers to regiſter his actes, with eloquent ſtile in perpetual remēbrāce.
            
            
               
               Of the ſixte ſeuenth and eyght braunches of prudence. Cap. xxv.
               ADouble in daunſynge is compacte of the nombre of thre, wherby maye be noted theſe thre branches of prudence, election, experience, and modeſtie: by theym the ſayde vertue of prudence is made complete, and is in her perfection. Election is of an excellente power and autoritie, and hath ſuche a maieſtie, that ſhe wyll not be approched vnto of euery man. For ſome there be, to whom ſhe denyeth her preſence, as chyldren, naturall fooles, men beinge frantike, or ſubdued with affectes, alſo they that be ſubiectes to flaterers and proude men. In theſe perſones reaſon lacketh libertie, which ſhuld prepare their entrie vnto election. This Election, whiche Election. is a parte, and as it were a membre of prudence, is beſte deſcribed by Oportunitie, Oportunitie. whiche is the principall parte of counſaylle, and is compacte of theſe thynges folowynge.
               ¶ The importaunce of the thynge conſulted, The facultie and power of him that cō
                  ſulteth, The time whan, The fourme how, The ſubſtance wherwith to do it, The diſpoſition and vſages of the countreys, For whom and agayne whom it oughte to be

done. Al theſe thynges prepenſed and gathered together ſeriouſely, and after a due examination, euery of them iuſtly pondred in the balance of reaſon. Immediately cometh the auctoritie of election, who taketh on her to appoynt, what is to be effectually folowed or purſued, reiectinge the refidue. And than ought experience to be at hande, to whom is commytted the actual execution. Experiēce or executiō
                   For without her, Election is fruſtrate, and all inuention of manne is but a fantaſye. And therfore who aduiſedlye beholdethe the aſtate of mans lyfe, ſhall well perceiue, that al that euer was ſpoken or writen, was to be executed, and to that intēt was ſpeche ſpecially gyuen to man, wherin he is moſte dyſcrepante, from brute beaſtes, in declaringe by them what is good, what vicious, what is profitable, what improfitable, whiche by clereneſſe of wytte do excel in knowlege, to theſe that be of a more inferior capacitie. And what vtilitie ſhulde be acquyred by ſuche declaration, if it ſhulde not be experienced with diligence?
               ¶ The philoſopher Socrates had not ben Socrates. named of Appollo the wiſeſt man of al Grecia, if he had not dayly practyſed the vertues, whiche he in his leſſons commended.
               ¶ Iulius Cacſar, the fyrſte emperour, al Iul. Ceſar. thoughe, there were in hym moche hydde

lernyng, in ſo moche as he fyrſt founde the order of our kalandre, with the Cikle and byſexte, called the leape yere: Yet is he not ſo moche honoured for his lernynge, as he is for his diligence, wherwith he exploited or brought to concluſion thoſe counſayles, whiche as wel by his excellent lerning and wiſedome, as by the aduiſe of other expert counſaylours were before trayted, and (as I mought ſay) ventilate.
               ¶ Who wyl not repute it a thing vayne and ſcornefulle, and more lyke to a maye game, than a mater ſeriouſe or commendable, to beholde a perſonage, whiche in ſpeche or writynge expreſſeth nothyng but vertuous maners, ſage and dyſcrete counſayles and holy aduertiſementes: to be reſolued in to all vices, folowynge in his actis no thynge that he hym ſelfe in his wordes approueth and teacheth to other?
               ¶ Who ſhal any thynge eſteme theyr wyſedome, which with great ſtudies fynde out remedies and prouiſiōs neceſſary for thingss dyſordred or abuſed, and where they them ſelfes may execute it, they leaue it vntouched, wherby theyr deuyſes, with the ſoune that pronounced them, be vanyſſhed and come to nothynge?
               ¶ Semblably it is to be thoughte in all other doctrine. Wherfore as it ſemed, it was

not without conſideratiō affirmed by Tulli, that the knowlege and contemplation of Natures operatyons, were lame and in a maner imperfcte, if there folowed none actuall experience. Of this ſhalbe more ſpoken in the later ende of this warke.
               ¶ Herwith wolde be conioyned or rather Modeſtie. myxte with it, the vertue called Modeſtie: whiche by Tulli is defined to be the know Offi. i. lege of oportunitie of thynges to be doone or ſpoken, in apoyntinge and ſettinge them in tyme or place to them conuenient & propre. Wherfore it ſemeth, to be moche lyke to that, whiche men cōmunely call Dyſcretion. Diſcretiō. Al be it diſcretio in latin ſignifieth Seperation: wherin it is more lyke to Election. But as it is communely vſed, it is not onely lyke to Modeſtie, but it is the ſelfe Modeſtie. For he that forbereth to ſpeke, all thoughe he can doo it bothe wyſely and eloquentely, bycauſe neyther in the tyme nor in the herers, he findeth oportunitie, ſo that no fruite maye ſuccede of his ſpeche, he therfore is vulgarely called a dyſcrete perſonne.
               ¶ Semblably they name him diſcrete, that Diſcrete. puniſheth an offendour leſſe than his merites doo requyre, hauynge regarde to the weakenes of his perſone, or to the aptenes of his amendement.
               
                  
¶ So do they in the vertue called Liberalitie, Liberalite where in gyuynge, is had conſyderation, as well of the condition, and neceſſyte of the perſone that receyueth, as of the benefite that cometh of the gifte receyued. In euery of theſe thynges and theyr ſemblable, is Modeſtie: which worde not beinge knowen in the englyſhe tongue, ne of all them whiche vnderſtode latine, excepte they had red good auctours, they improprely named this vertue dyſcrecion. And nowe ſome men do as moch abuſe the word Modeſtie abuſed. modeſtie, as the other dyd dyſcretion. For if a man haue a ſad countenaunce at all tymes, and yet not being meued with wrath, but pacient, and of moſte gentyllneſſe, they whiche wolde be ſene to be lerned, wyl ſay that the man is of a great modeſtie. Where they ſhulde rather ſaye, that he were of a great Manſuetude: whiche terme beynge Manſuetude. ſemblably before this tyme vnknowen in our tongue, maye be by the ſufferaunce of wiſe men, now receiued by cuſtome, wherby the terme ſhall be made famyliare. That like as the Romaynes tranſlated the wiſedome of Grecia into theyr citie, we maye, if we lyſte, bringe the lernynges and wyſedomes of theym bothe into this realme of Englande, by the tranſlation of theyr warkes, ſens lyke enterpriſe hath ben taken by

frenche men, Italyons, and Germaynes, to our no lyttel reproche for our negligēce and ſlouth.
               ¶ And thus I conclude the laſte parte of daunſynge, whiche dilygentely beholden, ſhall appere to be as well a neceſſary ſtudy, as a noble and vertuouſe paſtime, vſed and contynued in ſuche fourme as I hytherto haue declared.
            
            
               Of other exerciſes, whiche if they be moderately vſed, be to euery aſtate of man expedient. Cap. xxvi.
               
                  I Haue ſhewed howe huntyng and daunſynge may be in the nombre of commendable exerciſes, and paſſetymes, not repugnanute to vertue. And vndoubted, it were moche better to be occupyed in honeſte recreation, than to do nothynge. For it is ſayde of a noble autour, In doinge nothynge, men lerne to do yuell. And Ouidius the poete ſayth,
               
                  
                     If thou flee idlenes, Cupide hath no myghte,
                     His howe lyeth broken, his fire hath no lighte. 
                           Ouid de remedio amoris. Idelnes.
                     
                  
               
               ¶ It is not onelye called idlenes, wherin the body or mynde ceſſeth from labour, but ſpecially idlenes is an omiſſion of all honeſt exerciſe: the other maye be better called a vacation from ſeryouſe buſyneſſe, whiche

was ſome tyme embraced of wyſe men and vertuous.
               ¶ It is writen to the praiſe of Xerxes king Kyng Xerxes. of Perſia, that in tyme vacaunt from the affaires of his realme, he with his owne hā
                  des had planted innumerable trees, which longe or he died brought forthe abundance of fruite, and for the craftie and dylectable ordre in the ſettynge of them, it was to all men, beholdynge the princis induſtrye, excedynge maruaylous.
               ¶ But who abhorreth not the hyſtorye of Sardanapalus. Serdanapalus, kynge of the ſame realme? whiche hauynge in deteſtation all princely affaires, and leuyng al company of men, encloſed him ſelfe in a chamber with a greate multitude of concubynes: and for that he wold ſeme to be ſome time occupied, or els that wanton pleaſures and quyetneſſe became to hym tedyouſe, he was founde by one of his lordes in a womans attyre ſpynnynge in a diſtafe amonge perſones defamed, whiche knowen abrode, was to the people ſo odiouſe, that fynally by them he was burned, with all the place wherto he fledde for his refuge.
               ¶ And I ſuppoſe there is not a more plain Playing at diſe. fygure of idelneſſe, than play inge at dyſe. For beſides, that therin is no maner of exercyſe of the body or mynde, they whiche

playe therat, muſte ſeme to haue no portion of wyt or kunnynge, if they wyll be called fayre players, or in ſome cōpany auoide the ſtabbe of a dagger, if they be takē with any craſty conueyaunce. And by cauſe alwaye wyſedome is therin ſuſpected, there is ſeldome any playinge at dyſe, but therat is vehement chydyng and braulynge, horrible othes, cruell, and ſome tyme mortall menacis. I omytte ſtrokes, whiche nowe and than do happen, often tymes betwene bretherne and moſt dere frendes, if fortune brynge alwaye to one man yuell chaunces, whiche maketh the playe of the other ſuſpected. O why ſhulde that be called a play, whiche is compacte of malyce and robry? Undoubtedly they that wryte of the fyrſte inuentions of thinges, haue good cauſe to ſuppoſe Lucifer, prince of diuels, to be the firſte inuentour of dyſe playing, & helle the place where it was foundē, although ſome do write, that it was firſt inuēted by Attalꝰ. For what better allectiue coulde Lucyfer deuyſe to allure and bringe men pleaſantly into damnable ſeruitude, than to pourpoſe to them in fourme of a playe, his principall The treaſory of Lucifer. treaſory, wherin the more parte of ſynne is contained, and all goodnes and vertue cō
                  founded?
               ¶ The firſt occaſion to play, is tediouſnes

of vertuous occupation: Immediately ſuccedeth couaytynge of an other mans goodes, whiche they call playinge: therto is annexed auarice and ſtrayte kepynge, whiche they call wynnynge: ſone after cometh ſweryng, in rentinge the membres of god, whiche they name nobleneſſe (for they wyl ſaye, he that ſwereth depe, ſwereth lyke a lorde) than foloweth fury or rage, whiche they call courage: among them cometh inordinate watche, whiche they name painefulneſſe: he bryngeth in glotony, and that is good felowſhyp: & after cometh ſlepe ſuperſluous, called among them naturall reſt: and he ſome tyme bringeth in lechery: whiche is nowe named daliance. The name of this treaſory is veryly idelneſſe: the doore wherof is left wyde open to dyſe players: if they happe to brynge, in theyr company, lernyng, vertuous buſines, liberalitie, paciencie, charitie, temperance, good diete, or ſhamefaſtnes, they muſte leaue them without the gates. For yuell cuſtome, which is Il cuſtome the porter, wyll not ſuffre them to entre.
               ¶ Alas what pite is it, that any chriſten mā ſhulde by wanton company be trayned, I wyl no more ſaye into this Treaſory, but in to this lotheſome dungeon, where he ſhall lye fetored in chaynes of ignoraunce, and bounden with the ſtronge chayne of obſtinacie,

harde to be loſed but by grace?
               ¶ The moſt noble emperour Octauiꝰ Auguſtus, who hath amonge writers in diuers of his actes an honorable remembraunce: onely for playinge at dyſe, and that but ſeldome, ſuſteyneth in hyſtories a note of reproche.
               ¶ The Lacedemoniens ſent an ambaſſade Counſaillors diſers to the citie of Corinthe, to haue with them aliance: but whan the ambaſſadours founde the princis and counſaylours playenge at dyſe, they departed without exploytynge their meſſage, ſayenge, that they wold not maculate the honour of theyr people with ſuche a reproche, to be ſaide, that they had made aliaunce with diſars.
               ¶ Alſo to Demetrius, the kynge of Parthians ſente golden dyſe, in the rebuke of his lyteneſſe.
               ¶ Euery thynge is to be eſtemed after his value. But who herynge a man, whom he The eſtimation of dyſars. knoweth not, to be called a dyſar, doth not anone ſuppoſe him to be of lyght credence, dyſſolute, vayne, and remiſſe? who almooſt truſteth his brother, whom he knoweth a dyſe player? yea amonge them ſelfes they laughe, whan they perceyue or here any doctrine or vertuouſe worde procede from any of theyr companyons, thynkyge that it becometh not his perſone: moche more

whan he doth any thynge with deuotion or wyſdome.
               ¶ Howe many gentyll menne, howe many marchauntes, haue in this damnable paſſetyme conſumed theyr ſubſtaunce, as well by theyr owne labours, as by theyr parentes, with greatte ſtudy and peynefull trauayle in a longe tyme acquyred, and fyniſſhed theyr lyfes in dette and penury? How manye goodly and bolde yemenne hath it broughte vnto thefte, wherby they haue preuented the courſe of nature, and dyed by the ordre of lawes myſerably? Theſe be the fruites and reuennues of that dyuylyſhe marchaundyſe, beſyde the fynall rewarde, whiche is more terryble, the reporte wherof I leaue to dyuines, ſuche as feare not to ſhewe theyr lernynges, or fille not theyr mouthes ſo full with ſwete meates, or benefyces, that theyr tonges be not let to ſpeke trouth: for that is theyr duetie and office, excepte I with many other be moche dyſceyued.
               ¶ Playinge at cardes and tables is ſome Cardes & Tables. what more tollerable, onely for as moch as therin wytte is more vſed, and leſſe truſte is in fortune, all be it therin is neyther laudable ſtudy nor exerciſe. But yet men delitynge in vertue, moughte with cardes and tables deuyſe games, where in moughte be

moche ſolace and alſo ſtudy commodiouſe, as deuiſing a bataile, or contentiō betwene vertue and vice, or other lyke pleaſant and honeſt inuention.
               ¶ The cheſſe of al games, wherin is no bo dily exerciſe, is moſt to be commended, for Cheſſ. therin is ryght ſubtile engine, wherby the wit is made more ſharpe, and remembrance quickened. And it is the more commendable and alſo cōmodious, if the players haue red the moralization of the cheſſe, and whā they playe do thynke vpon it: whiche bokes be in englyſh. But they be very ſcarſe, bicauſe fewe men do ſeeke in plaies for ver tue or wyſedome.
            
            
               That ſhotinge in a longe bowe is principal of all other exerciſes. Cap. xxvii.
               TUlli ſaith in his firſt boke of Officis, We be not to that intente broughte vp by nature, that we ſhulde ſeme to be made to playe and dyſport, but rather to grauitie and ſtudyes of more eſtymation. Wherfore it is writen of Alexander, emperoure of Rome for his grauitie called Seuerus, that in his chyldehode, and before he was taughte the letters of greeke or latine, he neuer exercyſed any other playe or game, but onely one, wherin was a ſymylitude

of Iuſtice: and therfore it was called in latine Ad Iudices, whiche is in englyſhe to the iuges. But the fourme therof is not expreſſed by the ſaide auctour, nor none other that I haue yet red. Wherfore I wyll repaire againe to the reſidue of honeſt exerciſe.
               ¶ And for as moche as Galene in his ſeconde Exerciſe for preſeruynge of helthe. booke of the preſeruation of helthe, declareth to be in them theſe qualities or dyuerſyties, that is to ſaye, that ſomme be done with extendynge of myghte, and as it were vyolentely, and that is called valyaunte exercyſe: Some with ſwyfte or haſty motion, other with ſtrengthe and celerytie, and that maye be called vehemente: The partycular kyndes of euery of them, he deſcribeth, whiche were to longe here to be reherſed
               ¶ But in as moche as he alſo ſaythe, that he that is of good aſtate in his body, ought to know the power and effect of euery exercyſe: but he nedethe not to practiſe any other, but that whiche is moderate and meane betwene euery extremytie: I wyll now brefely declare, in what exerciſe nowe in cuſtume amonge vs, maye be moſt found of that medyocritie, and maye be augmented or mynyſſhed, at the pleaſure of hym that doth exercyſe, without therby appaypayrynge

any parte of dilectation or commoditie therof procedynge.
               ¶ And in mine oppinion none may be compared The commendation of ſhoting in a longe bowe. with ſhootynge in the longe bowe, and that for ſondrye vtylytyes that come therof, wherin it incomparably excelletly all other exercyſe. For in drawynge of a bowe, eaſy and congruent to his ſtrength, he that ſhooteth, doth moderately exerciſe his armes, and the other parte of his body: and if his bowe be bygger, he muſte adde to more ſtrengthe, wherin is no leſſe valiaunt exerciſe than in any other, wherof Galene writeth.
               ¶ In ſhootynge at buttes, or brode arowe markes, is a mediocritie of exercyſe of the lower partes of the bodye and legges, by goinge a lyttel dyſtaunce a meſurable paſe. At rouers or pryckes, it is at his pleaſure that ſhoteth, howe faſte or ſoftly he lyſteth to go: and yet is the prayſe of the ſhooter, neyther more ne leſſe, for as farre or nyghe the marke is his arowe, whanne he goeth ſoftly, as whan he renneth.
               ¶ Tenyſe, ſelledome vſed, and for a lyttell Tenyſe. ſpace, is a good exerciſe for yong men, but it is more violent than ſhotynge, by reaſon that two men do play. Wherfore neyther of them is at his owne libertie to meaſure the exercyſe. For if the one ſtryke the balle

harde, the other that intendeth to receyue hym, is than conſtrayned to vſe ſemblable vyolence, if he wyll retourne the bal from whens it came to hym. If it trille faſte on the grounde, and he intendeth to ſtoppe, or if it rebounde a greatte dyſtaunce from hym, and he wolde efteſones returne it, he can not than kepe any meaſure in ſwyftnes of mocion.
               ¶ Some men wolde ſay, that in mediocritie, whiche I haue ſoo moche prayſed in ſhootynge, why ſhuld not bouling, claiſhe, pynnes, and koytynge, be as moche commended? Ueryly as for two the laſte, be to be vtterly abiected of all noble men, in lyke wyſe foote balle, wherin is nothynge but beaſtely fury, and extreme violence, wherof procedeth hurte, and conſequently rancour and malice do remayn with them that be wounded. Wherfore it is to be put in per petuall ſylence.
               ¶ In clayſſe is employed to littel ſtrength, in boulynge often tymes to moche, wherby the ſinewes be to moche ſtrayned, and the veynes to moche chafed: wherof often tymes is ſene to enſue ache, or the decreas of ſtrength or agilitie in the armes, where, in ſhoting, if the ſhoter vſe the ſtrength of his bowe within his owne tiller, he ſhall neuer be therwith grieued or made more feble.
               
                  
¶ Alſo in ſhotyng is a double vtilitie, wher in it excellethe all other exercyſes and games incomparably. The one is that it is, and alway hath ben, the moſt excellent artillery for warres, wherby this realme of Englande hath ben nat only beſt defended from outwarde hoſtilitie, but alſo in other regions a fewe englyſhe archers haue ben ſene to preuayle agaynſte people innumerable. Alſo wonne inpreignable cities and ſtronge holdes, and kept them in the middes of the ſtrength of their enemies. This is the feate, wherby englyſhe men haue bē moſt dradde and had in eſtimation with out warde princis, as well ennemyes as alies. And the commoditie therof hath bene approued as far as Hieruſalem, as it ſhall appere in the lyues of Rycharde the fyrſt, & Edwarde the fyrſte, kynges of Englande, who made ſeueral iourneis to recouer that holy citie of Hieruſalem into the poſſeſſion of chriſten men, and achieued them honorably, the rather by the power of this feate of ſhootynge.
               ¶ The premiſſes cōſidered, O what cauſe Decaye of Archers. of reproche ſhall the decay of archers be to vs nowe lyuyng? Ye what irrecuperable damage either to vs or them, in whoſe time nede of ſemblable defence ſhall happen? whyche decaye, though we alredy ꝑceiue,

feare, and lament, & for the reſtoryng therof ceſſe not to make ordynaunces, good lawes and ſtatutes: yet who effectually putteth his hande to contynuall execution of the ſame lawes and prouyſyons? or beholdynge them dayly broken, wynketh nat at the offendours? But I ſhall hereof more ſpeake in an nother place, and retourne nowe to the ſeconde vtilitie, founde in ſhotynge in the longe bowe, whiche is kylling ofdere, wyld foule, and other game, wherin is bothe profyte and pleaſure aboue any other artyllery.
               ¶ And verily I ſuppoſe, that before croſbowes and handgunnes were brought into this realme, by the ſleight of our enemies, to thentent to diſtroy the noble defence of archery, contynuall vſe of ſhotynge in the longe bowe made the feate ſo perfect and exacte amonge engliſhe men, that they thā as ſurely and ſoone kylled ſuch game, whiche they lyſted to haue, as they nowe can do with the croſſebowe or gunne. But this ſuffyſeth, for the declaration of ſhootyng, wherby it is ſufficientely proued, that it incomparably excellethe all other exercyſe, paſtyme, or ſolace.
               ¶ And hereat I conclude to write of exercyſe, whiche apperteyneth as wel to princis and noble men, as to all other by theyr

example: whiche determyne to paſſe forth their lyues in vertue & honeſtie: And hereafter, with the aſſiſtence of god, vnto whō I render this myne account, for the talent that I haue of hym receyued, I purpoſe to wryte of the principal, and (as I mought ſay) the partycular ſtudye and affayres of hym, that by the prouydence of God, is called to the mooſte diffycult cure of a publyke weale.
            
            Libri primi finis.
         
         
            THE SECONDE BOKE.
            
               ¶ What thynges he, that is elected or appoynted to be a gouernour of a publyke weale, ought to premeditate. Cap. I.
               
                  
                     IN THE BOKE PRECEdynge I haue (as I truſte) ſufficiently declared, as well what is to be called a verye and ryghte publyke weale, as alſo, that there ſhulde be therof one prince and ſouerayne aboue all other gouernours. And I haue alſo expreſſed my conceyte and opinion, touching nat only the ſtudies, but alſo the exercyſes cō
                  cernynge the neceſſary education of noble

men and other, called to the gouernance of a publyke weale, in ſuche fourme as by the noble example of their lyues, and the fruit therof commynge, the publyke weale that ſhal happen to be vnder their gouernance, ſhall nat fayle to be accounted happy, and the auctoritie on them to be emploied well and fortunately. Nowe wyl I treate of the preparation of ſuche perſonages, whan Preparation of gouernours. they fyrſt receiue any great dignite charge or gouernance of the weale publyke.
               ¶ FYRST SVCHE perſons, being now adulte, that is to ſay, paſſed their childehode, as wel in maners as in yeres, if for their vtues and lernynge, they happe to be called to receyue any dignitie, they ſhulde fyrſt amoue al company from them, & in a ſecrete oratory or priuy chambre, by them ſelfe, aſſemble al the powers of their wyttes, to remembre theſe .vii. artycles, whiche I haue not of myn owne heed deuyſed, but gathered as well out of holy ſcripture, as out of the warkes of other excellent wryters of famous memorie, as they ſhall ſoone perceyue, whiche haue radde & pervſed good autours in greke and latine.
               ¶ Fyrſt and aboue all thyng, let them conſider, that from god only procedeth al honour, The fyrſte conſideration of gouernours. And that neither noble progenie, ſucceſſion, nor election be of ſuche force, that

by them any aſtate or dignitie maye be ſoo ſtablyſhed, that god beinge ſtyred to vengeāce, ſhall not ſhortly reſume it, and perchance tranſlate it where it ſhall lyke hym. And for as moche as examples greatly do profytte in the ſtede of experyence, here ſhal it be neceſſary to remēbre the hyſtorye of Saul, whom god hym ſelfe elected to be the firſte kynge of Iſrael, that where god commanded hym by the mouthe of Samuel the prophet, that for as moch as the people Saul and Amalech. callyd Amalech, had reſiſted the chyldren of Iſrael, whan they firſte departed from Egypte, he ſhulde therfore diſtroy al the countray, and ſlee men women and children, al beaſtis and cattel, and that he ſhuld nothing ſaue or kepe ther of. But Saul after that he had vaynquyſhed Amalech, and Diſobedience. taken Agag kynge ther of pryſoner, he hauynge on hym compaſſion, ſaued his lyfe onely. Alſo he preſerued the beſt oxen, catell, and veſtures, and all other thinge that was fayreſt, and of mooſte eſtimation, and wolde not conſume it, accordynge as god had commaunded him, ſayinge to Samuel, that the people kepte it to the entent, that they wolde make ther of to allmyghty god a ſolempne ſacrifyce. But Samuel reprouynge hym ſayde, Better is Obedience, than Sacrifyce. with other wordes that

do folowe in the hyſtorie. Fynally for that offence only, almighty god abiected Saul, that he ſhulde no more reigne ouer Iſrael: and cauſed Samuel forthewith to enoynte Dauid kynge, the yongeſt ſonne of a pore man of Bethleem, named Iſai, which was kepynge his fathers ſhepe.
               ¶ Sens for ones neglectyng the cōmandment of god, and that neyther naturall pitie, nor the intent to do ſacrifice, with that which was ſaued mought excuſe the trāſgreſſyon of goddis commaundement, nor mytigate his greuous diſpleaſure: howe vigilant ought a chriſten man, being in auctoritie, howe vigilant (I ſaye) induſtrious and diligent ought he to be in the adminyſtration of a publyke weale? dredynge alwaye the wordes, that be ſpoken by eternall ſapience to theym that be gouernours The wordes of Sapience to 
                        •
                     ouernours. Sapiencie of publyke weales, All power and vertue is gyuen of the lorde, that of all other is hygheſt, who ſhall examyne youre dedes, and inſerche youre thoughtes. For whan ye were the mynyſters of his realme, ye iudged nat vpryghtely, ne obſerued the lawe of Iuſtyce, nor ye walked nat accordynge to his pleaſure. He ſhall ſhortely and terryblye appiere vnto you. For moſt harde and greuous iudgemente, ſhall be on theym, that haue rule ouer other. To

the poore man mercy is graunted, but the great men ſhal ſuffre great turmentes. He that is lorde of all excepteth no perſone, ne he ſhall feare the greatnes of any man, for he made as well the great as the ſmall, and careth for euery of them equally. The ſtrō
                  ger or of more myghte is the perſone: the ſtronger peyne is to hym immynent. Ther fore to you gouernours be theſe my wordes, that ye maye lerne wyſedome and falle nat.
               ¶ This notable ſentence is nat only to be imprinted in the hartes of gouernours, but alſo to be oftentymes reuolued and called to remembrance.
               ¶ They ſhall nat thynke, howe moche honour The. 
                        •
                     i. cō
                     ſideration. they receyue, but howe moche care & burdeyn. He they ſhall nat moche eſteme their reuenues and treaſure, conſiderynge that it is no buten or praye, but a laborious offyce and trauayle.
               ¶ Let them thynke, the greatter dominiō 
                  The third. they haue, that thereby they ſuſteyne the more care and ſtudye. And that therefore they muſt haue the laſſe ſolace and paſtime, and to ſenſuall pleaſures laſſe oportunitie.
               ¶ Alſo whan they behold their garmentis and other ornamentes, rych and precious, The .iiii. they ſhall thynke, what reproche were to them to ſurmount in that, whiche be other

mennes warkes and nat theirs, and to be vanquyſhed of a poore ſubiecte in ſondrye vertues, wherof they theym ſelues be the artifycers.
               ¶ They that regarde them, of whom they The .v. haue gouernaunce, no more than ſhall appertayn to their owne priuate cōmodities, they no better eſteme them than other men dothe their horſes & mules, to whom they employ no laſſe labour and diligēce, not to the benefite of the ſely beaſtis, but to their owne neceſſities and ſingular aduantage.
               ¶ The moſte ſure foundation of noble renome, The ſyxte. is a man to be of ſuch vertues & qualities, as he deſireth to be opēly publiſhed. For it is a faint prayſe, that is gotten with feare, or by flaterars giuen, and the ſame is but fume, whiche is ſupported with ſilence prouoked by menacis.
               ¶ They ſhall alſo conſyder, that by theyr The .vii. preeminence, they ſit as it were on a pyller on the top of a mountayn, where al the people do beholde them, nat only in their open affaires, but alſo in their ſecrete paſtymes, priuie dalyaunce, or other improfytable or wanton conditions, whiche ſone be diſcouered by the conuerſation of their mooſte familyar ſeruantis, whiche do alwaye imbrace that ſtudy, wherin their mayſter delyteth, accordynge to the ſayinge of Ieſus

Sirach, As the iuge of the people is, ſo be his miniſters: And ſuche as be the gouernours of the citie, ſuch be the people. Whiche ſentence is confyrmed by ſondry hiſtories. For Nero, Caligula, Domiciane, Cucius Commodus, Uarius Heliogabalus, monſtruous emperours, nouriſhed aboute them, rybaudes, and other voluptuouſe artifycers.
               ¶ Maximianus, Diocleſian, Maxencius, and other perſecutours of chriſten men, lac ked not inuentours of cruell and terryble tourmentes.
               ¶ Contrary wyſe, reigning the noble Auguſtus, Nerua, Traiane, Hadriane, the two Antonines, and the wonderfull emperour Alexander, for his grauitie called Seuerus, the imperiall palayce was alway repleniſhed with eloquent oratours, delectable poetes, wyſe philoſophers, moſte cunnynge and experte lawyars, prudente and valiaunte capitaynes.
               ¶ Mo ſemblable examples ſhall here of be founden, by them which purpoſely do rede hiſtories, whom of all other I moſt deſyre to be princis and gouernours.
               ¶ Theſe articles wel and ſubſtācially grauen in a noble mannes memory, it ſhall alſo be neceſſary to cauſe them to be delectably writen and ſette in a table within his bedde

chambre, addyng to, the verſis of Claudiane the noble poet, which he wrate to Honorius emperour of Rome, The verſis I haue tranſlated out of latine into englſhe, nat obſeruynge the order as they ſtande, but the ſentence belonging to my purpoſe.
               
                  ¶ The table of gouernours to be hanged in their chambres.
                  
                     
                        Though thy power ſtretchith both far & large Claudianꝰ
                        
                        Through Inde the rich, ſet at the worldis end,
                        And Mede with Arabi be both vnder thy charge
                        And alſo Seres, that ſilke to vs doth ſende
                        If feare the trouble, & ſmall thinges the offēde,
                        Corrupt deſyre thyn harte hath ones imbraced
                        Thou arte in bondage, thyn honour is defaced.
                     
                     
                        Thou ſhalt be demed thā worthy for to reigne
                        whan of thy ſelfe thou winneſt the maiſtry.
                        Euyll cuſtome bringeth vertue in dyſdaine
                        Lycence ſuperfluous perſwadeth moche foly,
                        In to moche pleaſure ſette nat felicitie,
                        If luſte or anger do thy mynde aſſayle
                        Subdue occaſion, and thou ſhalt ſone p̄uayle.
                     
                     
                        ¶ what thou mayſt do, delyte nat for to know,
                        But rather what thing wyl become the beſt.
                        Embrace thou vertue, & kepe thy courage low,
                        And thinke that alway meaſure is a feeſt.
                        Loue well thy people, care alſo for the leeſt.
                        And whan thou ſtudieſt for thy cōmoditie
                        
                           
Make them all parteners of thy felicitie.
                     
                     
                        ¶ Be nat moche meued with ſynguler appetite
                        Excepte it profyte vnto thy ſubiectis all
                        At thyn example the people wyll delyte
                        Be it vyce or vertue with the they riſe or fall
                        No lawes auayle, men tourne as doth a balle
                        For where the ruler in lyuyng is nat ſtable
                        Both lawe & counſayle is tourned into a fable.
                     
                  
               
               ¶ Theſe verſes of Claudiane, ful of excellent wiſedomes, as I haue ſayd, wold be in a table, in ſuche a place as a gouernor ones in a day may behold them, ſpecially as they be expreſſed in latine by the ſayd poete, vnto whoſe eloquence no tranſlation in englyſhe maye be equiualent. But yet were it better to can them by harte, ye and if they were made in the fourme of a dytie, to be ſongen to an inſtrumente, O what a ſweete ſonge wold it be in the eares of wyſe men? For a meane muſitian mought ther of make a ryght pleaſant harmonie, where almoſte euery note ſhuld expreſſe a counſayle vertuous or neceſſary.
               ¶ Ye haue nowe hard, what premeditatiōs be expedient before that a man take on him the gouernāce of a publyke weale. Theſe notable premeditations and remembrāces ſhulde be in his mynde, whiche is in auctorytie often tymes renewed. Than ſhall he

procede further in furniſhynge his perſon, with honourable maners and qualytyes, wher of very nobilitie is cōpacte, wherby all other ſhall be induced to honour, loue, and feare hym, whiche thinges chiefely do cauſe perfect obedience.
               ¶ Now of theſe maners wil I write in ſuch order, as in my conceyt they be (as it were) naturally diſpoſed and ſette in a noble man, and ſooneſt in hym noted or eſpied.
            
            
               The expoſition of maieſtie. Cap. II.
               IN a gouernour or man, hauing in the publike weale ſome greatte authoritie, the fountayne of all excellent maners is maieſtie, whiche is the holle proportion and fygure of noble aſtate, and is proprelye a beautie or comelyneſſe in his countenance, langage and geſture, apt to his dignite, and accommodate to tyme, place, and company, whiche lyke as the ſonne doth his beames, ſo dothe it caſte on the beholders and herers a pleaſaunt and terrible reuerence. In ſo moche as the wordes or countenances of a noble manne, ſhulde be in the ſtede of a fyrme and ſtable lawe to his inferyours. Yet is nat maieſtie alwaye in haulte or fyerce countenance, nor in ſpeche outragious or arrogante, but in honourable

and ſobre demeanure, deliberate and graue ꝓnunciation, wordes clene and facile, void of rudenes and diſhoneſtie, without vayne or inordinate ianglynge, with ſuche an excellent temperance, that he amonge an infinite nombre of other perſons, by his maieſtie may be eſpied for a gouernour.
               ¶ Wherof we haue a noble example in Homere of Uliſſes, that whan his ſhyppe and Uliſſes. menne were peryſſhed in the ſee, and he vnethe eſcaped and was caſte on lande vppon a cooſte, where the inhabytauntes were called Pheacas, he beinge al naked, ſauynge a mantell ſent to hym by the kynges doughter, without other apparaylle, or ſeruant, repreſented ſuche a wonderfull maieſtie in his countenaunce and ſpeche, that the kynge of the countrey, named Alcinous, in that extreme calamitie, wyſſhed, that Uliſſes wold take his doughter Nauſicaa, to wyfe, with a great part of his treſure. And declarig the honour that he bare towarde hym, he made for his ſake dyuers noble eſbatementes and paſſetymes. The people alſo wondrynge at his maieſtie, honoured hym with ſondrye preſentes. And at their propre charges and expenſis, conuayed hym into his owne realme of Ithaca, in a ſhyppe of wonderfull beautie, well ordynaunced and manned for his defence

& ſaufe conduct. The wordes of Alcinous, wherby he declareth the maieſtie, that he noted to be in Uliſſes, I haue putte in engliſhe, nat ſo well as I found them in greke.
               
                  ¶ Alcinous to Uliſſes.
                  
                     
                        ¶ whan I the conſyder Ulyſſes, I perceiue
                        Thou doeſt nat diſſemble to me in thy ſpeche
                        As other haue done, whiche craftily can deceiue
                        Untruely reportyng, where they liſt to preache
                        Of thiges neuer done, ſuch falſhod they do tech.
                        But in thy wordes, there is a right good grace.
                        And that thy mind is good, it ſhewith i thy face
                     
                  
               
               ¶ The eſtimatyon of maieſtie in countenaunce, ſhall be declared by two examples nowe enſuynge.
               ¶ To Scipio, beinge in his manour place, called Linternū, came dyuers great theues and pyrates, only to the intent to ſe his perſone, of whoſe wonderfulle proweſſe and ſondry vyctories they harde the renoume. But he nat knowynge, but that they came to endomage hym, armed hym ſelfe and ſuche ſeruauntes as he than hadde with him, and dyſpoſed theym aboute the imbatylmentes of his houſe, to make defence, whiche the capytaynes of the theues perceyuyng, deſpeched the multitude from them, and layinge aparte their harneis and weapons,

called to Scipio with a loude voyce, ſayinge that they came nat as enemyes, but wondrynge at his vertue and proweſſe, deſired only to ſee him, whiche if he vouched ſaufe, they wolde accounte for an heuenly benefyte. That being ſhewed to Scipio by his ſeruauntes, he cauſed the gaates to be ſette wide open, and the theues to be ſuffered to entre: who kyſſynge the gates and poſtes with moche reuerence, as they had bene of a Temple or other place dedicate, humbly approched to Scipio, whyche vyſaged theym in ſuche fourme, that they as ſubdued with a reuerente drede, in beholdynge his maieſtie, at the laſt ioyfully kyſſing his hande oftentymes, which he benignely offred to theym, made humble reuerence, and ſo departed, laying in the porch ſemblable offrynges, as they gaue to theyr goddes: And forth with retourned to their owne habitatiōs, reioyſing incredibly, that they had ſene and touched a prince ſo noble and valyant.
               ¶ It is no lyttell thyng to meruayle at, the maieſtie ſhewed in extreme fortune and myſery. The noble Romayne Marius, whan he had ben .vii. tymes Conſul, being vaynguyſhed by Scilla, after that he had longe hyd him ſelfe in mariſes and deſert places, was fynally conſtrayned by famyne to repaire

to a towne called Minturne, where he truſted to haue ben ſuccoured. But the inhabitantes, dreding the cruelte of Scilla, toke Marius, and put hym into a dongeon, And after ſente to ſlee hym their commune hangeman: whiche was borne in Cimbria, a countrey ſomtime diſtroyed by Marius. The hangman, beholdyng the honourable porte and maieſtie, that remayned in Marius, nat withſtandynge that he was out of honorable apparayle, and was in garmētes torne and fylthy, he thought that in his vyſage appered the terrible battayle, wherin Marius vanquyſhed his coūtray men: he therfore all tremblynge, as conſtrayned by feare, dydde lette falle out of his hande the ſwerde, wherwith he ſhoulde haue ſlayne Marius, and leuing him vntouched, fledde oute of the place. The cauſe of his feare reported to the people, they meued with reuerence, afterwarde ſtudied and deuyſed howe they mought delyuer Marius from the malyce of Scilla.
               ¶ In Auguſtus, emperour of Rome, was a natiue maieſtie. For as Suetomꝰ writeth, from his eien proceded rayes or beames, whyche perced the eien of the beholders. The ſame emperour ſpake ſeldom openly, but out of a comentarie, that is to ſay, that he had before prouided and wryten, to the

intente that he wold ſpeke no more ne laſſe than he had purpoſed.
               ¶ More ouer, towarde the acquiringe of maieſtie, thre thinges be required in the oration of a man hauyng autoritie, that it be compendious, ſententious, and delectable: hauynge alſo reſpect to the tyme whan, the place where, and the perſones to whom it is ſpoken. For the wordes perchance apte for a bankette or tyme of ſolace, be nat cō
                  mendable in tyme of conſultation or ſeruice of god. That langage that in the chambre is tollerable, in place of iugement or great aſſembly is nothinge cōmendable.
            
            
               ¶ Of apparayle belongynge to a noble man beinge a gouernour or great counſaylour. Cap. iii.
               APparayle may be well a part of maieſtie. For as there hath ben euer a diſcrepance of veſture of youth and age, men and womenne, and our lorde god ordeyned the apparayle of prieſtis diſtinct frome ſeculars, as it appereth in holy ſcripture: alſo the gentyles had of auncyente tyme ſondry apparayle to ſondrye aſtates, as to the ſenate, and dignities called magiſtrates, And what enormitie ſhoulde hit nowe be thought and a thing to laughe at,

to ſe a iuge or ſergeāt at the lawe in a ſhort coote garded and pounced after the galyarde fation, or an apprentyſe of the lawe or pleder, come to the barre with a myllayne or frenche bonette on his heed, ſette full of aglettes? So is there apparayle comely to euery aſtate and degree, and that whiche excedeth or lacketh, procureth reproche, in a noble man ſpecially. For apparaile ſimple or ſcant reprouethe hym of auarice. If it be alwaye excedynge precious and often tymes chaunged, as well in to charge as ſtraunge and newe facions, it cauſeth hym to be noted dyſſolute of maners.
               ¶ The moſte noble emperours of Rome, Auguſtus, Traiane, Hadriane, Antonine, Seuerus, and Alexander, whiche were of al other incomparable in honorable lyuing, vſed a dyſcrete moderation in theyr apparayle, all though they were greatte emperours and gentyles. Howe moche more ought than chriſten men, whoſe denomination is founded on humilitie, and they that be not of the eſtate of pryncis, to ſhewe a moderation and conſtaunce in veſture, that they diminyſſhe noo part of theyr maieſtie, eyther with newe fangleneſſe, or with ouer ſumptuous expences, and yet may this laſt be ſuffred, where there is a great aſſembly of ſtraungers: for than ſome tyme it is expediente,

that a noble man, in his aparayle, do aduaunce hym ſelfe to be bothe ryche and honourable. But in this as wel as in other partes of maieſtie, tyme is to be highly conſydered.
               ¶ Semblable deckinge oughte to be in the Hāgynges and plate mete for a noble mā. houſe of a noble man, or manne of honour. I meane concernynge ornamentes of halle and chambres, in Aryſe, paynted tables, and images couteynynge hiſtories, wherin is repreſented ſome monumente of vertue, mooſte cunnyngely wrought, with the circumſtaunce of the matter briefly declared, wherby other men in beholdynge, maye be inſtructed, or at the leaſt wayes to vertue perſwaded. In lyke wiſe his plate and veſſayle wolde be ingraued with hiſtories, fables, or quycke and wyſe ſentences, comprehendyng good doctryne or counſayles, wherby one of theſe commodyties maye happen, eyther that they whiche doo eate or drynke, hauynge thoſe wyſedomes euer in ſyghte, ſhall happen with the meate to receyue ſome of them, or by purpoſing thē at the table, maye ſuſſitate ſome dyſputation or reaſonynge, wherby ſomme parte of tyme ſhall be ſaued, whiche elles by ſuperfluouſe eatynge and drynkynge, wolde be idelly conſumed.
            
            
               
               ¶ What very nobilitie is, and wherof it toke fyrſte that denomination. Capitulo. iiii.
               NOwe it is to be feared, that where maieſtie approcheth to exceſſe, & the mind is obſeſſed with inordinate glorie, leſt pryde, of al vices mooſte horryble, ſhulde ſodeynly entre and take priſoner the harte of a gentyllman called to auctoritie. Wherfore in as moch as that peſtilence corrupteth all ſences, and maketh them incurable by any perſwation or doctryne, therfore ſuch perſons, from theyr adoleſcency, Adoleſcē
                     cye, is the age next to the ſtate of man. Nobilitie begunne. ought to be perſwaded and taught the true knowledge of very nobylytie, in fourme folowynge or lyke.
               ¶ Fyrſt that in the begynnynge, whan priuate poſſeſſions and dignitie were giuen by the conſente of the people, who than had all thynge in commune, and equalitie in degree and condition, Undoutedly they gaue the one and the other to him, at whoſe vertue they meruayled, and by whoſe labour and induſtrie they receiued a commune benefyte, as of a commune father, that with equal affection loued them. And that prōptitude or redyneſſe in employinge that benefyte was than named in englyſhe gentylneſſe, as it was in latine BENIGNITAS,

and in other tonges after a ſemblable ſignifycation: and the perſons were called gentyll menne, more for the remembraunce of theyr vertue and benefyte, than for diſcrepaunce of aſtates.
               ¶ Alſo it fortuned by the prouidēce of god, that of thoſe good menne were ingendred good chyldren, who beinge broughte vp in vertue, and perceyuynge the cauſe of the aduauncement of theyr progenytours, endeuoured them ſelfes by imitation of vertue, to be equall to them in hon our and auctoritie: by good emulation they reteyned ſtylle the fauour and reuerence of people. And for the goodnes that proceded of ſuche generation, the aſtate of them was called in greke EVGENIA, whiche ſignifyeth good kynde or lynage: but in a more briefe maner, it was after called nobilitie, and the perſoues noble, which ſignifieth excellent, and in the analogie or ſignificatiō it is more ample than gentill, for it conteyneth as wel all that, whiche is in gentilneſſe, as alſo the honour or dignitie therfore receyued, whiche be ſo annexed the one to the other, that they can not be ſeperate.
               ¶ It wolde be more ouer declared, that where vertue ioyned with great poſſeſſiōs Nobilitie auncient. or dygnytie, hath longe contynued in the blode or houſe of a gentyll man, as it were

an inheritaunce, there nobilitie is moſt ſhewed, and theſe noble men be moſt to be honored: for as moche as continuaunce in all thinge that is good, hath euer preeminence in prayſe and comparyſon. But yet ſhall it be neceſſary, to aduertiſe thoſe perſōs, that do thynke, that nobylitie may in no wyſe be but onely where men can auaunte theym of auncient lignage, an auncient robe, or great poſſeſsions, at this day very noble men do ſuppoſe to be moch errour and foly. Wherof there is a familiar example, whiche we beare euer with vs: for the bloode in our bodies beinge in youthe warme, pure, and luſtye, is the occaſion of beautie, whiche is euery where commended and loued, but in age beynge putryfied, it leſeth his prayſe. And the goutes, carbuncles, kankers, lepryes, and other lyke ſores and ſyckneſſes, whiche do procede of blode corrupted, be to al men deteſtable. And this perſuaſion to any gentilman, in whom is apt dyſpoſition to very nobilitie, wyll be ſufficient, to withdrawe hym from ſuch vice, wherby he may empayre his own eſtimation, and the good renoume of his auncetours.
               ¶ If he haue an auncient robe, lefte by his Aunciente robes. auncetour, let hym conſider, that if the firſt owner were of more vertue than he is, that ſuccedeth, the robe beynge worne, mynſſheth

his prayſe, to them whiche knowe or haue harde of the vertue of hym that fyrſte owed it. If he that weareth it be vyclouſe, it more detecteth howe moch he is vnworthy to weare it, the remembraunce of his noble auncetour makynge men to abhorre the reproche gyuen by an yuell ſucceſſour,
               ¶ If the fyrſt owner were not vertuouſe, it condemneth him that weareth it of moche folyſheneſſe, to glorie in a thynge of ſo baſe eſtimation, which lacking beautie or gloſſe, can be none ornament to hym that weareth it, nor honorable remembrance to hym that fyrſte owed it.
               ¶ But nowe to confirme by true hiſtories, that accordynge as I late affirmed, nobilitic Nobilitie wherin it is. is not only in dignitie, auncient lignage, nor great reuenues landes or poſſeſſyons, let yong gentylmen haue often tymes tolde to theym, and (as it is vulgarely ſpoken) layde in theyr lappes, how Numa Pompilius was taken from huſbandry, whiche he Numa klg of Romais exerciſed, and was made king of Romayns by electyon of the people. What cauſed it ſuppoſe you, but his wiſedome and vertue, whiche in him was very nobilitie: and that nobylitie broughte hym to dygnitie? And if that were not nobylytie, the Romaynes were meruaylouſely abuſed, that after the dethe of Romulus theyr kynge, hauinge amonge

them a hundred ſenatours, whome Romulus dyd ſet in auctoritie, and alſo the blod royal, and olde gentylmen of the Sabynes, who by the procurement of the wiues of the Romains, beīg their doughters, inhabited the citie of Rome, they wold nat of ſomme of them electe a kynge, rather than aduaunce a ploughman and ſtraunger to that autoritie.
               ¶ Quintius, hauing but .xxx. acres of land, Quintius Dictator. and beinge ploughman therof, the Senate and people of Rome ſente a meſſager to ſhewe hym that they had choſen hym to be DICTATOR, whiche was at that tyme the higheſt dignitie among the Romains, & for thre monethes had auctoritie royal. Quintius herynge the meſſage, lette his plough ſtande, & went into the citie, & prepared his hooſt, agein the Samnites, and vanquiſhed them valiantly. And that done, he ſurrendred his office, and being diſcharged of the dignitie, repaired ageyne to his ploughe, and applied it diligently.
               ¶ I wold demaund nowe, if nobilitie were only in the dignitie, or in his proweſſe, whiche he ſhewed agaynſt his ennemies. If it were only in his dignite, it therwith ceſſed, and he was (as I mought ſay) eſtſones vnnoble, and than was his proweſſe vnrewarded, whiche was the chiefe and origynall

cauſe of that dignite: whiche were incongruent and without reaſō. If it were in his proweſſe, proweſſe conſiſtynge of valiaunte courage and martial polycie, if they ſtyl remayne in the perſonne, he maye neuer be with out nobilitie, whiche is the commendation, and as it were the ſurname of vtue.
               
               ¶ The two Romaynes, called both Decii, were of the baſe aſtate of the people, and Decii and theyr a
                     
                        •
                     owe. not of the greate blode of the Romaynes, yet for the preſeruation of theyr countrey, they auowed to dye, as it were in a ſatisfaction for all theyr countrey: and ſoo with valyaunte hartes they perced the hoſte of theyr ennemies, and valiauntly fyghtynge dyed there honourably, and by theyr example gaue ſuche audacitie and courage to the reſidue of the Romaynes, that they employed ſo their ſtrengthe agaynſt their ennemyes, that with lyttell more loſſe, they opteyned victorye.
               ¶ Ought not theſe two Romaynes, which by theyr death gaue occaſiō of victorye, be called noble? I ſuppoſe no man that knoweth what reaſon is, wyll denie it.
               ¶ More ouer, we haue in this realme coynes, which be called nobles, as lōg as they be ſene to be golde, they be ſo called: but if they be counterfayted, and made in braſſe, coper, or other vile metal, who for the prit

onely, calleth them nobles? wherby it appereth, that the eſtimation is in the metall, and not in the prynte or 
                     •
                  ygure.
               ¶ And in a horſe or good greyhounde, we prayſe that we ſe in them, and not the beautie or goodnes of theyr progenie. Whiche proueth, that in eſtemyng of money and catell, we be led by wyſedome, and in approuynge of man, to whom beaſtes and money do ſerue, we be onely induced by cuſtome.
               ¶ Thus I conclude, that nobylytie is not after the vulgare opynion of menne, but is onely the prayſe and ſurname of vertue. Whiche the lenger it continueth in a name or linage, the more is nobilitie extolled and meruayled at.
            
            
               Ofaffabilitie, and the vtilitie ther of in euery aſtate. Cap. v.
               TO that, whiche I before named gentylneſſe, be incident thre ſpecial qualities, Affabilite, Placabilitie, & Mercy, of whom I wil nowe ſeperately declare the propre ſignifications.
               ¶ Affabilitie is of a wonderfull efficacie or power in procuryng loue. And it is in ſondry wyſe, but moſte proprely, where a man is facyle or eaſye to be ſpoken vnto. It is alſo where a man ſpeketh courteyſely with

a ſwete ſpeche or countenaunce, wherwith the herers (as it were with a delycate odour) be refreſhed, and alured to loue him, in whom is this moſte delectable qualytie. As contrary wyſe, men vehementely hate them, that haue a proude and haulte countenaunce, Hault coū tenance. be they neuer ſo hyghe in aſtate or degree. How often haue I hard people ſay, whan men in great auctoutie haue paſſed by, without makyng gentyl countenāce, to thoſe whiche haue done to them reuerence, This mā weneth with a loke, to ſubdue all the worlde? Nay nay, mens hartes be free, and wyll loue whom they lyſt. And therto al the other do conſēt in a murmure, as it were bees. Lorde god howe they be ſore blinded, which do wene, that haulte countenaunce is comelyneſſe of nobylitie, where vndoubtedly, nothynge is therto, a more greatter blemyſhe: As they haue wel proued, which by fortunes mutabilite haue chaunged their aſtate, whan they perceiue that the remembrance of theyr pride, withdraweth all pitie, all men reioyſynge at the chaunge of theyr fortune.
               ¶ Dioniſe, the proude kynge of Sicile, after that for his intollerable pride, was driuen by his people out of his realme, the remenbraunce of his haulte and ſtately countenaunce, was to all men ſo odiouſe, that he

coulde be in no countrey well enterteyned. In ſo moche as if he had not be releued by lernynge, teachynge a grammer ſchole in Italy, he for lacke of frendes had ben conſtrayned to begge for his lyuynge.
               ¶ Semblably Perſes king of Macedonia, & one of the rycheſt kynges that euer was in Grece, For his execrable pryde, was at the laſt abandoned of all his alies and confederates, by reaſon wherof, he was vainquyſhed, and taken priſoner by Paulus Emilius, one of the conſules of Rome: & not onely he hym ſelfe bounden, and ledde as a captiue, in the triumphe of the ſayde Paulus, but alſo the remembrance of his pryde was ſo odiouſe to people, that his owne ſonne, deſtitute of frendes, was by nede cō
                  ſtrayned to worke in a ſmythes forge, not fyndinge any man that of his harde fortune had any compaſſion.
               ¶ The pride of Carquine, the laſt kyng of Romaynes, was more occaſion of his exile, than the rauyſſhynge of Lucrecia, by his ſonne Arunciꝰ, for the malice that the people by his pryde had longe gathered, fyndinge valiaunt capitaynes, Brutus, Colatinus, Lucretius, and other nobles of the citie, at the laſt braſte out, and takynge occaſion of the rauiſſhement, all thoughe the king were therto not partie, they vtterly expulſed

him for euer out of the citie. Theſe be the fruites of pride, and that men do call ſtately countenaunce.
               ¶ Whan a noble man paſſeth by, ſhewynge to men a gentyll and familiare viſage, it is a Gentil coū
                     tenance. world to beholde, howe people taketh cō
                  fort, howe the bloude in theyr viſage quickeneth, howe theyr fleſhe ſtyreth and hartes leape for gladnes: Than they all ſpeke, as it were in an harmony, the one ſaith, who beholdinge this mannes moſt gentyl countenance, wil nat with al his harte loue him? A nother ſayth, He is no man but an angel, ſe howe he reioyſeth all men that beholde hym. Fynally, all doo graunte, that he is worthy all honour that maye be gyuen or wyſhed hym.
               ¶ But nowe to reſorte to that, which moſt proprely (as I haue ſaid) is affabilite, whiche is facile or eaſy to be ſpoken vnto.
               ¶ Marcus Antoninꝰ, emperour of Rome (as Lampridius wryteth) enſerched, who were mooſt homely and playne men within the cite, and ſecretely ſent for them into his chambre, where he diligently enquered of them, what the people coniected of his liuinge, commaundynge them vpon peyne of his hygh indignation, to tell hym trouthe, and hyde nothynge from hym. And vpon theyr reporte, if he harde any thynge worthy

neuer ſo lyttell dyſpreyſe, he forthwith amended it. And alſo by ſuche meanes, he corrected them that were about his perſō, fyndyng them negligent, dyſſemblars, and flatterers.
               ¶ The noble Trayane, whan his nobles & counſaylours noted hym to famylyar and curtaiſe, and therfore dyd blame hym, He aunſwered, that he wolde be a lyke emperour to other men, as if he were a ſubiecte, he wolde wyſhe to haue ouer hym ſelfe.
               ¶ O what domage hath enſued to pryncis Libertie in ſpeakynge. and theyr realmes, where liberte of ſpeche hath ben reſtrained?
               ¶ What auayled fortune incomparable to Alexāders crueltie in ſleinge his frendes. the great kynge Alexander, his wonderful puyſſaunce and hardynes, or his ſynguler doctryne in philoſophy, taughte hym by Ariſtotle, in delyueryng hym from the deth in his yonge and flouriſhyng age? where if he hadde reteyned the ſame affabilitie, that was in hym in the begynnynge of his conqueſt, and had not put to ſylence his counſaylours, whiche before vſed to ſpeake to hym frankely, he mought haue eſcaped all vyolent death: and by ſimylitude haue enioyed the hole monarchie of al the worlde. For after that he waxed to be terryble in maners, and prohibited his frēdes, and diſcrete ſeruauntes, to vſe theyr accuſtomed

libertie in ſpeche, he felle in to the hatefull grudge amonge his owne people.
               ¶ But I had almoſt forgoten Iulius Ceſar, Iulius Ceſar exāple of tyranny who being not able to ſuſteyne the burden of fortune, and enuienge his owne felicitie, abandoned his naturall diſpoſition, and as it were being drōke with ouer moch welth, ſought newe wayes, howe to be aduaunced aboue the aſtate of mortal princis: wherfore litel and lytel he withdrewe from men his accuſtomed gentylneſſe, becoming more ſturdy in langage, and ſtrange in coū
                  tenaunce, than euer before had bene his vſage. And to declare more playnely his intente, he made an edict or decree, that noo man ſhulde preaſe to come to him vncalled, and that they ſhuld haue good awaite, that they ſpake not in ſuch familiar faciō to him, as they before had ben accuſtomed: wherby he ſo dyd alienate from hym the hartes of his moſte wyſe and aſſured adherentys, that from that tyme forwarde, his lyfe was to them tedious: and abhorrynge hym as a monſtre or commune enemy, beinge knytte in a confederacy, ſlewe hym ſyttyng in the Senate, of whiche conſpiracy was chiefe capitayne Marcus Brutus, whom of al other he beſt loued, for his great wyſedome and proweſſe. And it is of ſome writers ſuſpected, that he was begoten of Ceſar, for

as moch as Ceſar in his youth loued Seruilia, the mother of Brutus, and as menne ſuppoſed, vſed her more familiarly than honeſtie required. Thus Ceſar by omittinge his olde affabilitie, did incenſe his next frē
                  des and companions to ſle hym.
               ¶ But nowe take hede what domage enſued Dammage inſuing by lacke of libertie of ſpeche. to hym by his decre, wherin he cōmanded, that no man ſhulde be ſo hardy to approche or ſpeke to hym, One which knewe of the conſpiracie againſt him, & by all lykelihode did participate therin, beyng meued either with loue or pitie, or other wyſe his cōſcience remording againſt the deſtructiō of ſo noble a prince, cōſidering that by Ceſars decree he was prohybyted to haue to him any familiar acceſſe, ſo that he myghte not plainly detect the conſpiracie, he therto vehemētly meued, wrote in a byll all the fourme therof, with the meanes howe it might be eſpied, & ſēs he mought find none other oportunitie, he delyuered the byll to Ceſar the ſame day that his dethe was prepared, as he wēt towarde the place, where the Senate was holden. But he being radicate in pride, & neglectīg to loke on that bil, not eſteming the ꝑſon that deliuered it, whiche ꝑchāce was but of a mean hauiour, cōtinued his way to the Senate, where he incō
                  tinēt was ſlain by the ſaid Brutꝰ & many mo

of the Senate for that purpoſe appoynted.
               ¶ Who beholding the cauſe of the death of this moſte noble Ceſar, vnto whom in eloquence, doctrine, martial proweſſe, and gē
                  tylneſſe, no prince maye be compared, and the acceleration or haſte to his confuſyon, cauſed by his owne edict or decre, wyll not commende affabilitie, and extolle liberalite of ſpeche? wherby onely loue is in the hartes of people perfectely kendled, all feare excluded, and conſequentely realmes, dominions, and all other auctorities conſolydate and perpetually ſtabliſhed. The ſufferance of noble men to be ſpoken vnto, is not only to them an incōparable ſur etie, but alſo a confounder of repentaunce, ennemy to prudence, wherof is ingendred this word, Had I wyſt, whiche hath benne euer of all wyſe men reproued.
               ¶ On a tyme kynge Philip, father to the Jugement ſuſpended through libertie of ſpeche. Plutarchꝰ. great Alexander, ſittyng in iugemente, and hauynge before hym a matter agaynſte one of his ſoudiours, beinge ouer commen with watche, fel on a ſlombre, and ſodeynly being awaked, immediatly wolde haue giuen a ſentēce agaynſt the poore ſouldiour. But he with a great voice & outcrie ſaid? Kynge Philip, I appele. To whom wylt thou appele ſayd the kyng? To the (ſayd the ſouldiour) whan thou arte throughly awaked.

with whiche anſwere the kynge ſuſpended his ſentence, and more diligētly examining the matter, foūd, the ſouldiour had wrōge: whiche being ſufficiently diſcuſſed, he gaue iugement for hym, whome before he wolde haue condemned.
               ¶ Semblably hapned by a pore woman, agaynſte whom the ſame kynge had gyuen iugemēt, but ſhe as deſperate, with a loude voice, cried, I appele, I appele. To whom appeleſt thou ſayde the kynge? I appeale, ſayde ſhe, from the, nowe beynge dronke, to kynge Philyp the ſobre. At which wordis, though they were vndiſcrete and fooliſhe, yet he nat being moued to diſpleſure, but gatherynge to hym his wyttes, examined the matter more ſeriouſly: wherby he fyndyng the pore woman to ſuſteyn wronges, reuerſed his iugement, and according to truth and iuſtyce, gaue to her that ſhe demanded. Wherin he is of noble autours cō
                  mended, and put for an honorable example of affabilitie.
               ¶ The noble emperour Antonine, called Antonine philoſophus. herodianꝰ the philoſopher, was of ſuche affabilitie, as Herodiane writeth, that to euery man that came to him, he gentilly deliuered his hād. And wold nat ꝑmitte, that his garde ſhuld prohibyte any man to approche hym.
               ¶ The excellent emperour Auguſtus on a

a tyme, in the preſence of many men, plaied on cimbales, or an other lyke inſtrumente. Auguſtus▪
                   A poore man ſtandyng with other, and beholdynge Suetoniꝰ. the emperour, ſaid with a loude voyce to his felowe, Seeſt thou nat, howe this voluptuous lechour tempereth al the worlde with his fynger? Whyche wordes the emperour ſo wyſely noted, withoute wrathe or diſpleaſure, that euer after, duryng his lyfe, he refrayned his handes frō ſemblable lyghtneſſe.
               ¶ The good Antonine, emperor of Rome Antoninꝰ Plus. cōming to ſupper to a meane gentylmā, behelde in the houſe certaine pyllers of a delicate ſtone, called porpheri, aſked of the Lāppridiꝰ good man, where he had bought thoſe pillers. Who made to the emperour this anſwere, Syr, whan ye come into any other mans howſe, than your owne, euer be you both dome and defe. Whiche liberall taunte that moſt gentyl emperour toke in ſo good ꝑt, that he oftētimes reherſed that ſentēce to other, for a wyſe and diſcrete coūſayle.
               ¶ By theſe exāples apperith now euidētly what good cometh of affabylitie or ſufferāce of ſpeche, what moſt pernicious daū
                  ger alway enſueth to theym, that either do refuſe counſayle, or prohybyte lybertie of ſpeche, ſens that in lybertie (as it hath ben proued) is moſt perfect ſuertie, accordyng

as it is remembred by Plutarche, of Theopompus, kynge of Lacedemone, who beinge demaunded, howe a realme mought be beſte and mooſte ſurely kepte, If (ſayd he) the prince gyue to his frendes libertie, to ſpeake to hym thynges that be iuſte, and neglecteth nat the wronges, that his ſubiecte ſuſteyneth.
            
            
               ¶ Howe noble a vertue placabilitie is. Cap. VI.
               
                  PLacabylitie is no lyttell parte of Benignitie, and is proprely where a man is by any occaſyon meued to be angry, and nat withſtandynge eyther by his owne reaſon ingenerate, or by counſaylle perſwaded, omytteth to be reuenged, and often tymes receyuethe the tranſgreſſoure ones reconſyled, into more fauour: whyche vndoubtedlye is a vertue wonderfulle excellent. For as Tulli ſayth, No thynge is Cice. off. 1. more to be meruayled at, or that more becometh a man noble and honorable, thanne mercy and placabilitie. The valewe therof Ire or wrathe. is beſte knowen by the contrarye, whyche is yre, called vulgarely wrathe, a vyce mooſte vgly, and farreſt from humanitie.
               For who beholdynge a man in eſtymation

of nobylitie and wyſedome, by furie changed into an horrible figure, his face infarced with rancour, his mouth foule and imboſed, his eien wyde ſtarynge, and ſparkelynge lyke fyre, nat ſpeakynge, but as a wylde bulle, roringe and brayinge out wordes deſpytefull and venomous, forgettyng his aſtate or condytion, forgettynge lernynge, ye forgettynge all reaſon, wyll nat haue ſuche a paſſyon in extreme deteſtation? Shall he nat wyſſhe to be in ſuche a man placabilitie? wherby onely he ſhulde be efteſoones reſtored to the fourme of a man, wherof he is by wrathe deſpoyled, as it is wonderſly well deſcribed by Ouide in his crafte of loue.
               
                  
                     ¶ Man to thy vyſage it is conuenient
                     Beaſtly fury ſhortly to aſwage. Ouidiꝰ de erte amādi
                     
                     For peace is beautyfull to man onely ſent,
                     wrathe to the beaſtis cruell and ſauage.
                     For ī mā the face ſwelleth, whā wrath is ī rage
                     The blode becometh wanne, the eien firy bright
                     Lyke Gorgon the mōſter, appering in the night.
                  
               
               ¶ This Gorgon, that Quide ſpeaketh of, is ſuppoſed of poetes to be a fury or infernall wrathe monſter, whoſe heares were all in the figure of adders, ſignifieng the abundance of myſchiefe, that is conteyned in wrathe. Wherwith the great kyng Alexāder being Alexander in furye.
                  
(as I mought ſay) obſeſſed, dyd put to vē
                  geable deathe his dere frende Clitus, his mooſte prudent counſaylour Caliſthenes, his moſte valiant capitayne Philotas, with his father Parmenio, and dyuers other. wherof he ſo ſoore after repēted, that oppreſſed with heuynes, had ſlayne him ſelfe, had he nat ben let by his ſeruantes. Wherfore his furye and inordynate wrathe, is a fowle and greuous blemiſhe to his glorye, whiche without that vice, had incomparably excelled all other princis.
               ¶ Who abhoreth or hateth nat the violēce The horrible crueltie of Sylla & Marius. or rage that was in Scylla and Marius? noble Romains, & in their tyme in hygheſt authoritie within the citie, hauyng the gouernance of the more parte of the worlde. Scilla, for the malignitie that he hadde towarde Marius, cauſed the heades of a thouſande and ſeuen hundred of the chief citiſens of Rome to be ſtrikē of, & brought to him freſhe bledinge and quyck, and ther on fedde his mooſte cruell cyen, whiche to eate his mouth naturally abhorred. Marius with no leſſe rancour inflamed, beſide a terrible ſlaughter, that he made of noble men, leanyng to Scilla, alſo cauſed Caius Ceſar (who had ben both Conſul and Cenſor, two of the mooſte honorable dignities in the citie of Rome) to be violently drawē
                  
to the ſepulture of one Uarius, a ſymple and ſeditious perſone, and there to be diſhoneſtly ſlayne. With lyke beſtiall fury, he cauſed the heed of Marcus Antonius, one of the moſte eloquente oratours of all the Romaynes, to be brought vnto hym, as he ſate at dyner, and there toke the heed all blody betwene his handes, and with a malycious countenaunce reproched hym of his eloquence, wherwith he had nat onely defended many an innocēt, but alſo the hole publyke weale by his wyſe conſultations ſingularly profyted.
               ¶ O what calamitie hapned to that moſte noble citie of Rome, by the implacabilitie or wrath inſaciable, of theſe two capytaynes, or (as I mought rather ſay) deuylles? the nobles betwene theym exhauſte, the chyualrye almooſte conſumed, the lawes oppreſſed, and lackynge but lyttell, that the publyke weale had nat ben extinct, and the citie vtterly deſolate.
               ¶ The vndiſcrete haſtineſſe of themper or Claudius, cauſed hym to be noted for foolyſſhe. For he meued with wrathe, cauſed dyuers to be ſlayne, for whom after he demaunded, and wolde ſende for to ſoupper. Nat withſtandynge that he was right well lerned, & in dyuers great affaires appered to be wiſe. Theſe diſcōmodities do happen

by implacable wrathe, wherof there be examples innumerable.
               ¶ Contrarywiſe, the valiant king Pirrhus Pyrrhus. herynge that two men at a feaſt, & in a great aſſembly and audience, had openly ſpoken wordes, to his reproche, meued with dyſpleaſure, ſent for the perſones: and whan they were come, he demanded where they ſpake of him any ſuche wordes? whervnto one of theym aunſwered, If (ſayde he) the wyne had nat the ſooner fayled vs, all that which was tolde to your hyghnes, in compariſon of that whiche ſhuld haue ben ſpoken, had bene but trifles. The wyſe prince with that playne confeſſion was mitigate, & his wrath conuerted to laughynge.
               ¶ Iuliꝰ Ceſar, after his victory ageinſt the Placabilitie. great Pompei, who had maried his doughter, ſittyng in open iugement, one Sergius Galba, one of the nobles of Rome, a frend vnto Pompei, ſaide vnto him, I was bounden for thy ſonne in law Pompei in a great ſomme, whan he was conſul the third time, wherfore I am nowe ſewed. What ſhall I do? Shall I my ſelfe pay it? by which wordes he moughte ſeeme to reproche Ceſar of the ſellynge of Pompeis goodis, in defraudynge his creditours. But Ceſar than hauynge a gentyll harte and a pacient was nat meeued with any diſpleaſure towarde

Galba: but cauſed Pompeies dettes to be diſcharged.
               ¶ we lacke nat of this vertue dimeſticalle examples, I meane of our own kynges of Englande, but moſte ſpecially one, whiche in myne oppinyon, is to be compared with any, that euer was writen of in any region or countrey.
               ¶ The moſte renomed prince king Henry the fyſte, late kynge of Englande, durynge A good Iudge, a good prīce a good kīg the lyfe of his father, was noted to be fiers and of wanton courage: it hapned, that one of his ſeruantes, whom he well fauoured, was for felony by him committed, arrained at the kynges benche: where of the prince beinge aduertiſed, and incenſed by lyghte perſones aboute him, in furious rage came haſtily to the barre, where his ſeruāt ſtode as a priſoner, and commaunded hym to be vngyued and ſet at libertie. wherat all men were abaſhed, reſerued the chiefe Iuſtice, who humbly exhorted the prince, to be cō
                  tēted, that his ſeruaunt mought be ordred, accordynge to the aunciente lawes of this realme: or if he wolde haue hym ſaued frō the rigour of the lawes, that he ſhulde opteyne, if he moughte, of the kynge his father, his gratious pardon, wherby no lawe or iuſtyce ſhulde be derogate. With whiche anſwere the prince nothynge appeaſed, but

rather more inflamed, endeuored him ſelfe to take away his ſeruant. The iuge conſidering the perillous example, and incōuenience that mought therby inſue, with a valyant ſpirite and courage, commanded the prince vpon his alegeance, to leaue the priſoner, and depart his way, with which commandment the prince being ſet all in a fury, all chafed and in a terrible maner, came vp to the place of iugement, mē thinkyng that he wold haue ſlayne the iuge, or haue done to hym ſome damage: but the iuge ſittynge ſtyll without mouīg, declaring the maieſtie of the kynges place of iugement, and with an aſſured and bolde countenaunce, had to the prince, theſe wordes folowyng,
               ¶ Syr, remembre your ſelfe, I kepe here the place of the kyng your ſoueraine lorde and father, to whom ye owe double obedience, wherfore efteſoones in his name, I charge you deſyſte of your wylfulnes and vnlaufull enterpriſe, & from hensforth giue good example to thoſe, whyche hereafter ſhall be your propre ſubiectes. And nowe, for your contempte and diſobedience, goo you to the pryſone of the kynges benche, wherevnto I commytte you, and remayne ye there priſoner vntyll the pleaſure of the kynge your father be further knowen. with whiche wordes beinge abaſhed, and

alſo wondrynge at the meruaylous grauitie of that worſhypfulle Suſtyce, the noble prince layinge his weapon aparte, doynge reuerence, departed, and wente to the kynges benche, as he was commanded. wherat his ſeruauntes diſdaynynge, came and ſhewed to the kynge all the hole affaire. Wherat he awhyles ſtudyenge, after as a man all rauyſhed with gladneſſe, holdynge his eien and handes vp towarde heuen, abraided, ſaying with a loude voice, O mercyfull god, howe moche am I, aboue all other men, bounde to your infinite goodnes, ſpecially for that ye haue gyuen me a iuge, who feareth nat to miniſter iuſtyce, and alſo a ſonne, who can ſuffre ſemblably, and obeye iuſtyce?
               ¶ Nowe here a man may behold thre perſones, worthy excellent memorie, Fyrſte a iuge, who beinge a ſubiecte, feared nat to execute iuſtyce on the eldeſt ſon of his ſoueraigne lorde, and by the order of nature his ſucceſſour. Alſo a prince, and ſonne and heire of the kyng, in the myddes of his furye, more conſydered his euyll example, & the iuges conſtance in iuſtice, than his own aſtate or wylfull appetite. Thirdly, a noble kynge and wyſe father, who cōtrary to the cuſtome of parētes, reioyced to ſe his ſōne, and the heire of his crowne, to be for his

byſobedyence, by his ſubiecte corrected. wherfore I conclude, that nothing is more honorable, or to be deſired in a price or noble man, than placabilite. As contrary wiſe, nothinge is ſo deteſtable or to be feared in ſuche one, as wrathe and cruell malignitie.
            
            
               ¶ That a gouernour oughte to be mercyfull, and the diuerſitie of mercy and vayne pitie. Cap. VII.
               
               
                  MERCY IS and hath bene euer of ſuche eſtimation with mankynde, that nat onely reaſon perſuadeth, but alſo experience proueth, that in whome mercy lacketh, and is nat founden, in hym all other vertues be drowned, and loſe their iuſte commendation.
               ¶ The vice called crueltie, whiche is contrary Crueltie▪
                   to Mercy, is by good reaſon mooſte odious of all other vyces, in as moche as lyke a poyſon or contynuall peſtylence, it diſtroyeth the generation of manne. Alſo lykewiſe as noriſhyng meates and drinkes in a ſycke bodye, doo loſe their bountie and augmente the malady, ſemblably dyuers vtues in a perſon cruel and malicious, be not onely obfuſcate or hyd, but do miniſter occaſion and aſſiſtence to crueltie.
               ¶ But now to ſpeke of the ineſtimable p•ce

and value of mercy, Let gouernours, whiche knowe, that they haue réceyued theyr powar frome aboue, reuolue in their myndes, in what peryl they them ſelf be in daily, if in god were nat abundance of mercy, but that as ſoone as they offende hym greuouſly, he ſhulde immediatly ſtryke theym with his moſte terrible dart of vengeance: All be it vneth any houre paſſeth, that men deſerue nat ſome punyſhement.
               ¶ The moſte noble emperours, which for their merites reſceyued of the gentyls diuine honours, vanquyſhed the great hartis of their mortal ennemies, in ſhewyng mercy aboue mens expectation.
               ¶ Iulius Ceſar, which in policy, eloquēce, celeritie and proweſſe, excelled al other capitaynes, in mercy onely, ſurmounted hym ſelfe, that is to ſaye, contrarye to his owne affectes and determynate purpoſes, he nat onely ſpared, but alſo reſceyued into tender familyaritie his ſworne enmyes. wherfore if the diſdayne of his owne blode and alyance had nat traytorouſly ſlayne him, he had reigned longe and proſperouſly.
               ¶ But amonge many other exaumples of mercy, wherof the hyſtoryes of Rome do Seneca de clementia. abounde, there is one remembred by Seneca, whiche may be in the ſtede of a great noumbre.
               
                  
¶ It was reported to the noble emperour Octauius Auguſtus, that Lucius Cinna, Mercy ſhe wid by Auguſtus vntill his enemye. which was ſuſters ſonne to the great Pō
                  pei, had imagined his dethe: Alſo that Cinna was apointed to execute his feate, whiles the emperour was doing his ſacrifice. This reporte was made by one of the conſpiratours, and therwith diuers other thinges agreed: the olde hoſtilitie betwene the houſes of Pōpei and Ceſar, the wyld & ſeditious witte of Cinna, with the place and tyme, where and whan the emperour ſhuld be diſfurnyſhed of ſeruantes. No wonder though the emperours mynde were inquiete, being in ſo perillous a conflict, conſideryng on the one parte, that if he ſhulde put to deth Cinna, whiche came of one of the moſte noble and auncient houſes of Rome, he ſhulde euer lyue in daunger, onelas he ſhoulde deſtroye all that noble familie, and cauſe the memory of them to be vtterly exterminate: whiche mought nat be brought to paſſe, without effuſion of the bloudde of perſons innumerable, and alſo peryle of the ſubuercion of the empire, late pacified. On the other parte, he conſidered the imminente daunger, that his perſone was in, wherfore nature ſtered hym to prouide for his ſuertie: wherto he thought than to be none other remedy, but the deth of his aduerſarye.

To hym beinge thus perplexed, cam his wife Liuia, the empreſſe, who ſaid vnto him, Pleaſeth it you ſir to here a womans aduiſe. Do you as phiſitions be wont to do, where theyr accuſtomed remedyes preue nat, they aſſaye the contrary. By ſeueritie ye haue hytherto nothyng profited: proue therfore nowe, what mercy may aduaile you. Forgyue Cinna, he is taken with the maynure, and may nat nowe indomage you, profyte he may moche to the increaſe of your renoume & perpetuall glorie. The emperour reioyſed to him ſelfe, that Cinna had founde ſuch an aduocatrice, and giuing her thankes, cauſed his counſaylours, whiche he had ſent for, to be countermaunded, and calling to him Cinna only, commanded the chaumbre to be auoyded, and an other chayre to be ſet for Cinna, and that done, he ſayd in this maner to hym, I deſyre of the this one thinge, that whyles I ſpeke, thou wylt nat let or diſturbe me: or in the middes of my wordes make any exclamation.
               ¶ What tyme Cinna, I founde the in the hoſte of myne ennemies, all thoughe thou were nat by any occaſyon made myne enemye, but by ſucceſſion from thyn auncetors borne myn enemye, I nat onely ſaued the, but alſo gaue vnto the all thyn inheritance: And at this day thou art ſo proſperous and

ryche, that they, whyche hadde with me vyctorie, do enuye the, that were vanquyſhed. Thou aſkeddeſt of me a ſpiritual promotion, and furth with I gaue it the, before many other, whoſe parentes hadde ſerued me in warres. And for that I haue doone ſo moche for the, thou haſte nowe pourpoſed to ſlee me. At that worde, whan Cinna cried out, ſayinge, that ſuche madnes was farre from his mynde. Cinna (ſaid the emperour) thou kepeſte nat promyſe, it was couenanted, that thou ſhouldeſt nat interrupte me. I ſay thou prepareſt to kyll me. And therto the emperour named his companyons, the place, tyme, and order of all the conſpiracy, and alſo to whom the ſword was commytted. And whan he perceyued hym aſtonyed, holdynge than his peace, nat for bycauſe that he ſoo promyſed, but that his conſcyence hym meued. For what intent dyddeſte thou thus, (ſayde Auguſtus) bycauſe thou woldeſt be Emperour? In good faythe the publyke weale is in an euyll aſtare, if nothynge lettethe the to raygne, but I oonely. Thou canſte nat mayntayne or defende thyne owne houſe. It is nat longe ſens that thou in a pryuate iugement, were ouercomen of a poore man but laate infraunchyſed. Therfore thou mayſte nothynge doo lyghtlyer than plede

ageynſt the emperour. Say nowe, do I alone let the of thy purpoſe? ſuppoſiſt thou that Paule, Fabius Maximus, the Coſſes, & Seruiliis, aunciente houſes of Rome, and ſuche a ſorte of noble men (nat they whiche haue vayne and glorious names, but ſuche as for their merites be adorned with their propre images) wyll ſuffre the? Finally ſaid the emperor (after that he had talked with hym by the ſpace of two howres) I gyue to the thy lyfe Cinna the ſeconde tyme: fyrſte beinge myn ennemy, nowe a traytour and murderer of thy ſouerain lorde, whom thou oughteſt to loue as thy father. Howe frō this day let amitie betwene vs two begynne, and let vs bothe contende, whether I with a better harte haue giuen to the thy lyfe, or that thou canſt more genrilly recō
                  pence my kyndnes.
               ¶ Sone after Auguſtus gaue to Cinna the dignitie of conſull vndeſired, blaming him, that he durſte nat aſke it, wherby he hadde hym moſte aſſured and loyall. And Cinna afterwarde dieng, gaue to the emperour al his goodes & poſſeſſions. And neuer after was Auguſtus in daunger of any treaſone.
               ¶ O what ſufficient prayſe may be giuen to this moſte noble and prudente emperoure, that in a chambre aloone, without men, ordenance, or weapon, and perchaunce without

harnes, within the ſpace of .ii. houres, with wordes well couched, tempered with maieſtie, not only vainquiſhed and ſubdued one mortall enemie, whiche by a malignitie engendred of a domeſticall hatred, had determined to ſlee hym, but by the ſame feate excluded out of the hole citie of Rome, all dyſpleaſure and rancour towarde hym, ſo that there was not left any occaſion, wherof mought procede any lyttell ſuſpicion of treaſonne, whiche other wyſe coulde not haue hapned without ſlaughter of people innumerable.
               ¶ Alſo the empreſſe Liuia, maye not of A wiſewoman. right be forgoten, whiche miniſtred to her lorde that noble counſayle in ſuche a perplexitie, wherby he ſaued bothe hym ſelfe and his people. Suppoſe ye that al the Scnatours of Rome, and counſaylours of the emperour, whiche were lytell fewer than a thouſande, coulde haue better aduyſed hym? This hiſtorie therfore is no leſſe to be remembred of womē than of princis, takynge therby comforte to perſwade ſwetely theyr houſebandes to mercye and pacyence, to which counſayle only, they ſhulde be admytted and haue fre lybertie. But I ſhall forbere to ſpeke more of Liuia nowe, for as moche as I purpoſe to make a boke onely for ladies, where in her laude ſhalbe

more amplye expreſſed. But to reſort nowe to mercy.
               ¶ Suerly nothinge more entierly and faſtly mercy and gentylnes. ioyneth the hartes of ſubiectes to theyr prynce or ſoueraygne, than mercy and gentilnes. For Seneca ſaith, A tēperate drede repreſſeth hyghe and ſturdy myndes: feare frequente and ſharpe, ſette forthe with extremitie, ſtereth men to preſumption and hardynes, and conſtrayneth them to experimente all thynges. He that haſtily puniſſheth, oft tymes ſone repenteth. And who that ouer moch correcteth, obſerueth none equitie. And if ye aſke me what mercye is, it is a temperaunce of the mynde of hym, that hath power to be auenged, and it is called in latine Clementia, and is alway ioyned with reaſon. For he that for euery lyttel occaſion is meued with compaſſion, and beholdynge a man punyſſhed condygnely for his offence, lamenteth or waylethe, is called pitiouſe, which is a ſyckeneſſe of the mynde, wherewith at this daye the more parte of menne be diſeaſed. And yet is the ſikenes moch wars by adding to one word, callynge it Uayne pitie.
               ¶ Some man perchance wyll demaunde of me, what is Uaine pite? To that I will anſwere Uayn pitie in a deſcription of dayly experience.
               ¶ Beholde what an infynite nombre of engliſhe

men and women, at this preſent time, wander in all places throughout this realme, as beaſtis brute and ſauage abandonyng al occupation, ſeruice, and honeſtie. How many ſemely perſonagis, by outrage in riote, gaminge, and exceſſe of apparaile, be induced to theft and robry, and ſomtime to murder, to the inquietatiō of good men, and fynally to theyr owne deſtruction?
               ¶ Howe conſyder ſemblably, what noble ſtatutes, ordinances, and actes of counſayl, from time to time haue ben excogitate, and by graue ſtudy and mature conſultation, en acted and decreed, as well for due punyſſhemente of the ſaide idle perſones and vacabundes, as alſo for the ſuppreſſion of vnlaufull games, and reducynge apparayle to conuenyente moderation and temperance? Howe many proclamations ther of haue bē dyuulgate, and not obeyed? Howe many commyſſions directed, and not executed? (Marke wel here, that diſſobedient ſubiectes, & negligent gouernours, do fruſtrate good lawes) A man hering, that his neighbour is ſlayne or robbed, forth with hateth the offendour, and abhorreth his enormytie, thinkinge hym worthy to be punyſhed, accordynge to the lawes. Yet whan he beholdeth the tranſgreſſour, a ſemely perſonage, alſo to be his ſeruant, acqueyntance,

or a gentyll man borne (I omytte nowe to ſpeke of any other corrupty on) he forthe with changeth his opinion, and preferreth the offendours condition or perſonage, before the example of iuſtice, condempninge a good and neceſſary lawe, for to excuſe an offence pernycious and dampnable, ye and this is not onely done by the vulgare or cō
                  mune people, but moche rather by them, whiche haue auctoritie to them committed concernynge the effectuall execution of lawes. They beholde at theyr eie the continuall encreaſe of vacabundes, in to infynite nombres, the obſtinate reſiſtence of theym that dayely do tranſgreſſe the lawes made agaynſte games, and apparayle, whiche be the ſtreyght pathes to robry, and ſemblable miſchefe. Yet if any one comiſſioner, meued with zele to his countrey, accordynge to his duetie do execute duely, and frequētly the lawe or good ordinaunce, wherin is any ſharpe puniſſhmente, ſome of his companyons therat reboyleth, infamynge hym to be a manne without charytie, callynge hym ſecretely a pyke thanke, or ambicious of glorie, and by ſuche maner of obloquie, ſeeke meanes to brynge hym in to the hatered of people. And this maye wel be called vayne pytie, wherin is conteyned neyther iuſtice nor yet commendable charytie,

but rather therby enſueth negligence, contempte, diſſobedyence, and fynally all myſchiefe and incurable miſerie.
               ¶ If this ſyckeneſſe had reygned amonge the olde Romaynes, ſuppoſe ye that the aſtate of theyr publyke weale had ſyxe hundred yeres encreaſed, & two hundred yeres contynued in one excellente aſtate and wonderfull maieſtye? Or thynke ye that the ſame Romayns mought ſo haue ordred many greatte countreyes, with fewer myniſters of iuſtice, than be nowe in one ſhire of Englande?
               ¶ But of that mater, and alſo of rigour and equalite of puniſhement. I wyll traite more amply in a place more propiſe for that purpoſe. And here I conclude to wryte any more at this tyme of mercy.
            
            
               The pryncipall partes of humanitie. Cap. VIII.
               THe nature & condition of man, wherin he is leſſe than god almyghty, and excellynge not withſtanding al other creatures in erth, is called humanitie: whiche is a generall name to thoſe vertues, in whom ſemeth to be a mutuall concorde and loue, in the nature of man. And al thoughe there be many of the ſayde vertues, yet 
                     •
                  e

there thre pryncipall, by whom humanitie is chiefely compact, Beneuolence, Beneficence, and Liberalitie, which maketh vp the ſaide principall vertue called Benignitie or gentylnes.
               ¶ Beneuolence, if it doo extende to a hole countreye or citie, is proprely called charite, Charitie. and ſome tyme zele: and if it concerne one perſon, than is it called Beneuolence. And if it be very feruēt and to one ſinguler perſon, than maye it be named loue or amitie. Beneuolence. Loue. Amitie. Of that vertuous diſpoſition procedeth an acte, wherby ſome thynge is complyed, whiche is profitable and good to hym that receyueth it. And that vertue, if it be in operation, or (as I mought ſaye) endeuour, is called than Beneficence: and the dede (vulgarly named a good tourne) maye be called a benefytte. If it be in money, or other thynge that hath ſubſtaunce, it is than Liberalite called Liberalitie, whiche is not alwaye a vertue as Beneficence is: for in wel doinge (whiche is the ryght interpretation of Beneficence) can be no vice included. But Liberalitie, Seneca de benef. thoughe it procede of a free and gentyll harte, wyllynge to do ſome thynge thankeful, yet may it trāſgreſſe the bondes of vertue, eyther in exceſſyue rewardes, or expences, orels employenge treaſour, promotion, or other ſubſtaunce on ꝑerſons vnworthy,

or on thynges inconuenient, and of ſmall importaunce. Al be it ſome thynke ſuche maner of erogation not to be worthy the name of Liberalitie.
               ¶ Ariſtotle defineth a liberal man, whiche A liberal man. Ethic. 2. doth erogate, accordinge to the rate of his ſubſtance, and as oportunitie hapneth. He ſayth alſo in the ſame place, that Liberalytie is not in the multitude or quātite of that which is gyuen, but in the habite or facion, of the gyuer. For he gyueth accordynge to his habilitie. Neither Tulli approueth it to be Liberalitie, wherin is any myxture of auarice or rapine: for it is not properly Liberalitie, to exacte iniuſtely, or by violence or crafte to take goodes frō particuler per ſons, and diſtribute them in a multitude: or to take frō many iniuſtly, and enriche therwith on perſonne or fewe. For as the ſame autour ſayth, the laſt precept concernynge benefytes or rewardes is, to take good hede, that he contende not agaynſt equitie, ne that he vpholde none iniurie.
               ¶ Nowe wyll I procede ſeriouſly and in a due forme to ſpeke more pticulerly of theſe thre vertues. Not withſtanding there is ſuche affinitie betwene beneficence and liberalitie, beinge alwayes a vertue, that they tende to one cōcluſion or purpoſe, that is to ſay, with a free & glad wyll to gyue to a nother

that thynge, which he before lacked.
            
            
               Of what excellence beneuolence is. Cap. ix.
               VUhan I remembre, what incomparable goodnes hath euer proceded of this vertue BENEVOLENCE, mercyfulle god what ſwete flauour fele I, perſynge my ſpyrytes, wherof bothe my ſoule and body, to my thynkynge doo conceyue ſuch recreation, that it ſemeth me to be in a paradiſe, or other ſemblable place of incomparable delites and pleaſures.
               ¶ Fyrſte I beholde the dygnitie of that vertue, conſyderynge that god is therby chiefly knowen and honoured, both of angel and man. As contrary wyſe, the deuyll is hated and reproued both of god and mā for his malyce, whiche vice is contrarious and repugnant to Beneuolence. Wherfore without Beneuolence may be no god. For god is all goodnes, al charitie, al loue, whiche holy be comprehēded in the ſaid word Beneuolence.
               ¶ Nowe let vs ſee, where any other vertue may be equall in dignitie with this vertue Beneuolence: or if any vertue remayneth, where this is excluded? For what commeth of Prudence, where lacketh Beneuolence?

but diſceite, rauine, auarice, and tyrranny. What of Fortitude? but beaſtely crueltie, oppreſſion, and effuſion of bloode. What iuſtice may there be without beneuolence? ſens the fyrſt or chiefe porcion of iuſtice (as Tulli ſaith) is to indomage no mā, onles thou be wronfully vexed. And what is the cauſe hereof, but equal & entier loue, whiche being remoued or ceſſinge, who endeuoureth not hym ſelfe to take from a nother al thynge that he coueteth, or for euery thynge that diſcontenteth him, wold not forthwith be auenged: wherby he confoū
                  deth the vertue called Temperance, which is the moderatrice as well of al motions of the mynde, called affectes, as of all actes procedynge of man.
               ¶ Here it ſufficiently appereth (as I ſuppoſe) of what eſtymatiom beneuolence is. Nowe wyl I endeuoure me to recreate the ſpirites of the dylygente reder, with ſome delectable hyſtories, wherin is any noble remembrance of this vertue Beneuolence, that the worthynes therof maye appiere in a more plaine declaration: For in euery diſcipline, exaumple is the beſte inſtructour. But fyrſte I wyl aduertyſe the reder, that I wyll nowe wryte of Beneuolence onely, whiche is moſte vniuerſal, wherin is equalytie without ſyngular affection or acceptaunce

of perſonages.
               ¶ And here it is to be noted, that if a gouernour That Iuſtyce neuer lacke beneuolence. of a publyke weale, iuge, or any other miniſtre of iuſtice, do gyue ſentence agaynſte on e that hath tranſgreſſed the lawes, or puniſſheth hym accordynge to the qualitie of his treſpas: Beneuolence therby is not any thynge peryſhed: for the condempnation or puniſhement, is either to reduce hym that erreth into the traine of vertue, or to preſerue a multitude frō domage, by puttynge men in fcare, that be prone to offende, dreding the ſharpe correctiō, that they beholde a nother to ſuffre. And that maner of ſeuerytie is touched by the prophet Dauid in the fourthe pſalme, ſayinge in this wyſe, Be you angry, and loke that you ſynne not. And Tulli ſaith, in his fyrſte boke of Officis: It is to be wyſſhed, that Sharpnes of iuſtyce. they, whiche in the publyke weale haue any autoritie, may be lyke to the lawes, whiche in correctynge be lad onely by equitie, and not by wrath or dyſpleaſure
               ¶ And in that maner, whan Chore, Dathā, and Abirō, moued a ſedition againſt Moyſes, he prayed god, that the erthe mought open and ſwalowe them, conſyderyng that the fury of the people mought not be by aany other menes aſſwaged, ne they kept in due rule or obedience.
               
                  
¶ Helias, the holy prophete of god, dyd Helias. his owne handes put to death the prieſtes of the Idol Baal, yet ceſſed he not with faſtynge, prayinge, longe and tedious pilgrimages, to pacifie the dyſpleaſure that god toke agaynſte the people of Iſrael. But to retourne to beneuolence.
               ¶ Moyſes, be ing highly enterteined with Pharao kynge of Aegipte, and ſo moche in his fauour, by the meanes of the kynges ſiſter, that (as Ioſephus ſaythe) he beinge made capitayne of a huge armye, was ſente by Pharao againſt the Ethiopians or Mores, where he made ſuche exployture, that he not only atchieued his entrepriſe, but alſoo had gyuen vnto hym, for his proweſſe, the kynges doughter of Ethiopia to be his wife, with great abundance of ryches. And alſo for his endeuour, proweſſe, and wyſedome, was moche eſtemed by Pharao and the nobles of Aegypte, ſo that he moughte haue lyued there continually in moche honour & welth, if he wold haue preferred his ſinguler aduayle before the vniuerſal weale of his owne kinred or familie: But he inflamed with feruente beneuolence or zele towarde them, to redeme them out of theyr myſerable bondage, chaſe rather to be in the daungerous indignation of Pharao, to commytte his perſonne to the chaungeable

myrides of a multitude, and they moſte vnſtable, to paſſe greate and longe iourneyes throughe deſertes, repleniſhed with wylde beaſtes and venemoꝰ ſerpentes, to ſuffre exſtreme hunger and thyrſte, lackynge often tyme not onely vitayle, but alſo freſſhe water to drinke: thā to be in a palayce of Pharao, where he ſhuld haue ben ſatiſfied with honour, rycheſſe, and eaſe, and all other thynges pleaſaunte.
               ¶ Who that redeth the boke of Exodi, ſhal finde the charitie of this man wonderfull. For whan almyghty god, beinge greuouſly meued with the chyldren of Iſrael, for theyr ingratitude, for as moche as they oftē tymes murmured agaynſte hym, and vneth moughte be kepte by Moyſes from idolatri, he ſayde to Moyſes, That he wold deſtroye them vtterly, and make hym ruler of a moche greatter and better people. But Moyſes brenninge in a meruaylous charitie towardes them, ſayde vnto god, This people good lorde haue mooſte greuouſlye ſynned, yet eyther forgyue them this treſpas, or if ye do not, ſtryke me cleane out of the booke that he wrate. And dyuers other tymes he importunatelye cried to god for the ſaufe garde of them, notwithſtandynge that many tymes they concluded to haue ſlayne hym, if he had not bene by his wyſedome,

and ſpecially by the power of god, preſerued.
               ¶ But peraduenture ſome, which ſeke for ſtertynge holes to maynteyne theyr vices, wyll obiecte, ſayinge, that Moyſes was a holy prophete, and a perſon electe by predeſtination, to delyuer the chyldren of Iſrael out of captiuitie, whiche he coulde not haue done, if he had not ben of ſuche pacyence and charitie. Therfore let vs ſe what examples of ſemblable beneuolence we can fynde amonge the gentyles, in whom was no vertue inſpired, but that only which naturall reaſon induced.
               ¶ Whan a furious and wylfull yonge man, in a ſediciō, had ſtricken out one of the eies Pacience. of kynge Licurgus, the people wold haue ſlayne hym, and the kinge wolde not ſuffre them, but had hym home to his houſe, and by ſuche wyſe meanes corrected the yonge manne, that at the laſte he broughte hym to good maners and wyſedome.
               ¶ Alſo the ſame Licurge, to thentent that theffect of his beneuolence, toward the cō
                  mune weale of his countrey mought perſiſt and continue, and that his excellent lawes beinge ſtablyſhed, ſhulde neuer be alterate, he dydlette ſwere all his people, that they ſhulde chaunge no parte of his lawes, vntil he were returned, ſaynynge to them, that

he wold go to Delphos, where Apollo was chiefly hououred, to conſult with that god, what ſemed to hym to be added to, or miniſhed of thoſe lawes, whiche alſo he feyned to haue receyued of the ſayde Apollo. But finally he wēt into the Iſle of Crete, where he continued and dyed, commaundynge at his death, that his bones ſhulde be caſte in to the ſee, leaſte if they were broughte to Lacedemonia his countreye, the people ſhulde thynke them ſelfe of theyr othe and promyſe dyſcharged.
               ¶ Semblable loue Codrus, the laſt king of Codrus kynge of Athenes. Athenes, had to his countrey. For where the people called Dores (whom ſome thīke to be nowe Sicilians) wold aduenge their olde grudges againe the Athenienſis, they demaunded of ſome of theyr goddis, what Charitie. ſucceſſe ſhoulde happen, yf they made any warres. Unto whom aunſwere was made, that if they ſlewe not the kynge of Athenienſis, they ſhulde than haue the victorye. Whan they came to the fielde, ſtraite commaundemente was gyuen amonge theym, that aboue all thynge, they ſhoulde haue good awayte of the kyng of Athenes, whiche at that tyme was Codrus. But he before knowynge the aunſwere made to the Dores, and what commaundement was giuen to the army, dydde put of his princely

habite or robes, and in apparayle al ragged and rent, carienge on his necke a bundel of twygges, entred into the hoſte of his enemies, and was ſlayne in the preaſe by a ſoul diour, whom he wounded with a hoke purpoſely. But whan it was perceiued & knowen to be the corps of kynge Codrus, the Dores al diſmayed departed frō the fielde, without proferynge battaylle. And in this wyſe the Atheniēſis, by the vertue of their moſte beneuolent kynge, who for the ſaulfgarde of his contrey, willyngly dyed, were clerely delyuered from batayle.
               ¶ O noble Codrus, howe worthy had you bene (if god had ben pleaſed) to haue aboden the reparation of mankynde, that in the habite and religion of a chriſten prynce, ye moughte haue ſhewed your wonderfull beneuolence and courage for the ſaulfe garde of chriſten men, and to the noble exaumple of other princis?
               ¶ CVRTIVS, a noble knyghte of the Curtius. Romaynes, hadde no leſſe loue to his coū
                  treye than Codrus. For ſoone after the begynnynge of the Cytie, there hapned to be a great erthe quauc, and after there remayned a greatte dell or pytto without botume, which to beholde, was horrible and lotheſome, and out of it proceded ſuche a dampe or ayre, that corrupted all the cytie

with peſtylence. Wherfore whannej they had counſaylled with ſuche idols as they than worſhypped, anſwere was made, that the erth ſhulde not cloſe, vntyll there were throwen into it the moſte precious thynge in the citie. which anſwere receyued, there was throwen in ryche iewels of golde and precious ſtone: but all auayled not. At the laſte Curtius, beynge a yonge and goodly gentyll man, conſyderynge, that no riches throwhen in, profyted, fynally coniected, that the lyfe of man was aboue all thynges moſt precious, to thētent the reſidue of the people mought be ſaued by his onely deth, he armed hym ſelfe at all poyntes, and ſyttynge on a courſer, with his ſwerde in his hand redy drawen, with a valiaunt & fyerce courage enforſed his horſe to lepe into the dell or pytte, and forth with it ioyned to gether and cloſed, leuinge only a ſigne where the pytte was, which longe after was called Curtius lake.
               ¶ I paſſe ouer the two Decius, Marcus Regulus, and many other princis and noble men, that for the weale of theyr countrey died willingly. And nowe wyl I ſpeke of ſuch as in any other fourme haue declared theyr beneuolence.
               ¶ Xenophō the condiſciple of Plato, wrate The power of beneuolence. the lyfe of Cirus kynge of Perſya mooſte

elegantly, wherin he expreſſeth the figure of an excellent gouernour or capitayne: he ſheweth there, that Creſus kynge of Lidia, whom Cyrus had taken priſoner, ſubdued his countray, and poſſeſſed his treaſure, ſayd on a tyme to Cyrus, whan he behelde his liberalitie, That ſuche largenes as he vſed, ſhulde brynge hym in pouertie, where if he lyſted, he mought accumulate vp treaſure incomparable. Than Cyrus demanded of Creſus, what treaſure ſuppoſe ye ſhulde I now haue, if durynge the tyme of my reigne, I wolde haue gadred & kept money, as ye exhorte me to do? Than Creſus named a great ſomme. Wel ſayd Cyrus, ſende ye ſome man, whome ye beſte truſte, with Hiſtaſpa my ſeruaunt. And thou Hiſtaſpa, go about to my frendes, and ſhewe them that I lacke golde towarde a certayn buſynes, wherfore I wyll, they ſende me as moche as they can, and that they put it in wrytyng, and ſende it ſealed by the ſeruant of Creſus. In the ſame wyſe Cyrus wrate in a letter, and alſo that they ſhulde receiue Hiſtaſpa as his counſaylour and frende, & ſent it by hym. Hiſtaſpa, after that he had done the meſſage of Cyrus, and was returned with the ſeruāt of Creſ9, who brought letters frome Cyrus frendes, he ſayde to Cyrus, O ſyr, from hensforth loke that ye

ye take me for a man of greate ſubſtaunce. For I am hyghely rewarded with manye greate gyftes for bryngynge your letters. Than Cyrus at the houre appoynted, lad with hym kynge Creſus into his campe, ſayinge to hym, nowe beholde here is our treaſure: accounte if ye can, howe moche money is redy for me, if I haue nede of any to occupie. Whan Creſus behelde, and reckened the innumerable treaſure, which in ſondry partes were laid about the pauilyon of Cyrus, he found moche more than he ſaid to Cirus, that he ſhulde haue in his treſure, if he him ſelf had gadred & kept it. And whan al appered ſufficiētly, Cirus thā ſaid, How think you Creſus, haue I nat treſure? And ye coūſailed me, that I ſhuld gather and kepe money, by occaſyon wherof I ſhuld be enuied and hated of my people. And more ouer put my truſte to ſeruantes hyred to haue rule therof. But I do all otherwiſe, for in makyng my frendes ryche, I take them all for my treſure, & haue them more ſure and truſty kepers, bothe of me & my ſubſtance, than I ſhuld do thoſe, whom I muſte truſte onely for theyr wages.
               ¶ Lorde god, what a notable hyſtorie is this, and worthy to be grauen in tables of golde? conſyderyng the vertue and power of beneuolence therin expreſſed. For the

beneuolente mynde of a gouernour, nat only byndeth the hartes of the people vnto hym, with the chayne of loue, more ſtronger than any materyal bondes, but alſo gardeth more ſaufely his perſone, thanne any toure or garyſon.
               ¶ The eloquent Tulli ſaith in his offycis, Offic. 2. A lyberall harte is cauſe of beneuolence, although perchaunce power ſometyme lacketh. Contrary wiſe, he ſaythe, They that deſyre to be feared, nedes muſte they drede them, of whom they be feared.
               ¶ Alſo Plini the yonger ſaythe, He that is In panegyrico. nat enuironned with charite, in vayne is he garded with terrour, ſens armure with armure is ſtered. Whiche is ratyfyed by the mooſte graue philoſopher Seneke, in his De clemē
                     tia. booke of mercye, that he wrate to NERO, where he ſaith, He is moche deceiued, that thinketh a man to be ſure, where nothynge from hym can be ſaulfe. For with mutualle aſſurance, ſuretie is opteyned.
               ¶ Antoninus Pius, emperour of Rome, ſo Antoninꝰ Pius. moch tendred beneuolence of his people, that whan a great nombre had conſpired treaſon ageinſt hym, the ſenate beynge therwith greuouſely meued, endeuoured them to puniſhe the ſaid conſpiratours, but the emperoure cauſed the examination to ceſſe, ſaying, It ſhulde nat nede to ſeeke to

buſily for them that intēded ſuch miſchiefe, leſte if they founde many, he ſhuld knowe, that many hated hym. Alſo whan the people (for as moche as on a tyme they lacked corne in their graynardes, wold haue ſlain hym with ſtoones) rather than he wolde haue the ſedytious perſones to be punyſſhed, in his owne perſone declared to them the occaſyon of the ſcarſytie, wherewith they beynge pacifyed, euery man held him contented.
               ¶ I had almooſte forgotten a notable and Kynge. Philip. worthy remembrance of kynge Philyp, father to great kynge Alexander. It was on a tyme to hym reported, that one of his capitaynes had menacinge wordes towardis hym: wherby it ſemed he intended ſomme domage towarde his perſonne. Wherfore his counſayle aduyſed hym, to haue good awayte of the ſayde capitayne, and that he were put vnderwarde. To whom the king anſwered, If any parte of my bodye were ſycke or els ſore, whether ſhuld I therfore cut it from the reſidue, and caſt it from me, or els endeuour my ſelfe, that it mought be healed? And than he called for the ſaid capytain, and ſo entertayned him with familia ritie and bounteous rewardes, that euer after he hadde hym more aſſured and loyall, than euer he was.
               
                  
¶ Ageſilaus, kynge of Lacedemonia, to Ageſilaus hym that demanded, howe a kyng mought moſte ſurely gouerne his realme, withoute ſouldiours or a garde to his perſon, anſwered, If he reigned ouer his people, as a father dothe ouer his children.
               ¶ The citie of Athenes, from whenſe yſſued The .xxx. tyrātes of Athenes. all excellent doctrine and wyſedome, durynge the tyme that it was gouerned by thoſe ꝑſons, vnto whō the people mought haue a familiar acceſſe, and boldly expoūde their grefes and damages, proſpered meruaylouſly, and duringe a longe ſeaſon, reygned in honour and weale. Afterward the Lacedemons, by the mutabilite of fortune, vanquyſhed them in battayle, and commytted the citie of Athenes, to the kepynge of xxx. of their owne capitaynes, which were for their pride and auarice called tyrantes. But nowe ſe howe lytell ſuretie is in great puiſſaunce lacking be neuolence. nombre or ſtrength, where lackith beneuolence. Theſe .xxx. tyrantes were contynually enuyronned with ſondry garryſons of armed men, whiche was a terryble viſage, to people that before lyued vnder the obedience of their lawes only. Fynally the Athenienſes, by feare beinge put from theyr accuſtomed acceſſe to their gouernours to require iuſtice, and therwith being fatigate as men oppreſſed with contynuall iniurie,

toke to theym a deſperate courage, and in concluſyon expelled out of the cytie all the ſaid tyrātes, and reduced it vnto his priſtinate gouernance.
               ¶ What miſery was in the lyfe of Dyoniſe Dionyſe kynge of Sicile. the tyrant of Cicile? who knowing, that his people deſired his diſtruction, for his rauin and crueltie, wolde nat be of any man ſhauen, but firſte cauſed his owne doughters to clyppe his bear de: And afterwarde alſo myſtruſtyng them, he hym ſelfe with a brē
                  nynge cole ſeared the heares of his beard: and yet fynally was diſtroyed.
               ¶ In lyke wretchedneſſe was one Alexander, prince of a citie called Pherea, for he Alexander Phereus. hauynge an excellent fayre wyfe, nat onely excluded al men from her company, but alſo as often as he wolde lye with her, certayne perſones ſhulde go before hym with torches, and he folowynge with his ſwerd redy drawen, wolde therwith enſerche the bedde, coffers, and all other places of his chaumbre, leſte any manne ſhoulde be there hydde, to the entent to ſlee hym. And that nat withſtandynge, by the procuremente of his ſayde wyfe (who at the laſte fatygate with his mooſte folyſhe ialouſy, conuerted her loue into hatred) he was ſlayne by his owne ſubiectes.
               ¶ NOVVE DOTHE IT appere, that this

reuerende vertue BENEVOLENCE, is of all men, moſte ſpecially of gouernours and men of honour, incomparably before other to be enbraced. The treaſure of a gentylle countenaunce, ſwete aunſweres, ayde in ad uerſitie, nat with money only, but alſo with ſtudye and dylygent endeuoure, canne neuer be waſted, ne the loue of good people therby acquired, can be from theyr hartes in any wyſe ſeperate. And here I make an ende to ſpeake any more atte this tyme of Beneuolence.
            
            
               Of beneficence and liberalitie. Cap. x.
               ALthough philoſophers, in the deſcription of vertues, haue diuiſed to ſet theym as it were in degrees, hauyng reſpect to the qualitie & condition of the perſone, whiche is with theym adourned, as applieng Magnificence to the ſubſtaunce and aſtate of princis, and to priuate perſones Beneficence and Liberalitie: yet Ariſtotel. Ethic. 1. ben nat theſe in any part defalcate of their cōdigne praiſes. For if vertue be an electiō annexid vnto our nature, and conſiſteth in a Uertue what it is. meane, which is determined by reaſon, and that meane is the very myddes of two thinges vycious, the one in ſurpluſage, the other in lacke: than nedes muſt Beneficence

and Liberalitie be 
                     •
                  apitall vertues, & Magnificence procedeth frō them, approching to the extreme partes. And may be turned into vyce, if he lacke the brydell of reaſon. But Beneficence can by no meanes be vicious, Beneficēce and retayne ſtyl his name. Semblably Liberalitie (as Ariſtotle ſaith) is a meſure, Liberalite as welle in gyuynge as in takynge of money and goodes. And he is onely lyberall, whiche diſtributeth accordynge to his Conſiderations iu gyuynge. ſubſtance, and where it is expedient. Ther fore he ought to cōſider, to whom he ſhuld gyue, howe moche, and whan. For lyberalitie taketh his name of the ſubſtance of the perſone, from whome it procedeth: for it reſteth nat in the quātitie or qualite of thin ges that be gyuen, but in the naturall diſpoſition of the gyuer.
               ¶ The greate Alexander on a tyme after he had vanquyſhed Darius in battayle, one 
                     Alexand.
                   of his ſouldiours broughte vnto hym the heed of an ennemy that he had ſlayne, whiche the kynge thankefully, and with ſwete countenance receyued, and takyng a cuppe of golde fylled with good wyne, ſayde vnto the ſowldyour, In olde tyme a cuppe of golde was the rewarde of ſuch vertue, as thou haſte ſhewed, whyche ſemblablye thou ſhalt receyue. But whan the ſouldior for ſhamefaſtnes refuſed the cup, Alexāder

added vnto it theſe wordes, The cuſtome was to gyue the cuppe emptie, but Alexander gyueth it to the fulle of wyne, with good handſell.
               ¶ Wherwith he expreſſed his lyberal hart, and as moche comforted the ſouldiour, as if he had gyuen to hym a great citie.
               ¶ More ouer, he that is lyberalle, neglecteth nat his ſubſtance or goodes, ne giueth Liberal. it to all men, but vſeth it ſo, as he may contynually helpe therwith other, and gyueth whan, and where, and on whome it oughte to be employed. Therfore it may be ſaide, that he vſeth euery thynge beſte, that exercyſeth vertue, whiche is to the thyng moſt appropried. For rycheſſe is of the nombre of thynges, that maye be eyther good or yuell, whyche is in the arbytremente of the gyuer. And for that cauſe Lyberalitie and Benefycence be of ſuche affinitie, that the one maye neuer from the other be ſeperate. For the employment of moneye is nat Lyberalitie, if it be nat for a good ende or purpoſe.
               ¶ The noble emperours Antonine & Alexander Seuerus, gaue of the reuenues of Antonyne and liberal Alexander emperors. the empire inumerable ſubſtāce, to the reedifieng of cities & cōmune houſes decaied for age, or by erth quaues ſubvted, wherin they practiſed Liberalite & alſo Beneficēce.
               
                  
¶ But Tyberius, Nero, Caligula, Heliogabalus, & other ſemblable monſters, whiche Prodigalite. exhauſted and conſumed infinite treaſures in bordell houſes, and places, where abominations were vſed, alſo in enryching ſlaues, concubynes, and baudes, were nat named lyberall, but ſuffren therfore perpetual reproche of writars, beinge called deuourers and waſters of treaſure. wherfore in as moch as Lyberalitie holly reſteth in the gyuynge of money, it ſomtyme coloureth a vyce: But Beneficence is neuer taken but in the better parte, and (as Tullie ſaith) is taken out of vertue, where Liberalitie cōmeth out of the coffer.
               ¶ Alſo where a man diſtributeth his ſubſtance to many perſons, the laſſe Liberalitie ſhal he vſe to other: ſo with bounteouſnes, bountie is minyſhed. Onely they that be called beneficiall, and do vſe the vertue of Beneficence, whiche conſiſteth in coū
                  ſaylynge, and helpynge other with any aſſiſtence in tyme of nede, ſhall alwaye fynde coadiutours & ſupportours of their gentyll courage. And douteles, that maner of gen tylnes, that conſiſteth in labour, ſtudie, and diligēce, is more cōmendable, and extēdeth further, and alſo may more profite perſons, than that whiche reſteth in rewardes and expences. But to retourne to liberalitie.
               
                  
¶ What greater foly may be, thā that thing Prodigalitie. that a man moſt gladly dothe, to endeuour hym with all ſtudye, that it maye no longer be done? wherfore Tulli calleth them prodigalle, that in inordynate feaſtes and bankettes, vayne playes, and huntynges, doo ſpende all theyr ſubſtance, and in thoſe thinges, wherof they ſhall leaue but a ſhort or no remembrance. Wherfore to reſort to the counſaylle of Aryſtotle before expreſſed, Lyberalytie, in a noble manne ſpecyally, is commended, all though it ſomewhat excede the termes of meaſure. And yf it be well and duely employed, it acquireth perpetualle honour to the gyuer, and moche frute and ſyngular commoditie therby encreaſeth. For where honeſte and vertuous perſonages be aduaunced, and wel rewarded, it ſtereth the courages of menne, whyche haue any ſparke of vertue, to encreaſe therin with all theyr force and endeuoure. wherefore nexte to the helpynge and relieuyng of a communaltie, the great parte of Lyberalitie is to be employed on men of vertue and good qualities, wherin is required to be a good election and iuge ment, that for hope of rewarde or fauour, vnder the cloke of vertue, be nat hyd the moſte mortall poyſon of flatterie.
            
            
               
               ¶ The true deſcription of amitie or frendeſhyp. Cap. XI.
               
                  I HAVE AL redy treated of Beneuolēce and Beneficence generally. But for as moche as frendſhyp, called in latin AMICITIA, comprehēdeth both thoſe vertues more ſpecially, and in an hygher degree, and is nowe ſo infrequente or ſtrauuge amonge mortall men, by the tyrannye of couetyſe or ambition, whiche haue longe reigned, and yet do, that amitie may nowe vnethe be knowen, or founde throughoute the worlde, by them that ſeke for her as dilygently, as a mayden wold ſeke for a ſmall ſyluer pynne in a great chaumber, ſtrawed with whyte ruſhes. I wyl therfore borow ſo moche of the gentyll reder, thoughe he be nigh wery of this longe matter, barram of eloquence and pleaſant ſentence, and declare ſomewhat by the way, of verye & true frendſhyp. whiche perchaunce maye be an allectiue to good men to ſeke for their ſemblable, on whom they may practiſe amitie. For as Tulli ſaith, Nothinge is more to be loued, or to be ioyned togyther, than ſimylytude Ci. off. i. of good maners or vertues: wherin be the ſame or ſēblable ſtudies, the ſame wylles or deſires: in them it hapneth, that one in an other as moch delyteth as in him

ſelfe. But nowe let vs enſerch what frendſhyp or amitie is. Ethi. vi.
               
               ¶ Ariſtotle ſaith, Frendeſhyp is a vertue, or ioyneth with vertue. whiche is affirmed Tulli de amicitia. by Tulli, ſaying, Frendeſhyppe can nat be without vertue, ne but in good men onely. Who be good men, he after declareth, to be thoſe perſones, whiche ſo do beare theym ſelues, and in ſuche wyſe do lyue, that their faythe, ſuretie, equalitie, and lyberalitie, be ſufficiētly proued. Ne that there is in them any couetyſe, wylfulneſſe, or folehardynes, and that in theym is great ſtabilitie or conſtance: them ſuppoſe I (as they be taken) to be called good men, whiche doo folowe (as moche as men maye) nature the chiefe capytayne or guyde of mannes lyfe More ouer, the ſame Tulli defyneth frendſhyppe in this maner, ſayinge, It is noone other thynge, but a perfect conſent of al thynges appertaining aſwell to god as to man, with Beneuolence and Charitie. And that he knoweth nothing gyuen of god, except ſapience, to man more cōmodious. whiche definition is excellent & very true. For in god and all thynge that cōmeth of god, nothing is of more greatter eſtimation, than loue, called in latine AMOR, wherof AMICITIA cōmeth, named in englyſhe frendſhyppe or amitie: the whiche taken awaye frome the

lyfe of man, no howſe ſhall abide ſtanding, no fyelde ſhall be in Culture. And that is lyghtly perceyued, if a man do remembre, what commeth of diſſention and dyſcorde, fynally he ſeemeth to take the ſonne frome the worlde, that taketh frendſhyppe from mannes lyfe.
               ¶ Sens frendſhyp can nat be but in good men, ne may not be without vertue, we may be aſſured, that therof none euyl may procede, or therwith any yuel thyng may participate. Wherfore in as moche as it maye be but in a fewe perſones (good men being in a ſmalle nombre) And alſo it is rare and ſeldome, as all vertues be communely, I wyll declare after the opynion of philoſophers, and partely by commune experiēce, who amonge good men be of nature moſte apte to frendſhippe.
               ¶ Betwene all men that be good, can nat alway be amitie, but it alſo requireth, that they be of ſemblable or moche like maners or ſtudy, and ſpecially of maners. For Gra uitie and Affabilitie, be euery of them laudable qualities. So be Seueritie and Placabilitie. Alſo Magnificence & Liberalite, be noble vertues: and yet Frugalitie, whiche is a ſobreneſſe or moderation in liuing, is, and that for good cauſe of all wyſe men extolled. Yet where theſe vertues and qualities

be ſeperately in ſondry perſons aſſē
                  bled, may welle be perfecte concorde, but frendeſhyp is there ſeldome or neuer. For that, which the one for a vertue imbraceth, the other cōtemneth, or at the leſte neglecteth, wherfore it ſemeth, that it, wherein the one deliteth, is repugnāt to the others nature: And where is any repugnaunce, may be none amitie, ſens frendeſhyp is an entier conſent of wylles and deſires. Therfore it is ſeldome ſene, that frendeſhyp is betwene theſe perſons, A man ſturdy of opinion inflexible, and of ſoure countenance and ſpeche, with hym that is tractable, and with reaſon perſwaded, and of ſwete coū
                  tenance and entertaynment. Alſo betwene hym, whiche is eleuate in auctoritie, and a nother of a very baſe aſtate or degree, ye & if they be both in an equall dignitie, if they be deſyrous to clyme: as they do aſcende, ſo frendſhyp for the more parte decayeth. For as Tulli ſaythe, in his fyrſte booke of offices, what thing ſo euer it be, in the whiche many can nat excelle, or haue therin ſuperiorytie, therein often tymes is ſuche a contention, that it is a thynge of all other moſte difficile, to kepe amonge them good or vertuous company: that is as moche to ſay, as to retayne amonge them frendſhyp and amitie. And it is oftentymes ſene, that

diuers, which before they came in autorite, were of good & vertuous condiciōs, being in their proſperitie were vtterly changed, and diſpiſyng their old frendes, ſet all their ſtudy and pleaſure on their newe acquaintaunce. Wherin men ſhall perceyue to be a wonderfull blyndnes, or (as I mought ſay) a madneſſe, if they note diligentely all that I ſhall hereafter write of frendeſhyp. But nowe to reſorte to ſpeke of them, in whom frenſhyp is moſt frequente, and they alſo therto be moſt aptely diſpoſed.
               ¶ Undoutedly it be ſpecially they, whiche be wyſe, and of nature inclyned to Beneficence, Liberalitie, and Conſtance. For by wyſedome is marked and ſubſtancially decerned the wordes, actes, and demeanure of all men, betwene whome hapneth to be any entercours or familiaritie, whereby is ingendred a fauour or diſpoſition of loue. Beneficence, that is to ſaye, mutually puttynge to their ſtudie and helpe in neceſſary affaires, induceth loue. They that be lyberall, do withholde or hyde nothynge from them, whom they loue, wherby loue increſeth. And in them that be conſtant is neuer myſtruſte or ſuſpition, nor any ſurmyſe or yuelle reporte can with drawe theym from their affection. And hereby frendeſhyppe is made perpetuall and ſtable. But yf ſimilitude

of ſtudy or lernynge be ioyned vnto the ſayde vertues, frendſhip moche rather hapneth, and the mutuall enteruewe and conuerſation is moche more pleaſaunt, ſpecially if the ſtudies haue in them any delectable affection or motion. For where they be to ſerious, or full of contention, frendeſhip is oftentymes aſſaulted, whereby it is often in peryll. Where the ſtudy is elegant, and the matter illecebrous, that is to ſaye ſwete to the reder, the courſe wherof is rather gentyll perſwaſion and quicke reaſonynges, than ouer ſubtyll argumente, or litigious controuerſyes: there alſo it hapneth, that the ſtudentes do delyte one in a nother, and be without enuye or malycyous contention.
               ¶ Nowe let vs try out, what is that frendſhyppe, that we ſuppoſe to be in good men. Ueryly it is a bleſſed and ſtable connexyon of ſondry wylles, makynge of two perſons one, in hauynge and ſuffrynge. And therfore a frende is proprely named of Philoſophers, the other .I. For that in theym is but one minde and one poſſeſſion: and that, which more is, a man more reioyſeth at his frendes good fortune, than at his owne.
               ¶ Horeſtes and Pilades, beinge wonderful lyke in al features, were taken to geder, and preſented vnto a tirant, who deedly hated

Horeſtes. But whan he behelde them bothe, and wolde haue ſlayne Horeſtes only, he coulde not decerne the one from the other: And alſo Pilades, to delyuer his frende, affirmed, that he was Oreſtes: on the other parte Oreſtes, to ſaue Pilades, denyed, and ſayd, that he was Oreſtes (as the trouthe was) Thus a longe tyme they togyther contendynge, the one to dye for the other, at the laſte ſo relented the fierſe and cruell harte of the tyraunte, that wondringe at theyr meruaylous frendſhyp, he ſuffred them frely to departe, without doinge to them any damage.
               ¶ Pitheas and Damō, two Pythagoriens, Pithias? Damon. that is to ſay, ſtudentes of Pythagoras lernynge, beinge ioyned togyther in a perfect frendſhyp: for that one of them was accuſed to haue cōſpired againſt Dionyſe, kyng of Sicile, they were both takē and brought to the kynge, who immedyately gaue ſentence, that he that was accuſed, ſhulde be put to dethe. But he deſired the kinge, that er he died, he mought retourne home, to ſet his houſeholde in order, and to dyſtribute his goodes. Whereat the kyng laughynge, demaunded of him ſkornfully, what pledge he wolde leaue hym, to come agayne. At the whiche wordes, his company on ſtepte forthe and ſayde, that he wolde remayne

there as a pledge for his frend, that in caſe he came not agayne, at the daye to him appoynted, he wyllngly wold loſe his hede. Whiche condicion the tyraunte receyued. The yonge man that ſhuld haue died, was ſuffred to departe home to his hous, where he did ſet all thynge in order, and dyſpoſed his goodes wyſely. The day appointed for his retourne was commen, the tyme moche paſſed. Wherfore the kynge called for hym that was pledge. Who came forth meryly, without ſemblaunte of drede, offringe to abyde the ſentence of the tyraunte, and with out grudginge, to dye for the ſauing the life of his frende. But as the offycer of iuſtyce had cloſed his eien with a kerchiefe, & had drawen his ſwerde, to haue ſtryken of his hede, his felowe came renning and crieng, that the daye of his appoyntmente was not yet paſte: wherfore he deſired the miniſter of iuſtice to loſe his felowe, and to prepare to do execution on hym, that had giuen the occaſion, whereat the tyraunte beynge all abaſhed, cōmanded both to be broughte in his preſence, and whan he had inough wō
                  dred at theyr noble hartes, and theyr conſtance in very frendſhyp, he offring to them greate rewardes, deſyred them to receyue hym into theyr company: and ſo doing▪ thē moche honour, dyd ſet them at libertie.
               
                  
¶ Undoughtedly that frendſhyp, whiche doth depend eyther on profite or els in pleſure, if the habilitie of the perſone, whiche mought be profitable, do faile or diminiſhe, or the diſpoſitiō of the perſon, which ſhuld be pleaſaunte, do chaunge or appayre, the feruentneſſe of loue ceſſeth, and thanne is there no frendſhyp.
            
            
               The wonderfull hiſtory of Titus & Giſippus, & wherby is fully declared the figure of perfet amitie. Ca. XII.
               BUt nowe in the myddes of my labour, as it were to pauſe and take breth, and alſo, to recreate the reders, whiche fatigate with longe preceptes, deſyre varietic of mater, or ſome newe pleaſaunt fable or hiſtorie, I wyll reherce a righte goodly example of frendſhyp, whiche example ſtudiouſely red, ſhal miniſter to the reders ſinguler pleaſure, and alſo incredible comfort to practiſe amitie.
               ¶ There was in the cytie of Rome a noble ſenatour, named Fuluius, who ſente his ſonne, called Titus, beinge a chylde, to the citie of Athenes in Grece (whiche was the fountayne of al maner of doctrine) there to lerne good letters: and cauſed hym to be hoſted with a worſhypfull man of that citie,

called Chremes. This Chremes hapened to haue alſo a ſonne, named Giſippus, who not onely was equal to the ſayde yong Titus in yeres, but alſo in ſtature, proporcion of body, fauour, and colour of viſage, countenaunce and ſpeche. The two chyldren were ſo lyke, that without moche difficultie it coulde not be decerned of theyr propre parentes, which was Titus from Giſippus, or Giſippus from Titus. Theſe two yonge gentyllmen, as they ſemed to be one in fourme and perſonage, ſo ſhortely after acquaintaunce, the ſame nature wrought in theyr hartes ſuche a mutuall affection, that theyr wylles and appetites dayly more and more ſo cōfederated them ſelues, that it ſemed none other, whan theyr names were declared, but that they had only chaunged theyr places, iſſuing (as I mought ſay) out of the one body, & entringe into the other. They to gether, and at one tyme wente to theyr lernynge and ſtudye, at one tyme to theyr meales and refectyon, they delyted bothe in one doctrine, and profyted equally therin, fynally they to gether ſo increaſed in doctrine, that within a fewe yeres, fewe within Athenes mought be compared vnto them. At the laſte dyed Chremes, whiche was not onely to his lonne, but alſo to Titus cauſe of moche ſorowe and heuyneſſe.

Gyſippus, by the goodes of his father was knowen to be a manne of great ſubſtaunce: wherfore there were offred to hym greate and ryche mariages. And he than being of rype yeres, and of an habile & goodly perſonage, His frendes, kinne, and alies exhorted hym buſely to take a wyfe, to the entent he mought increaſe his lynage and progenye. But the yonge man, hauyng his harte all redy wedded to his frende Titus, & his minde fixed to the ſtudy of philoſophie, ferynge that maryage ſhulde be the occaſion to ſeuer him both from thone and thother, refuſed of longe tyme to be perſwaded, vntyll at the laſte, partly by the importunate callynge on of his kynneſmenne, partely by the conſente and aduyſe of his dere frende Titus, therto by other deſired, he aſſented, to mary ſuche one as ſhulde lyke him. What ſhall nede any wordes? his frendes found a yonge gentyl woman, whiche in equalitie of yeres, vertuous condicions, nobilitie of blode, beaute, and ſufficiente richeſſe, they thought was for ſuche a yonge man apt and conueniente. And whan they and her frē
                  des vpon the cōuenantes, of mariage were throughely accorded, they counſayled Giſippus to repayre vnto the mayden, and to beholde howe her perſone contented him. And he ſoo doynge, founde her in euerye

fourme and condicion, according to his expectation and apperite, whereat he moche reioyſed, and became of her amorouſe, in ſoo moche as many and often tymes, leauing Titus at his ſtudy, he ſecretely repaired vnto her. Not with ſtandynge the feruent loue that he had to his frende Titus, at the laſt ſurmounted ſhamefaſtnes. Wherfore he dyſcloſed to hym his ſecrete iourneyes, and what delectacion he toke in beholding the excellent beautie of her, whom he purpoſed to marye: and howe with her good maners and ſwete enterteynemente, ſhe had conſtrayned hym to be her louer. And on a tyme, he hauynge with hym his frende Titus, wente to his lady, of whom he was reſceyued moſte ioyouſly. But Titus furthewith as he behelde ſo heuenly a perſonage, adourned with beautie inexplicable, in whoſe viſage was mooſte amiable countenaunce, myxt with maydenly ſhamefaſteneſſe, and the rare and ſobre wordes, and well couched, whiche iſſued out of her pretye mouthe, Titus was therat abaſhed, and had the harte through perced with the firy darte of blynde Cupide, of the whiche wounde the anguiſhe was ſo excedyng and vehement, that neyther the ſtudy of philoſophie, neyther the remēbrance of his dere frende Giſippus, who ſo moche loued and

truſted hym, coulde any thyng with drawe hym from that vnkynde appetite, but that of force he muſte loue inordinately that lady, whom his ſaide frende had determined to mary. Al be it with incredible paynes he kepte his thoughtes ſecrete, vntyll that he & Giſippus were returned vnto theyr lodgynges. Than the myſerable Titus, withdrawynge hym as it were to his ſtudye, all turmented and oppreſſed with loue, threwe hym ſelfe on a bed, and there rebukyng his owne moſte deſpitefull vnkyndneſſe, which by the ſodeyne ſyghte of a mayden, he had conſpired agaynſte his mooſte dere frende Giſippus, agaynſt all humanitie and reaſō, curſed his fate or conſtellation, and wiſſhed that he had neuer comen to Athenes. And therwith he ſente out from the botome of his harte depe and colde ſyghes, in ſuche plentie, that it lacked but litel that his hart ne was ryuen in peces. In dolour and anguiſhe toſſed he him ſelfe by a certain ſpace but to no man wolde he dyſcouer it. But at the laſte, the peyne became ſo intollerable, that wold he or no, he was inforced to kepe his bed, beinge for lacke of ſlepe and other naturall ſuſtenaunce, broughte in ſuche febleneſſe, that his legges mougt not ſuſteine his body. Giſippus, miſſynge his dere frēd Titus, was moche abaſſhed, and herynge

that he laye ſycke in his bed, had forthwith his harte perced with heuyneſſe, and with all ſpede came to hym, where he laye. And beholdynge the roſiall colour, whiche was wonte to be in his viſage, tourned into ſalowe, the reſydue pale, his ruddy lyppes wan, & his eyen ledy and holowe, moughte vneth kepe hym ſelfe from wepyng, but to the entente he wolde not dyſcomforte his frende Titus, diſſimuled his heuyneſſe, and with a comfortable countenaunce demaunded of Titus, what was the cauſe of his diſeaſe, blamynge hym of vnkyndeneſſe, that he ſo longe had ſuſteyned it, without gyuinge hym knowlege, that he moughte for hym haue prouyded ſome remedye, if any mought haue begoten, though it were with the dyſpendynge of all his ſubſtaunce. With which wordes the mortal ſyghes renewed in Titus, and the ſalte teares braſte out of his eyen, in ſuche habundaunce, as it had ben a lande flode runnyng downe of a moū
                  tayne after a ſtorme. That beholdyng Giſyppns, and beinge alſo reſolued in to teares, moſte hartely deſired hym, and (as I mought ſay) coniured him, for the feruente and entier loue that had bene, and yet was betwene them, that he wold no lenger hide from hym his gryefe: and that there was nothynge to hym ſo deere or precyous (all

though it were his owne life) that mought reſtore Titus to helthe, but that he ſhulde gladly, and without grutchynge employe it. with whiche wordes, obteſtations, and teares of Gyſippus, Titus conſtrayned, al bluſſhynge and aſſhamed, holdinge downe his hede, brought furthe with greate difficultie his wordes in this wiſe.
               ¶ My dere and moſte louyng frende, with The wordes of Titus to Giſyppus. drawe your frendely offers, ceſſe of your courtaiſie, refraine your teares and regretynges, take rather your knyfe and ſlee me here where I lye, or otherwyſe take vengeaunce on me, mooſte miſerable and falſe traytour vnto you, and of all other mooſte worthy to ſuffre moſt ſhameful deathe. For where as god of nature, like as he hath giuen to vs ſimilitude in all the partes of our body, ſo had he conioyned our wylles, ſtudies and appetites to gether in one, ſo that betwene two men was neuer like concorde and loue, as I ſuppoſe: And now, not with ſtandynge, only with the loke of a woman, thoſe bondes of loue be dyſſolued, reaſon oppreſſed, frēdſhip is excluded, there auaileth no wyſedome, no doctrine, no fidelite or truſte: ye your truſte is the cauſe that I haue conſpired agaynſte you this treaſon. Alas Gyſippus, what enuious ſpirite mened you to bringe me with you to her, whō
                  
ye haue choſen to be your wyfe, where I receyued this poyſon? I ſaye Gyſyppus, where was than your wyſedom, that ye remembred not the fragilitie of our cōmune nature? what neded you to cal me for a witneſſe of your priuate delites? why wolde ye haue me ſee that, whiche you your ſelfe coulde not beholde without rauyſſhyng of mynde and carnall appetite? Alas why forgate ye, that our myndes & appetites were euer one? and that alſo what ſoo ye lyked was euer to me in lyke degree pleaſaunte. What wyll ye more? Gyſippus I ſaye, your truſt is the cauſe that I am intrapped. The rayes or beames iſſuynge from the eyen of her, whom ye haue choſen, with the remē
                  braunce of her incomparable vertues, hath thrilled throughout the middes of my hart and in ſuche wyſe brenneth it, that aboue althinges I deſire to be out of this wretched and moſte vnkinde life, whiche is not worthy the company of ſo noble and louynge a frende as ye be. And therwith Titus concluded his confeſſion, with ſo profound and bytter a ſighe, receyued with teares, that it ſemed, that all his body ſhulde be dyſſolued and relented into ſalte dropes.
               ¶ But Gyſippus, as he were therwith nothynge The annſwere of Giſippus. aſtonyed or dyſcontented, with an aſſured countenannce, and mery regarde,

imbraſynge Titus, and kyſſynge hym, anſwerd in this wiſe. Why Titus, is this your only ſickeneſſe and griefe, that ye ſo vncur 
                     •
                  eſely haue ſo longe counceyled, and with moch more vnkindneſſe kept from me, than ye haue conceiued it? I knowlege my foly, wherwith ye haue with good right imbraided me, that in ſhewyng to you her, whom I loued, I remembred not the commune aſtate of our nature, ne the agreableneſſe or (as I moughte ſaye) the vnitie of our two appetites. Suerly that defaulte can be by no reaſon excuſed. Wherfore it is onely I, that haue offended. For who may by ryght proue, that ye haue treſpaſed, that by the ineuitable ſtroke of Cupides dart are thus bytterly wounded? Thynke ye me ſuche a ſole or ignorant perſone, that I knowe not the power of Uenus, where ſhe lyſteth to ſhewe her importable vyolence? Haue not ye wel reſyſted agaynſte ſuche a goddeſſe, that for my ſake haue ſtryuen with her all mooſte to the deathe? What more loyaltye or trouthe can I require of you? Am I of that vertue, that I maye reſyſte agaynſt celeſtiall influence, preordynate by prouydence dyuine? If I ſo thought, what were my wyttes? where were my ſtudy ſo longe time ſpent in noble Philoſophy? I confeſſe to you Titus, I loue that mayden as moche

as any wyſe man mought poſſyble: and toke in her company more delyte and pleaſure than of al the treaſure and landes that my father lefte me, whiche ye knowe was ryght abundaunte. But nowe I perceyue, that the affection of loue towarde her ſurmouuteth in you aboue meaſure, what ſhall I thynke it of a wanton luſte, or ſodeyne appetite in you, whom I haue euer knowē of graue and ſadde dyſpoſytion, inclyned alwaye to honeſt doctrine, fleynge al vayne dalyaunce and dyſhoneſte paſſetyme? Shal I imagine to be in you any malice or fraude ſens from the tender tyme of our chyldehode, I haue alwaye founden in you, my ſwete frende Titus, ſuche a conformytye with all my maners, appetites, and deſires, that neuer was ſeene betwene vs any maner of contention? Nay god forbede, that in the frendſhyppe of Gyſyppus and Titus, ſhoulde happen any ſuſpition: or that any fantaſye ſhulde perce my hedde, wherby that honourable loue betwene vs ſhulde be the mountenaunce of a cromme, peryſſhed. Nay nay Titus, it is (as I haue ſaid) the onely prouydence of god: ſhe was by hym from the begynnynge prepared to be your lady and wyfe. For ſuch feruent loue entreth not in to the harte of a wyſe manne and vertuous, but by a dyuyne dyſpoſyton:

whereat yf I ſhoulde be dyſcontented▪ or grudge, I ſhulde not only be iniuſte to you, with holdynge that from you, which is vndoubtedly yours, but alſo obſtinate and repugnant agaynſt the determination of god, whiche ſhal neuer be founden in Giſyppus. Therfore gentyll frende Titus, dyſmaye you not at the chaunce of loue, but receyue it ioyously with me, that am with you nothinge diſcontented, but meruaylous glad, ſens it is my happe to finde for you ſuche a lady, with whome ye ſhall lyue in felicitie, & receyue fruite to the honour and comfort of all your lynage. Here I renounce to you clerely al my title and intereſt, that I nowe haue or mought haue in the fayre mayden. Call to you your priſtinate courage, waſhe clene your viſage and eien thus bywepte, and abandone all heuyneſſe, the day apointed for our mariage approcheth: let vs cō
                  ſulte, howe without dyfficultie ye may holy attayne your deſyres. Take hede, this is myne aduiſe, ye knowe wel, that we two be ſo lyke, that beinge a parte and in one apparayle, fewe men do knowe vs. Alſo ye do remembre, that the cuſtome is, that not withſtandynge any ceremony do one at the tyme of the ſpouſayles, the maryage notwithſtandynge is not confyrmed, vntyll at night that the huſbande putteth a rynge on

the finger of his wife, and vnloſeth her girdell. Therfore I my ſelfe wyll be preſente with my frendes, and performe all the partes of a bride. And ye ſhall abyde in a place ſecrete, where I ſhall appoynt you, vntil it be nyghte. And than ſhall ye quickely conuaie your ſelfe into the maydens chambre: and for the ſimilitude of our perſonages, & of our apparayle, ye ſhall not be eſpyed of the women, which haue with none of vs any acqueyntaunce, and ſhortely get you to bed, and put your owne rynge on the maydens fynger, and vndo her gyrdell of virginitie, and do all other thynge, that ſhalbe to your pleaſure. Be nowe of good chere Titus, and comforte your ſelfe with good refections and ſolace, that this wanne and pale colour, and your chekes meygre and leane, be not the cauſe of your diſcouering. I knowe wel, that ye hauing your purpoſe, I ſhall be in obloquie & deriſion of all men, and ſoo hated of all my kynrede, that they ſhall ſeke occaſion to expulſe me out of this citie, thynkynge me to be a notable reproch to all my familie. But let god therin warke. I force not what payne that I abyde, ſoo that ye my frende Titus may be ſaulfe, and pleaſauntly enioye your deſyres, to the increaſynge of your felicitie.
               ¶ VVITH theſe wordes Titus beganne to

meue, as it were out of a dreme, and doubtynge, whether he harde Giſyppus ſpeke, or elles ſawe but a viſyon, lay ſtyll as a man abaſhed. But whan he behelde the teares, tryckelynge downe by the face of Gyſyppus, he than recomforted hym, and thankyng hym for his incomparable kyndneſſe, refuſed the benefyte that he offered, ſayinge, that it were better, that a hundred ſuche vnkynde wretches, as he was, ſhulde peryſſhe, than ſoo noble a manne, as was Gyſippus, ſhulde ſuſteyne reproche or damage. But Gyſyppus eſteſones comforted Titus, and therwith ſware and proteſted, that with fre and gladde wyl he wold that this thynge ſhulde be in fourme aforeſayde accomplyſſhed, and therwith inbraced and ſwetely kyſſed Titus. Who perceiuynge the matter ſure, and not feyned, as a man not ſycke, but only awaked out of his flepe, ſet hym ſelfe vp in his bed, the quicke bloud ſome what reſorted vnto his vyſage, and after a lyttell good meates and drinkes taken, he was ſhortely and in a fewe dayes reſtored in to his old facion and figure. To make the tale ſhorte. The daye of maryage was commen. Gyſyppus accompanied with his alies & frendes, came to the houſe of the damoſell, where they were honorably & ioyouſly feſted. And betwene him and

the mayden was a ſwete entertaynemente, whiche to beholde, all that were preſente, toke moche pleaſure and comfort, prayſing the beautie, goodlyneſſe, vertue, and curteſie, which in this couple were excellent aboue all other, that they hadde euer ſene. What ſhal I ſay more? the couenātes were radde and ſealed, the dowar apointed, and all other bargaynes concluded, & the frendes of either parte toke their leaue & depted: the bride, with a fewe women (as was the cuſtome) brought into her chambre: thā as it was before agreed, Titus conueyed hym ſelfe, after Gyſippus retourned to his houſe, or perchance to the chambre appointed for Titus, nothyng ſorowfull, although that he hartily loued the mayden, but with a gladde harte and countenaunce, that he hadde ſo recouered his frende from deth, and ſo well broughte hym to the effecte of his deſyre. Nowe is Titus in bedde with the mayden, not knowen of her, nor of any other, but for Gyſippus. And fyrſte he ſweetely demaunded her, if that ſhe loued him, & dayned to take hym for her huſbāde, forſakyng all other. whiche ſhe al bluſhing with an eye halfe laughynge, halfe mournynge (as in poynte to depart frō her maidenheed, but ſuppoſinge it to be Gyſippus that aſked her) affirmed. And than he efteſones

aſketh her, if ſhe in ratifieng that ꝓmiſe, wold receyue his ryng, which he had there alredy: wherto ſhe conſentyng, putteth the rynge on her fynger, and vnloſeth her gyrdell. what thynge els he dyd, they two only knewe of it. Of one thynge I am ſure, that nyghte was to Titus more comfortable, than euer was the lengeſt daye of the yere, ye and I ſuppoſe a hoole yere of dayes. The morowe is comen. Gyſippus, thinking it expedient, that the trouth ſhuld be diſcouered, aſſembled all the nobilitie of the citie at his owne houſe, where alſo by appoyntemente was Titus, who amonge them had theſe wordes, that do folowe.
               ¶ My frendes Atheniēſis, there is at this The oration of Titus to the Athenienſis. tyme ſhewed amonge you an example, almoſt incredible, of the diuine powar of honorable loue, to the perpetuall renome and cōmendatiō of this noble cite of Athenes, wherof ye ought to take excellent cōfort, & therfore gyue due thankes to god, if ther remayne amonge you any token of the ancient wyſedome of your moſte noble progenitours. For what more prayſe maye be giuen to people, thā beneuolence, faithfulneſſe, and conſtance? withoute whome all countrayes and cities be brought vnto deſolation and ruyne, like as by them they be come proſperous, and in mooſte high felilicitie.

What ſhall I longe tary you in coniectyng myne intent and meanynge? Ye all know, from whens I came vnto this citie, that of auēture I foūd in the hous of Chre mes his ſonne Gyſippus, of min owne age, and in euery thing ſo lyke to me, that neyther his father, nor any other man coulde diſcerne of vs the one frome the other, but by our owne inſignement or ſhewynge: in ſo moch as there were put about our neckes lacis of ſondry colours, to daclare our perſonages. what mutuall agrement & loue haue ben alwaye betwene vs, durynge the eyght yeres, that we haue ben togither, ye all be witneſſes, that haue ben beholders & wonderars of our moſt ſwete conuerſation and cōſent of appetites, wherin was neuer any diſcorde or variaunce. And as for my part, after the deceſſe of my father, natwith ſtandinge that there was diſcended & hapned vnto me great poſſeſſiōs, fayre houſes, with abundance of riches: alſo I being called home by the deſirous & importunate let ters of myn alies and frendes, which be of the moſte noble of all the ſenatours, offred the aduancement to the higheſt dignities in the publike weale, I wyll nat remembre the lamentations of my moſte naturall mother, expreſſed in her tender letters, all be ſprent and blotted with abūdāce ofteares,

wherin ſhe accuſeth me of vnkyndneſſe, for my longe taryenge, and ſpeciallye nowe in her moſte diſcomforte. But all this coulde nat remoue me the breadthe of my naylle frome my dere frende Gyſippus. And but by force coulde nat I, nor yet may be drawen from his ſwete cōpany, but yf he therto wylle conſente. I chooſynge rather to lyue with hym, as his company on and felowe, ye and as his ſeruaunt, rather than to be conſull of Rome. Thus my kyndenes hath be wel acquyted (or as I mought ſay) redoubled, delyueryng me from the deth, ye from the moſte cruel and peynefull deth of all other. I perceyue ye wonder hereat noble Athenienſis, and noo meruayle. For what perſon ſhulde be ſo hardy, to attempte any ſuche thyng ageynſt me, being a Romayne, and of the noble blode of the Romaynes? Or who ſhulde be thought ſo malicious, to ſlee me, who (as all ye be my iuges) neuer treſpaſſed agaynſte any perſone within this citie? Nay nay my frēdes, I haue none of you all therin ſuſpected. I perceyue ye deſyre and harken to knowe, what he was, that preſumed to do ſo cruell and great an enterpriſe. It was loue, noble Athenienſis, the ſame loue, which (as your poetes doo remembre) dydde wounde the more parte of all the goddis, that ye doo

honour, that conſtrayaed Iupiter to tranſfourme hym ſelfe in a ſwanne, a bulle, and dyuers other likeneſſes: the ſame loue that cauſed Hercules, the vaynquyſher and diſtroyer of Monſters & Giauntes, to ſpinne on a rocke, ſyttynge amonge maydens in a womannes apparayle: the ſame loue that cauſed to aſſemble all the noble pryncis of Aſia and Grece in the fieldes of Troy: the ſame loue I ſaye, agaynſte whoſe aſſaultes may be founde no defence or reſiſtēce, hath ſodainely and vnware ſtryken me vnto the harte, with ſuche vehemence and myghte, that I had in ſhorte ſpace dyed with moſte feruent tourmentes, hadde nat the incomparable frendſhip of Gyſippus holpen me. I ſee, you wolde fayne knowe, who ſhe is, that I loued. I wyll no lenger delaye you noble Athenienſis: It is Sophronia, the lady, whom Gyſippus had choſen to haue to his wyfe, and whome he moſte entierly loued. But whan his mooſte gentyll harte perceyued, that my loue was in a moche hygher degree than his toward that lady, and that it proceded neither of wantōnes, neyther of longe conuerſation, nor of any other corrupte deſyre or fantaſie, but in an inſtant, by the onely looke, and with ſuche feruence, that īmediatly I was ſo cruciate, that I deſired, & in all that I mought prouoked

deth to take me. He by his wiſedom ſo one perceyued, (as I doute nat but that ye do) that it was the very prouiſiō of god, that ſhe ſhuld be my wyfe, & nat his. wherto he giuynge place, and more eſtemyng true frendſhip, than the loue of a woman, wher vnto he was induced by his frendes, & nat by violence of Cupide cōſtrayned as I am, hath willyngly graunted to me the intereſt that he hadde in the damoſell. And it is I Titus, that haue verily weded her, I haue putte the rynge on her fynger, I haue vndo one the gyrdell of ſhame faſtenes. what wylle ye more, I haue lyen with her, and confyrmed the Matrymonye, and made her a wyfe.
               ¶ At theſe wordes all they that were preſent, began to murmure, and to caſte a diſdainous and greuous loke vpon Giſippus. Than ſpake ageyne Titus.
               ¶ LEAVE YOVR grudgynges and menaſynge countenaunce, towarde Gyſyppus, he hath doone to you all honour, and no dede of reproche. I telle you, he hath accomplyſhed all the partes of a Frende: that Loue, whyche was mooſte certayne, hath he contynued. He knew, he mought fynd in Greece an other maiden, as faire & as ryche as this that he had choſen, & one perchaunce, that he mought loue better.

But ſuche a frende, as I was (hauyng reſpect to our ſimilitude, the longe approued concorde, alſo myne aſtate and condytion) he was ſure to fynde neuer none. Alſo the damoſell ſuffereth no diſper gemente in hyr bloode, or hynderance in her mariage, but is moche rather aduaunced (no dyſpreyſe to my dere frende Gyſippus). Alſo cōſider noble Athenienſis, that I toke her nat my father lyuynge, whan ye mought haue ſuſpected, that as well her ryches as her beautie, ſhoulde haue therto allured me: but ſoone after my fathers deceaſe, whan I far exceded her in poſſeſſions and ſubſtance, whan the moſte notable men of Rome and of Italy, deſired myn aliāce. Ye haue therfore all cauſe to reioyſe and thanke Gyſippus, and nat to be angry, and alſo to extoll his wonderfulle kyndeneſſe towarde me, wherby he hath wonne me and al my blode ſuche frendes to you and your cytie, that ye may be aſſured, to be by vs defended agaynſt all the worlde: whiche beinge conſidered, Giſippus hath well deſerued a ſtatue or ymage of golde, to be ſet on a piller, in the myddes of your citie, for an honorable monumente, in the remembraunce of our incomparable frēdſhyp, & of the good that therby may come to your citie. But if this perſuaſion can nat ſatiſfie you, but that

ye wyll imagyne any thyng to the damage of my dere frende Gyſippus, after my departynge, I make myne auowe vnto god, creatour of all thynge, that as I ſhall haue knowlege therof, I ſhall furth with reſorte hyther, with the inuyncible power of the Romaynes, and reuenge him in ſuche wyſe againſt his enmies, that al Grece ſhal ſpeke of it to their perpetuall diſhonour, ſhame, and reproche.
               ¶ And therwith Titus & Gyſippus rooſe, but the other for feare of Titus diſſembled their malyce, makynge ſemblaunt, as they had ben with all thynge contented.
               ¶ Sone after Titus, beinge ſent for by the auctorite of the ſenate and peple of Rome, prepared to departe out of Athenes, And wolde faine haue hadde Gyſippus to haue goone with hym, offrynge to deuyde with hym all his ſubſtance and fortune. But Gyſippus, conſiderynge howe neceſſarye his counſayle ſhuld be to the citie of Athenes, wolde nat depart out of his countray, nat withſtandynge that aboue all erthly thynges, he moſt deſired the company of Titꝰ: whiche abode alſo, for the ſayd conſideration, Titus approued.
               ¶ Titus with his lady, is departed towardes the citie of Rome. Where at their cō
                  mynge, they were of the mother of Titus,

his kynſemen, and of al the ſenate and people ioyouſly receyued. And there liued Titus with his lady in ioye inexplycable, and had by her many faire children: and for his wyſedome and lernynge was ſo hyghely eſtemed, that there was no dignitie or honorable offyce within the Citie, that he hadde not with moche fauour and prayſe a chyeued and occupied.
               ¶ But now let vs reſorte to Giſippus, who immediately vpon the departing of Titus, was ſoo malygned at, as well by his owne kynſemen, as by the frendes of the ladye, that he, to theyr ſemynge ſhamefully abandoned, lcauynge her to Titus, that they ſpared not dayly to vexe hym with all kyndes of reproche, that they coulde deuyſe or imagine: and fyrſte they excluded hym out of theyr counſayle, and prohibited from hym al honeſt company. And yet not being therewith ſatisfyed, fynally they adiuged hym vnworthy to enioye any poſſeſſions or goodes, left to hym by his parentes, whō he (as they ſuppoſed) by his vndeſcrete frendſhyppe had ſo dyſtayned. Wherfore they dyſpoyled hym of all thynges, and almoſte naked, expelled him out of the citie. Thus is Gyſippus, late welthy, and one of the mooſte noble men of Athenes, for his kynde harte, banyſſhed his owne countrey

for euer, and as a man dyſmayed, wandring hyther and thyther, fyndynge no man that wolde ſocour hym. At the laſt, remembring in what pleſure his frend Titus liued with his lady, for whom he ſuffred theſe damages, concluded to go to Rome, and declare his infortune to his ſaid frend Titus. What ſhall nede a longe tale? in concluſyon, with moche peyne, colde, hunger, and thurſte, he is commen to the citie of Rome, and diligently enquiringe for the houſe of Titus, at the laſte he came to it: but beholdinge it ſo beauteous, large, and pryncely, he was aſhamed to approche nygh to it, beynge in ſo ſymple aſtate and vnklad, but ſtandeth by, that in caſe Titus came forth out of his howſe, he moughte preſente hym ſelfe to hym. He beynge in this thoughte, Titus holdynge his lady by the hande, iſſued out from his doore, and takynge theyr horſes to ſolace them ſelfe, beheld Giſyppus: and beholdynge his vyle apparayle, regarded hym not, but paſſed furthe on theyr waye, wherewith Gyſippus was ſoo wounded to the harte, thynkynge Titus had contempned his fortune, that oppreſſed with mortal heuynes, fell in a ſowne, but beynge recouered by ſome that ſtode by, thynkyng him to be ſyeke, furth with departed, entending not to abide any lenger, but as a wilde beaſt

to wander abrode in the worlde. But for werineſſe he was conſtrayned to entre into an olde barne, without the citie, where he caſtinge him ſelfe on the bare gronde, with wepynge and dolorous cryenge bewayled his fortune: But moſte of all accuſynge the ingratitude of Titus, for whom he ſuffred all that myſery: the remembraunce wherof was ſo intollerable, that he determined no lenger to lyue in that anguyſhe and dolour. And therwith drewe his knyfe, purpoſyng to haue ſlayne hym ſelfe. But euer wyſedome (whiche he by the ſtudy of Philoſophy had attayned) withdrewe hym frome that deſperate acte. And in this contentiō, betwene wyſedome and wyll, fatigate with long iournaies and watche, or as god wold haue it, he fell into a dede ſlepe. His knyfe (wherwith he wolde haue ſlayne him ſelfe) fallyng downe by hym. In the meane time a commune and notable rufyan or thefe, whiche hadde robbed and ſlayne a manne, was entred into the barne, where Gyſyppus laye, to the intente to ſoiorne there all that nyghte. And ſeyng Giſippus bewept, and his viſage replenyſſhed with ſorowe, and alſo the naked knyfe by hym, perceyued well, that he was a man deſperate, and ſuppriſed with heuyneſſe of harte, was werye of his lyfe: whiche the ſayde rufyan

takynge for a good occaſion to eſcape, toke the knyfe of Gyſyppus, and puttynge it in the wounde of hym that was ſlayne, put it all blody in the hande of Gyſyppus, beinge faſte a ſlepe, and ſo departed. Soone after the dedde man beinge founde, the officers made dyligente ſerche for the murderar: at the laſte they entringe into the barne, and fyndinge Giſippus on ſlepe, with the blody knife in his hande, awaked hym, wherwith he entred agayne in to his olde ſorowes, complaynynge his yuel fortune. But whan the officers layde vnto him the death of the man, and the hauynge of the blody knyfe, he thereat reioyſed, thankynge god, that ſuche occaſiō was hapned, wherby he ſhuld ſuffre deathe by the lawes, and eſcape the vyolence of his owne handes. Wherfore he denyed nothynge that was layde to his charge, deſyryng the officers to make haſt that he mought be ſhortely out of his lyfe. Whereat they meruayled. Anone reporte came to the ſenate, that a man was ſlayne, and that a ſtraunger, and a Greeke borne, was founde in ſuche fourme, as is before mencioned. They forthwith commaunded hym to be brought vnto theyr preſence, ſittynge there at that tyme Titus, being than Conſull, or in other lyke dignitie. The miſerable Giſippus was brought to the barr̄,

with billes and ſtaues like a felon, of whom it was demaunded, if he ſlewe the man, that was foundended. he nothynge denyed, but in moſt ſorowfull maner curſed his fortune, namynge hym ſelfe of all other moſte miſerable. At the laſte one demaundynge hym, of what coūtrey he was, he confeſſed to be an Athenienſe, and therwith he caſt his ſorowfull eyen vppon Titus, with moche indignation, and braſte oute into ſyghes and teares abundauntly: that beholdynge Titus, and eſpienge by a lyttel ſygne in his viſage, which he knewe, that it was his dere frende Giſyppus, and anone conſideringe, that he was brought into dyſpayre by ſome my ſaduenture, roſe out of his place, where he ſate, and falling on his knees before the iuges, ſayd, that he had ſlayne the man, for olde malyce that he bare towarde him, and that Gyſippus, being a ſtraunger, was giltles, and all men mought perceyue, that the other was a deſperate perſon. wherfore to abbreuiate his ſorowes, he confeſſed the acte, wherof he was innocent, to the intent that he wold finiſhe his ſorowes with deth. Wherfore Titus deſyred the iuges, to giue ſentence on hym, accordynge to his merytes. But Gyſippus, perceyuynge his frēde Titus (contrary to his expectation) to offre hym ſelfe to the deathe, for his ſaulfe

garde, more importunately cried to the ſenate to procede in theyr iugement on hym, that was the very offēdar. Titus denied it, and affirmed with reaſons and argumētes, that he was the murderer, and not Giſyppus. Thus they of longe tyme, with abundaunce of teares contēded, which of them ſhuld die for the other, wherat all the Senate and people were wonderly abaſſhed, not knowyng what it ment. The murderer in dede, hapned to be in the preaſe at that time, who perceiuing the meruaylous contention of theſe two perſones, which were bothe innocēt, & that it proceded of an incō parable frendſhip, was vehemently prouoked to dyſcouer the trouthe. Wherfore he brake through the preaſe, and cōminge before the ſenate, ſpake in this wiſe,
               ¶ Noble fathers, I am ſuch a perſō, whom ye knowe haue ben a cōmune baratour and thefe by a long ſpace of yeres: ye know alſo, that Titus is of a noble bloude, and is a proued to be alway a man of excellent vertue and wyſedome, and neuer was malycious. This other ſtrāger ſemeth to be a mā full of ſimplicitie, and that more is, deſperate for ſome greuous ſorowe that he hath taken, as it is to you euidente. I ſay to you fathers, they both be innocente, I am that perſon, that ſlewe hym, that is foundēded

by the barne, and robbed him of his money, and whan I founde in the barne this ſtranger lyenge on ſlepe, hauinge by hym a naked knyfe: I, the better to hyde myne offence, dyd put the knife into the wounde of the ded man, and ſo al blody laide it agayne by this ſtranger. This was my miſcheuous deuiſe to eſcape your iugement. Where vnto nowe I remit me holy, rather than this noble man Titus, or this innocent ſtranger ſhulde vnworthely die.
               ¶ Here at all the Senate and people toke comforte, and the noiſe of reioyſing hartes filled all the courte. And whan it was further examined, Giſippus was dyſcouered, the frendſhip betwene hym and Titus was through out the citie publyſſhed, extolled, & magnified. Wherfore the Senate conſulted of this mater, and fynally at the inſtāce of Titus and the peple, dyſcharged the felon. Titus recognyſed his neglygence, in forgettynge Giſippus. And Titus beinge aduertiſed of the exile of Giſippus, and the dipiteful crueltie of his kynrede, was therwith wonderfull wrath, and hauinge Giſippus home to his hous (where he was with incredible ioye receiued of the lady, whom ſomtyme he ſhulde haue wedded) honorably apparyled him: and there Titus offred to hym, to vſe al his goodes and poſſeſſiōs

at his owne pleaſure and appetite. But Giſippus, deſyrynge to be agayne in his propre countrey, Titus by the conſente of the Senate and people, aſſembled a gret army, and wente with Gyſyppus vnto Athenes: where he hauing deliuered to him al thoſe, whiche were cauſers of banyſſhynge and dyſpoylynge of his frende Gyſyppus, dyd on them ſharpe execution: and reſtorynge to Gyſyppus his landes and ſubſtance, ſtablyſhed hym in perpetuall quietnes, and ſo retourned to Rome.
               ¶ This exaumple in the affectes of frendſhyp, expreſſeth (if I be not deceyued) the deſcription of frendeſhyppe, engendred by the ſymilitude of age and perſonage, augmented by the conformitie of maners and ſtudies, and confirmed by the longe continuance of company.
               ¶ It wolde be remembred, that frendſhip None euil maye be in frendſhip. is betwene good men onely, and is ingendred of an opinion of vertue. Than may we reaſon in this fourme, A good man is ſo named, bycauſe all that he wylleth or doth, is only good: in good can be none euyl, therfore nothynge that a good man wylleth or dothe, can be euyl. Lykewyſe vertue is the affection of a good man, which neither willeth nor dothe any thynge that is euyl. And vice is contrary vnto vertue, for in the opinion

of vertue, is neyther euyll nor vyce. And very amytie is vertue. wherfore nothynge euyll or vycyous maye happen in frendſhyp. Therfore in the fyrſte election of frendes, reſteth al the importāce, wherfore it wold not be without a longe beliberation and profe, and as Ariſtotle ſayth, in Ethie. as longe tyme as by them bothe, beinge to gether conuerſaunt, a hole buſſhell of ſalte mought be eten. For oftentymes with fortune (as I late ſayd) is chaunged, or at the leaſt miniſhed the feruentneſſe of that affection, according as the ſwete Poete Duide affirmeth, ſayinge in this ſentence,
               
                  
                     ¶ Whiles fortune the fauoureth, frendes thou Oui. de Pon. haſt plentie.
                     The tyme beinge troublous thou arte al alone,
                     Thou ſeeſt coluers haunte houſes made whyte and dente.
                     To the ruynous towre all moſte cometh none,
                     Of emotes innumerable vneth thou findeſt one
                     In emty barnes, and where fayleth ſubſtaunce
                     Hapneth no frende, in whom is aſſuraunce.
                  
               
               ¶ But if any hapneth in euerye fortune to be conſtant in frendſhippe, he is to be made of aboue all thynges that maye come vnto man, and aboue any other that be of bloude or kynrede, as Tulli ſayth. For from kynrede maye be taken Beneuolence, frome frendſhippe it can neuer be ſeuered. Wherfore

Beneuolence taken from kynrede, yet the name of kynſeman remayneth: take it from frendſhyp, and the name of frendſhip is vtterly peryſhed.
               ¶ But ſens this liberte of ſpeche is nowe Howe to diſcernea frēd from a flatterer. vſurped by flaterers, where they perceiue, that aſſentation and praiſes be abhorred: I am therfore not well aſſured, howe a man nowe a dayes ſhal knowe or dyſcerne ſuche admonicion from flatery, but by one onely meanes, that is to ſaye, to remembre, that frēdſhip maye not be but betwene good mē. Than conſider, if he that doth admonyſſhe the, be hym ſelfe voluptuous, ambicious, couetous, arrogant, or diſſolute, refuſe not his admonicion, but by the example of the emperour Antonine, thākefully take it: and amende ſuche defaulte, as thou perceyueſte, doth gyue occaſion of obloqui in ſuche maner as the reporter alſo by thyne exaumple maye be corrected. But for that admonicion onely, accompt hym not immediatly, to be thy frend, vntyl thou haue of hym a lōge and ſure experience. For vndoubtedly it is wonderful difficile, to fynde a man very ambitious or couetous, to be aſſured in frendſhyp. For where fyndeſt thou hym (ſaythe Tulli) that wyl not prefer honoures, great offices, rule, autoritie, and rycheſſe before frendſhyp? Therfore (ſayth he) it is very

harde to fynde frendſhyp in them, that be occupied in acquiring honour, or about the affayres of the publyke weale. Which ſayinge is proued trewe by dayly experience. For dyſdayne and contempt be companiōs with ambition, lyke as enuye and hatered be alſo her folowers.
            
            
               The diuiſion of Ingratitude, and the dyſprayſe therof. Ca. XIII.
               THe moſt damnable vice, and moſte agaynſt iuſtice, in myn opinion, is INGRATITVDE, commenly called vnkindneſſe. All be it, it is in diuers formes, and of ſondry importaunce, as it is diſcrybed by Seneca in this fourme.
               ¶ He is vnkynde, whiche denyeth to haue receyued any benefite, that in dede he hath receyued, He is vnkynde, that diſſimuleth, he is vnkynde, that recompenſeth not: But he is moſte vnkynde, that forgetteth. For the other, though they render not agayne kindneſſe, yet they owe it, and there remaineth ſome ſteppes or tokēs of deſertes, incloſed in an yuel conſcience, and at the laſte by ſome occaſion maye hap to retourne to yelde agayne thankes, whan eyther ſhame therto prouoketh them, or ſodeyne deſyre of thynge, that is honeſt, whiche is wonte

to be for that tyme in ſtomackes, thoughe they be corrupted, if a lyghte occaſyon do moue them. But he that forgetteth kindeneſſe, maye neuer be kynde, ſens al the benefite is quite fallen from hym: And where lacketh remembraunce, there is no hope of any recompence.
               ¶ In this vice, men be moche warſe than Kyndenes in beſtis. beaſtes. For dyuers of them wyl remembre a benefytte, longe after they receyued it. The courſer, fierſe and couragious, wyll gladely ſuf
                     •
                  re his keper, that dreſſeth and fedeth hym, to vaunte hym eaſely, and ſtereth not, but whan he lyſtethe to prouoke hym: where if any other ſhulde ryde hym, thoughe he were a kynge, he wyl ſtere and plonge, and endeuour hym ſelfe to throwe hym. Suche kyndeneſſe hath ben founden Kidnes in dogges. in dogges, that they haue not only dyed in defendynge theyr mayſters, but alſo ſome, after theyr maiſters haue died or ben ſlaine, haue abſteyned from meate, and for famine haue dyed by theyr mayſters.
               ¶ Plini remembreth of a dogge, whiche in Epiro (a contrey in Grece) ſo aſſaulted the murdrer of his mayſter in a great aſſembly of people, that with barkynge and bytynge he compelled hym at the laſte, to confeſſe his offence.
               
                  
¶ The dogge alſo of one Iayſon, his maiſter beinge ſlayne, wolde neuer eate meate, but dyed for hunger.
               ¶ Many ſēblable tokens of kindneſſe Plini reherſeth, but principally one of his own tyme, worthy to be here remembred.
               ¶ Whan execution ſhoulde be done on one Titus Habinius and his ſeruantes, one of them had a dogge, whiche moughte neuer be dryuen from the pryſon, nor neuer wold departe from his mayſters body: and whā it was taken from the place of executiō, the dogge houled mooſte lamentably, beynge compaſed with a great nombre of people, of whom whan one of them had caſt meate to the dogge, he brought and laide it to the mouthe of his maiſter. And whā the corps was throwen in to the ryuer of Tiber, the dogge ſwamme after it, and as longe as he moughte, inforced hym ſelfe to beare and ſuſteyne it, the people ſcateryng abrode to beholde the faythfulneſſe of the beaſte.
               ¶ Alſo the Lyon, whiche of all other beaſtes is accounted mooſte fierce and cruell, hath ben founden to haue in remembraunce a benefite ſhewed vnto hym.
               ¶ Aul. Bellius remembreth out of the hyſtory of Appion, howe allon, out of whoſe fote a yonge man had ones taken a ſtubbe, and clenſed the wounde, wherby he waxed hole, after knewe the ſame man, being caſt

to him to be deuoured, and wolde not hurt hym, but lyckynge the legges and handes of the man, whiche laye dyſmayde, lokinge for deathe, toke acquaintaunce of him, and euer after folowed hym, beynge ladde in a ſmall lyam, whereat wondred all they that behelde it. Whiche hyſtorie is wonderfull pleaſaunte, but for the lengthe therof I am conſtrayned to abrege it.
               ¶ Howe moche be they repugnaunte, and (as I moughte ſaye ennemies) bothe to nature and reaſon, whiche beynge aduaunced by any good fortune, wyll contemne or neglecte ſuche one, whom they haue longe knowē, to be to them Beneuolent, and ioyned to them in a ſincere and aſſured frendſhyppe, approued by infallible tokens, ratifyed alſo with ſondry kyndes of benefycence? I require not ſuche excellant frendſhyppe, as was betwene Pitheas and Damon, betwene Horeſtes and Pilades, or be twene Gyſyppus and Titus, of whome I haue before wrytten (for I fyrmely beleue, they ſhall neuer happen in payres or couples) nor I ſeke not for ſuche as will alway prefer the honour or profyte of theyr frēde before theyr owne, ne (which is the leaſte parte of frendſhyppe) for ſuch one as deſirouſly wyll participate with his frende all his good fortune or ſubſtaunce. But where

at this daye maye be founden ſuche frendſhyppe betwene two, but that if fortune be Frēdſhip of tyme. more Beneuolente to the one, than to the other, the frendeſhyppe waxeth tedyous, and he that is aduaunced, deſyrethe to be matched with one hauynge ſemblable fortune? And if any damage hapeneth to his olde frende, he pytyeth hym, but he ſoroweth not, and thoughe he ſeeme to be ſorowfull, yet he helpeth not: and thoughe he wolde be ſene to helpe hym, yet trauaileth he nat: And though he wolde be ſene to trauayle, yet he ſuffreth not. For (let vs laye a parte aſſyſtence with moneye, whyche is a very ſmall portion of frendeſhyp) who wyll ſo moche eſteme frendſhyp, that therefore wyll entre in to the dyſpleaſure, not of his prynce, but of them, whome he ſuppoſeth may mynyſſhe his eſtimation towardes his prince, ye and that moche leſſe is, wyll diſpleaſe his newe acquayntaunce, equall with hym in auctorite or fortune, for the defence, helpe, or aduauncement of his auncient and well approued frende? O the moſte miſcrable aſtate at this preſent tyme of mankynde, that for the thynge, whiche is mooſte propre vnto them, the exaumple muſte be founden amonge the ſauage and ſyerce beaſtes.
            
            
               
               The election of frendes, and the diuerſite of flaterers. Cap. XIIII.
               
               A Noble man aboue all thynge oughte to be very circumſpecte, in the electiō of ſuche men, as ſhulde continually attende vpon his perſone, at tymes vacante from buſye affayres, whom he maye vſe as his familiars, and ſaufely commytte to thē his ſecretes. For as Plutarche ſaith, what ſo euer he be that loueth, doteth, and is blynde in that thynge, whiche he dothe Plutarchꝰ de cognoſcēdo amico ab adulatore. loue: excepte by lernyng he can accuſtome hym ſelfe to enſue and ſette more pryce by thoſe thynges, that be honeſte and vertuous, than by them that he ſeeth in experyence, and be familiarly vſed. And ſuerly as the wormes do brede mooſte gladly in ſofte wode and ſwete, ſo the mooſte gentyll and noble wyttes, inclined to honour, repleniſhed with moſt honeſt and curtaiſe maners, do ſoneſt admytte flaterars, and be by them abuſed. And it is no meruayle. For lyke as the wylde corne, beinge in ſhape and greatneſſe lyke to the good, if they be mengled, with great difficultie wyll be tryed out, but either in a narowe holed ſeeue they wyl ſtil abide with the good corne, orelles, where the holes be large, they wyll iſſue out with the other: ſoo flattery from frendſhyppe is

hardely ſeuered, for as moche as in euery motion and affect of the minde, they be mutually mengled together. Of this peruerſe and curſed people be ſondry kindes, Some apparantly do flatter, prayſynge and extollynge euery thing that is done by theyr ſuperior, and bearynge him on hande, that in hym it is of euery man commended, which of trouthe is of al men abhorred and hated, to the affyrmaunce wherof they adde to othes, adiurations, and horrible curſes, offryng them ſelfes to eternal peynes, except theyr reporte be true. And if they perceiue any parte of theyr tale miſtruſted, thā they ſette forthe ſodeynely an heuy and ſorowfull countenaunce, as if they were abiected and brought into extreme deſperation. Other there be, which in a more honeſt terme maye be called Aſſentatours or folowers, whiche do awayte diligently, what is the fourme of the ſpeche and geſture of theyr mayſter, and alſo other his maners and facion of garmentes: and to the imytatiō and reſemblaunce therof they applie theyr ſtudy, that for the ſimylitude of maners they maye the rather be accepted in to the more famyliar acquaintaunce. Lyke to the ſeruauntes of Dionyſe, kynge of Sicile, whiche al thoughe they were inclined to al vnhappynes and myſchiefe, yet after the com

mynge of Plato, perceyuynge, that for his doctrine and wyſedome the kinge had him in highe eſtimation, they than counterfayted the countenāce and habite of the Philoſopher, therby encreaſynge the kynges fauour towardes them, who than was holy gyuen to ſtudy of Philoſophye. But after that Dionyſe, by theyr incitation hadde expelled Plato out of Sicile, they abandoned theyr habite and ſeueritie, and eſtſones retourned to theyr miſcheuous and voluptuous lyuinge.
               ¶ The greate Alexaunder bare his hedde ſome parte on the one ſyde, more than the other, whiche diuers of his ſeruantes dyd counterfayte.
               ¶ Semblably dyd the ſcholers of Plato, the moſt noble Philoſopher, whiche for as moche as theyr mayſter had a brode breſte, and hygh ſhulders, and for that cauſe was named Plato, whiche ſygnifyeth brode or large, they ſtuffed theyr garmentes, and made on theyr ſhulders greate bolſters, to ſeme to be of like fourme as he was. wherby he ſhulde conceyue ſome fauour towardes them, for the demōſtration of loue that they pretēded in the oſtentation of his perſon. Which kinde of flatery I ſuppoſe Plato coulde right well laugh at.
               ¶ But theſe maner of flaterars may be well

founde out and perceyued by a good witte, whiche ſometyme by hym ſelfe dyligentely conſidereth his owne qualities and natural appetite. For the company or communication of a perſon familiar, whiche is alwaye pleaſaunte and without ſharpnes, inclinyng to inordinate fauour and affection, is alway to be ſuſpected.
               ¶ Alſo there is in that frende ſmall cōmoditie, whiche foloweth a man lyke his ſhadowe, meuynge only whan he meueth, and abiding where he liſt to tary. Theſe be the mortall enemyes of noble wyttes, and ſpecially in youthe, whanne communely they be more inclined to glory than grauite. Wherfore that Liberalitie, which is on ſuche flaterers imployed, is not onely periſhed, but alſo ſpilled & deuoured. Wherfore in myne opinion, it were a right neceſſary lawe, that ſhulde be made to put ſuche perſons openly to tortures, to the fearefull exaumple of other, ſens in all pryncys lawes (as Plutarche ſayth) not onely he that hath ſlayne the kinges ſonne and heyre, but alſo he that counterfayteth his ſeale, or adulteratethe his coyne, with more baſe mettall, ſhall be iudged to dye as a traytour. In reaſon how Flateri ꝑnicions to gentyl nature. moche more peine (if there were any gretter peyne thanne deathe) were he worthy to ſuffre, that with falſe adulation, dothe

corrupte and adulterate the gentil and vertuous nature of a noble man, whiche is not only his image, but the very man hym ſelfe? For without vertue man is but in the numbre of beaſtes. And alſo by peruerſe inſtruction and flatery, ſuche one ſleeth both the ſoule and good renome of his maiſter. By whoſe example and negligence peryſſheth alſo an infinite numbre of perſones, whiche domage to a realme neyther with treaſure ne with power can be redoubed.
               ¶ But harde it is, alway to exchewe theſe flaterers, whiche lyke to crowes, do pyke out mennes eyes er they be ded. And it is to noble men moſte difficile, whom all men couayte to pleaſe, and to dyſpleaſe them it is accounted no wyſedome, perchance leſt there ſhulde enſue therby more peryl than profytte.
               ¶ Alſo Carneades, the Philoſopher, was Plutarchꝰ de libe. educandi. A notable exaumple. wonte to ſaye, that the ſonnes of noble men men lerned nothynge well but only to ride. For whiles they lerned letters, theyr mayſters flattered them, prayſyng euery word that they ſpake. In wraſtlynge theyr teachers and companions alſo flattered them, ſubmyttyng them ſelfes, and falling downe to theyr fete: But the horſe or courſer, not vnderſtandynge who rydeth hym, ne whether he be a gentyll man or yoman, a ryche

man or a poore, if he ſyt not ſurely, and can ſkyl of ridynge, the horſe caſteth him quickely. This is the ſayinge of Carneades.
               ¶ There be other of this ſort, which more Subtyll flatterers. Ex Plutarcho de cogn. amico ab adu latore. couertly laye theyr ſnares to take the hartes of princis and noble menne. And as he, whiche entendeth to take the fierſe & mighty lyon, pytcheth his haye or nette in the woode amonge greatte trees and thornes, where as is the mooſte haunte of the lyon, that beinge blynded with the thyckenes of the couerte, maye er he be ware, ſodeynely tumble into the nette: where the hunter ſeelynge bothe his eyen, and byndinge his legges ſtrongly to gether, fynally daunteth his fierceneſſe, and maketh hym obediente to his enſygnes and tokens. Semblablye there be ſome, that by dyſſimulation can oſtente or ſhewe a hyghe grauitie, mixt with a ſturdy enterteinment and facion, exilinge them ſelfes from all pleaſure and recreation, frownyng and gruching at euery thing, wherin is any myrth or ſolace, all though it be honeſt, tauntynge and rebukyug immoderately them, with whome they be not cō
                  tented, Namyng them ſelfes therfore plain men, althoughe they do the ſemblable, and often tymes warſe in theyr owne howſes. And by a ſimplicitie and rudeneſſe of ſpeakynge, with longe delyberation vſed in the

ſame, pretende the hygh knowlege of coū
                  ſayle to be in them onely: and in this wyſe pytchynge theyr net of adulation, they intrap the noble and vertuous harte, whiche onely beholdeth theyr fained ſeueritie and counterfayte wyſedome, and the rather by cauſe this maner of flatery is moſte vnlyke to that, whiche is communely vſed.
               ¶ Ariſtotell in his politykes, exorteth gouernours, Many frē
                     des neceſſary for a gouernor. to haue theyr frendes for a great numbre of eyen, eares, handes, and legges, conſiderynge that no one man maye ſee or here all thynge, that many men may ſe and here: ne can be in all places, or do as many thynges well, at one tyme, as many perſōs maye do. And often times a beholder or loker on, eſpieth a defaulte, that the doer forgetteth or ſkyppeth ouer: whiche cauſed the emperour Antonine to ēquire of many, what other men ſpake of hym, correctinge therby his defautes, whiche he perceyued to be iuſtely reproued.
               ¶ This I truſte ſhal ſuffiſe, for the expreſſynge of that incomparable treaſure, called amytie: in the declaration wherof I haue aboden the longer, to the intente to perſwade the reders, to enſerche therfore vigilantly, and beinge ſo happy to fynde it, accordinge to the ſayde deſcription, to embrace and honour it, abhorrynge aboue all

thynges ingratytude, whiche peſtylence hath longe tyme raygned amonge vs, augmented by detraction, a corrupte and lothly ſyckeneſſe, wherof I wyll trayte in the laſte parte of this warke, that men of good nature eſpienge it, nede not (if they liſt) be therwith deceyued.
            
            Finis libri ſecundi.
         
         
            THE THYRDE BOKE.
            
               Of the noble and moſte excellent vertue, named Iuſtice. Ca. I.
               
                  
                     THE MOSTE EXCELLENTE and incōparable vertue, called IVSTICE, is ſoo neceſſary and expediēt for the gouernour of a publyke weale, that without it, none other vertue maye be commendable, ne wytte or any maner of doctryne profytable. Tulli Offic. i. Frō whēs the name of a kynge fyrſte proceded. ſaithe, At the beginninge, whan the multitude of people were opreſſed by them that abounded in poſſeſſions and ſubſtance, they eſpienge ſome one, whiche excelled in vertue and ſtrengthe, repayred to hym: who miniſtringe equitie, whan he had defended the poore men from iniurie, finally retained

together and gouerned the greatter perſones with the laſſe, in an equal and indifferent ordre. Wherfore they called that man a kynge, which is as moche to ſay, as a ruler. And as Ariſtotell ſayth, Iuſtice is not only a portion or ſpice of vertue, but is entierly the ſame vertue. And therof onelye (ſayth Tulli) men be called good menne, as who ſaythe, without Iuſtice, al other qualites and vertues cānot make a man good.
               ¶ The auncient Ciuilians ſaye, Iuſtyce is a wyll perpetuall and conſtaunt, which gyueth to euery man his ryght. In that it is named conſtant, it importeth fortitude: in diſcernyng what is righte or wronge, prudence is required: And to proporcion the ſentence or iugement, in an equalitie, it belongeth to temperance. Al theſe together conglutinate and effectually executed, maketh a perfecte definicion of iuſtice.
               ¶ Iuſtice, all thoughe it be but one entyer vertue, yet is it deſcribed in two kyndes or ſpyces, the one is named Iuſtyce diſtrybutyue, whiche is in dyſtrybution of honour, money, benefyte, or other thynge ſemblable: the other is called commutatiue or by Iuſtice cō mutatif. Diorthotica. Iuſtice correctif. exchaunge. And of Ariſtotel it is named in Greke DIORTHOTICE, whiche is in englyſhe correctiue. And thatparte of Iuſtyce is conteyned in intremedelynge, and

ſomtyme is voluntary, ſometyme involuntary intermedlynge. Uoluntary is byenge or ſellynge, loue, ſuertie, lettynge, and takynge, and all other thynge, wherin is mutuall conſente at the beginnynge: and therfore it is called voluntary. Intermedlynge involūtary, ſomtime is priuely done, as ſtelynge, auoutry, poyſonyng, falſehede, diſceyte, ſecrete murdre, falſe wytneſſe, and periury. Somtyme it is violente, as batry, open murdre, and manſlaughter, robry, open reproche, and other lyke. Iuſtyce dyſtributiue hath regarde to the perſone, iuſtyce commutatiue hath no regarde to the perſon, but onely conſideringe the inequalite, whereby the one thynge excedeth the other, indeuoureth to brynge them bothe to an equalitie.
               ¶ Nowe wyll I retourne agayne to ſpeke fyrſte of Iuſtice diſtributiue, leauynge Iuſtice cōmutatiue to an other volnme. Which I ſuppoſe ſhall ſuccede this warke, god giuynge me tyme and quyetneſſe of mynde to perfourme it.
            
            
               The firſt parte of Iuſtice diſtributiue ca. ii.
               IT is not to be doubted, but that the firſt and principal part of Iuſtice diſtributiue is, & euer was, to do to god that honour,

whiche is due to his diuine maieſtie. Whihonour (as I before ſaide in the firſt boke, where I wrate of the motion called honor in daunſynge) conſiſteth in loue, feare, and reuerence. For ſens all men graunte, that iuſtyce is to gyue to euerye man his owne, moche more to rendre one good dede for a nother, moſte of all to loue god, of whom we haue all thynge, and withoute hym we were nothynge, and beinge peryſſhed, we were eftſones recouered. Howe ought we (to whome is gyuen the very lyght of true fayth) to embrace this part of iuſtice more, or at the leaſte noo leſſe than the gentyles, whiche wandrynge in the darkenes of ignoraunce, knewe nat god as he is, but deuidynge his maieſtye in to ſondry portions, imagined Idols of diuers fourmes and names, and aſſigned to them particuler autorites, offices, and dignities. Nat withſtandynge, in the honouryng of thoſe goddes, ſuche as they were, they ſuppoſed alwaye to be the chiefe parte of iuſtice.
               ¶ Romulus, the fyrſte kynge of Romaynes, The houour that the gētiles bare to their goddes. Plutarchꝰ in vita romuli. for his fortune and benefytes, whiche he aſcrybed to his goddes, made to theyr honour great and noble Temples, ordeynyng to them images, ſacrifices, and other ceremonyes. And more ouer (whiche is moch to be meruayled at) he alſo prohybyted,

that any thinge ſhuld be red or ſpoken, reprocheable or blaſphemous to god. And therfore he excluded al fables, made of the aduoutryes and other enormityes, that the Dioniſius halicar. li. i. Greekes had fayned their goddes to haue cōmitted, Inducing his peple to ſpeke, and alſo to coniecte nothynge of god, but onely that, which was in nature moſt excellent, whiche after was alſo commanded by Plato in the fyrſte boke of his publike weale.
               ¶ Numa Pompilius, the nexte kinge after Romulus, & elect by the Senate, although he were a ſtraunger borne, and dweliynge with his father in a lyttel towne of the Sabynes, conſyderynge from what aſtate he came to that dignitie, beynge a man of excellent wiſedome and lerninge, thought he could neuer ſufficiently honour his goddes for that benefyte, by whoſe prouydence he ſuppoſed, that he had attayned the gouernaunce of ſoo noble a people and citie. He therfore not onely increaſed within the citie Temples, alters, ceremonies, prieſtes, and ſondry religions, but alſo, with a wonderful wyſedome & policie, which is to long to be nowe reherſed, brought all the people Deuocion cauſe of tranquilitie. of Rome to ſuche a deuocy on, or (as I moughte ſay) a ſuperſticion, that where alway before, durynge the time that Romulꝰ reigned, whiche was, 37. yeres, they euer

were continually ocupied in warres and rauine, by the ſpace of, xliii. yeres (ſo longe reygned Numa) they gaue them ſelfe al, as it were to an obſeruaunce of religion, abandonyng warres, and applyeng in ſuch wiſe theyr ſtudy to the honouring of their goddes, and increaſynge theyr publyke weale, that other people adioynynge, wondringe at them, and for theyr deuocion hauyng the citie in reuerence, as it were a palayce of god, all that ſeaſone neuer attempted any warres agaynſte them, or with any hoſtilitie inuaded theyr countrey. Many mo princis and noble men of the Romaynes coude I reherce, who for victoryes agaynſt their enemyes, rayſed Temples, and made ſolempne and ſumptuouſe playes in honoure of theyr goddes, rendring (as it were) vnto them theyr duetie, and all wayes accuntynge it the fyrſt parte of Iuſtice. And this parte of iuſtice towarde god, in honouring him with conuenient ceremonyes, is not to be contempned. Example we haue amonge vs that be mortall. For if a man being made ryche, and aduaunced by his lorde or mayſter, wyll prouyde to receyue hym, a fayre and pleaſaunt lodgynge, hanged with riche Areſſe or tapeſtrye, and with goodly plate and other thynges neceſſary moſt freſſhely adourned, but after that his maiſter is ones

entred, he wyll neuer enterteyne or countenaunce hym, but as a ſtraunger: ſuppoſe ye, that the beautie and garnyſhyng of the houſe ſhall onely content hym, but that he wyll thynke, that his ſeruaunte broughte hym thither onely for vayne glorye, and as a beholder and wōderer at the riches that he him ſelfe gaue hym, which the other vnthankefully doth attribute to his owne fortune or policie? Moche rather is that ſeruaunte to be commended, whiche hauinge a lyttell rewarde of his mayſter, wyll in a ſmall cotage make hym hartye chere, with moche humble reuerence.
               ¶ Yet wolde I not be noted, that I wolde ſeme ſo moch to extol reuerence by it ſelfe, that churches and other ornamentes dedicate to god, ſhulde be therfore contemned. Churches materiall and ornamentes. For vndoubtedly ſuche thynges be not only commendable, but alſo expedient for the augmentation and continuing of reuerēce. For be it eyther after the opinion of Plato, that all this worlde is the temple of god, or that man is the ſame temple, theſe materiall churches, where vnto repaireth the cō
                  gregation of chryſten people, in the which is the corporal preſēce of the ſonne of god, and very god, ought to be lyke to the ſayde temple, pure, cleane, and well adourned, that is to ſaye, that as the heuyn viſible is

moſt pleaſauntly garniſhed with planettes, and ſterres, reſplendiſhynge in the mooſte pure firmament of aſure colour, the erthe furniſhed with trees, herbes, & floures of diuers colours, facions, and ſauours, beſtis, foules, & fiſſhes of ſondry kindes: Semblably the ſoule of man, of his owne kynde beinge incorruptibill, nete, and clere, the ſences and powars wonderfull and pleaſaunt, the vertues in it conteined noble and riche, the fourme excellent & roial, as that, which was made to the ſimilitude of god. More ouer, the body of man is of all other mortall creatures in proporcion and figure mooſte perfecte and elegante. What peruerſe or frowarde opinion were it to thynke, that god, ſtyll beynge the ſame god that he euer was, wold haue his maieſtie nowe contempned, or be in leſſe eſtimation? but rather more honored for the benefites of his glorious paſſion, whiche maye be wel perceiued, who ſo peruſeth the holy hiſtorie of the Euāgeliſtes, where he ſhal finde in ordre, that he deſired clenneſſe and honour.
               ¶ Firſt in preparation of his cōming, whiche was by the waſſhynge and clenſinge of the body of man by baptiſme in water, the ſoule alſo made clene by penaunce, the election of the moſte pure and clene virgine to be his mother, and ſhe alſo of the lyne of

prtncis moſte noble and vertuous.
               ¶ It pleaſed hym moch, that Mary humbly kneled at his feete, and waſſhed theym with precious balme, and wiped them with her heare.
               ¶ In his glorious transfiguration, his vyſage ſhone lyke the ſonne, and his garmentes were wonderful whyte, and more pure (as the Euangelyſt ſayth) than any warkeman coulde make them.
               ¶ Alſo at his commynge to Ieruſalem, towarde his paſſion, he wolde than be receiued with great routes of people, who laying theyr garmētes on the way as he rode, other caſtynge bowes abrode, went before hym in fourme of a triumphe. All this honour wolde he haue before his reſurrection, whan he was in the fourme of humylitye. Than howe moche honour is due to hym nowe, that all power is giuen to hym, as well in heuyn as in erthe, and being gloryfyed of his father, ſytteth on his ryghte hande, iudgynge all the worlde.
               ¶ In redynge the bible menne ſhall fynde, Ceremonies. that the infinite numbre of the ſturdye harted Iewes, coulde neuer haue ben gouerned by any wyſedome, if they had not ben brydeled with ceremonies.
               ¶ The ſuperſtition of the gentiles, preſerued often tymes as well the Grekes as the

Romaynes from final diſtruction. But we wyll laye all thoſe hiſtories a parte, & come to our owne experience.
               ¶ For what purpoſe was it ordeyned, that chriſten kynges (all thoughe they by inheritaunce ſucceded theyr progenitours kinges) ſhulde in an open and ſtately place be fore al theyr ſubiectes, receiue their crown and other Regalities: but that by reaſon of the honourable circumſtaunces than vſed, ſhulde be impreſſed in the hartes of the beholders perpetuall reuerence: whiche (as I before ſayde) is fountayne of obedience, or elles moughte the kynges be enoynted and receiue their charge in a place ſecrete, with leſſe peyne to them, and alſo theyr minyſters?
               ¶ Lette it be alſo conſydered, that we be men and not aungels: wherfore we knowe nothing but by outward ſignifycation. HONOVR, wherto reuerence perteyneth, is (as I haue ſayde) the rewarde of vertue, whiche honour is the eſtimation of people, whiche eſtimation is not euery where perceyued, but by ſome exterior ſigne, and that is eyther by laudable reporte, or excellēcy in veſture, or other thing ſēblable. But reporte is not ſo cōmune a tokē, as apparaile. For in olde tyme kynges ware crownes of golde, and knightes only ware chaines.
               
                  
¶ Alſo the moſte noble of the Romaynes ware ſondry garlondes, wherby was perceyued theyr merite. O creatures moſt vnkynde, and bar rayne of Iuſtice, that wyll deny that thyng to their god and creatour, whiche of very duetie and right is giuen to hym by good reaſon afore all pryncis, whiche in a degree incomparable be his ſubiectes and vaſſals, by whiche opinion they ſeme to deſpoyle hym of reuerence, which ſhal cauſe all obedience to ceſſe, wherof wil enſue vtter confuſion, if good chriſten princis, meued with zeale, do not ſhortely prouide to extincte vtterly all ſuche opinions.
            
            
               The thre noble counſayles of reaſon, ſocietie, & knowlege. Cap. III.
               
               VErely the knowlege of Iuſtice is not Counſaylours of Iuſtice. ſo difficile or hard to be attayned vnto by man, as it is communely ſuppoſed, if he wolde not wyllyngely abandone the excellencie of his propre nature, and fo liſſhely applicate hym ſelfe to the nature of creatures vnreaſonable, in the ſtede of Reſon embraſynge ſenſualitie, and for Societe and Beneuolence, folowynge wylfulneſſe and malyce, and for knowlege, blynde ignoraunce and forgetfulnes. Undoughtedly reaſon, ſocietie called company, and knowlege

remaynynge, Iuſtice is at hande, and as ſhe were called for, ioyneth her ſelfe to that company, whiche by her felowſhyp is made inſeperable, wherby hapneth (as I mought ſaye) a vertuous and moſte bleſſed conſpiracie. And in theyr ſhorte preceptes and aduertiſementes, man is perſwaded to receiue and honour iuſtice. Reaſon bedyng hym, Do the ſame thynge to an other, that thou woldeſt haue done to the. Societie, without which mans lyfe is vnpleaſant and full of anguyſſhe, ſaythe, Loue thou thy neyghboure, as thou doeſt thy ſelfe. And that ſentence or precepte came from heuin, whan Societie was fyrſt ordeimed of god, and is of ſuch auctoritie, that the only ſōne of god, beynge demaunded of a doctour of lawe, whiche is the great commaundemente in the lawe of god, anſwered, Thou Matt. 22. ſhalt loue thy lorde god with all thy harte, and in all thy ſoule, and in all thy mynde, that is the fyrſte and greatte commaundemēt. The ſecond is lyke to the ſame, Thou ſhalte loue thy neyghbour as thy ſelfe. In theſe two commaundementes do depende al the lawe and prophetes. Beholde howe our ſauiour Chriſte ioyneth Beneuolence with the loue of god, and not only maketh it the ſeconde precepte, but alſo reſembleth it vnto the fyrſte?
               
                  
¶ Knowlege alſo, as a perfeyt inſtructrice knowlege and maſtreſſe, in a more briefe ſentence than yet hath benne ſpoken, declareth, by what meane the ſayd preceptes of reaſon and ſocietie maye be well vnderſtande, and therby Iuſtice finally executed. The wordes be theſe in latyne, NOSCE TE IPSVM, whiche that this ſētēce noſce te ipſū, know thy ſelfe. induceth to the veri knowlege of Iuſtyce. is in englyſhe, knowe thy ſelf. This ſē
                  tence is of olde wrytars ſuppoſed for to be firſte ſpoken by Chilo, or ſome other of the ſeuen ancient Grekes, called in latine SAPIENTES, in englyſſhe ſages or wiſe men. Other do accōmodate it to Apollo, whom the paynimes honoured for god of wyſedome. But to ſaye the trouthe, were it Apollo, that ſpake it, or Chilo, or any other, ſuerly it proceded of god, as an excellente and wonderful ſentence. By this coūſaile, man is induced to vnderſtād the other two preceptes, & alſo therby is accōplyſhed not only the ſeconde parte, but alſo the reſidue of Iuſtice, whiche I before haue reherſed. For a man knowynge hym ſelfe, ſhal knowe that whiche is his owne, and perreineth to hym ſelfe. But what is more his own, than his ſoule? Or what thynge more apterteyneth to him, than his body? His ſoule is vn doughtedly and frely his owne. And none other perſone may by any meane poſſeſſe it or clayine it. His body ſo perteyneth vnto

hym, that none other, without his conſent, maye vendicate therin any propretie. Of what valour or price his ſoule is, the ſymilitude, wherunto it was made, the immortalytie, and lyfe euerlaſtynge, and the powars and qualities therof, abundauntly do declare. And of that ſame matter and ſubſtance that his ſowle is of, be all other ſoules, the equalite in ſoules & corporal ſubſtaunce. that nowe are, and haue ben, and euer ſhall be, without ſyngularytie or preemynence of nature. In ſemblable aſtate is his body, and of no better claye (as I mought frankely ſaye) is a gentyl man made, than a carter, and of lybertie of wyll, as moche is gyuen of god to the poore herdeman, as to the greate and myghty Emperour. Than in knowynge the condycyon of his ſowle and body, he knoweth hym ſelfe, and conſequently in the ſame thynge he knowethe euery other man.
               ¶ If thou be a gouernour, or haſte ouer other ſoueraygntie, knowe thy ſelfe. That knowlege of a gouer nour. is to ſaye, knowe that thou arte verelye a manne, compacte of ſoule and body, and in that all other men be equall vnto the. Alſo that euery man taketh with the, equall benefite of the ſpirite of lyfe, nor thou haſt any more of the dewe of heuyn, or the brightnes of the ſonne, than any other perſonne. Thy dignitie or auctoritie, wherin thou only

differeſt from other, is (as it were) but a weyghty or heuy cloke, freſhely gliteryng in the eien of them that be poreblind, wher vnto the, it is peynefull, if thou weare him in his ryght facion, and as it ſhall beſte become the: And from the it maye be ſhortly taken, of hym that dyd put it on the, if thou vſe it negligently, or that thou weare it not commely, and as it apperteyneth. Therefore whiles thou weareſt it, knowe thy ſelf, knowe that the name of a ſoueraigne or ruler, without actuall gouernaunce, is but a ſhadowe, that gouernance ſtandeth not by wordes onely, but princypally by acte and exaumple, that by example of gouernours men do ryſe or fal in vertue or vice. And as it is ſayde of Ariſtotell, rulers more greuouſly do ſynne, by example than by theyr acte. And the more they haue vnder theyr gouernaunce, the greatter accounte haue they to rendre, That in theyr owne preceptes and ordenaunces they be not foūde negligent. Wherfore there is a noble aduer tiſement of the emperour Alexāder, for his grauitie called Seuerus.
               ¶ On a time, one of his noble mē exhorted Lāpridius hym to do a thyng, contrary to a lawe or edicte, which he him ſelfe had enacted: But he firmely denyed it. The other ſtyl perſiſtynge, ſayde, The emperour is not bounden

to obſerue his owne lawes. Whervnto the ſayde emperour diſpleaſanntely anſwering, ſaid in this maner, God forbede, that euer I ſhulde deuiſe any lawes, wherby my people ſhuld be compelled to do any thing, whiche I my ſelfe can not tollerate.
               ¶ Wherfore ye that haue any gouernance, by this moſte noble princis example knowe the boundes of your auctoritie, knowe alſo your office and duetie, beynge your ſelfes men mortall, amonge men, and inſtructours and leaders of men. And that as obedience is due vnto you, ſo is your ſtudy, your labour, your induſtry with vertuous exaumple, dewe to them that be ſubiecte to your autoritye. Ye ſhal knowe al way your ſelfe, if for affection or motion ye doo ſpeke or do nothyng vnworthy the immortalitie & moſt precious nature of your ſoule, and remembringe that your body is ſubiecte to coruption, as al other be, and life time vncertain. If ye forget not this commune aſtate, and do alſo remembre, that in nothinge but only in vertue ye are better thā an other inferior perſon: According to the ſaying of Ageſilaus, king of Lacedemones, who heryng Ageſilaus the greate kynge of Perſia prayſed, aſked howe moche that greatte kynge was more than he in iuſtice. And Socrates, being demanded, Socrates. if the kyng of Perſia ſemed to him

happy, I can not tell (ſaid he) of what eſtimatiō he is in vertue and lerning. Conſider alſo, that auctoritie being wel and diligētly vſed, is but a token of ſuperioritie, but in very dede it is a burden and loſſe of libertie.
               ¶ And what gouernour in this wyſe knoweth him ſelfe, he ſhal alſo by the ſame rule knowe all other men, and ſhall nedes loue them, for whom he taketh labours, and for ſaketh libertie.
               ¶ In ſemblable maner, the inferior perſon Knowlege of ſubiectꝭ or ſubiecte aught to conſider, that all be it (as I haue ſpoken) he in the ſubſtaunce of ſowle and body, is equall with his ſuperyor. yet for as moche as the powers & qualities of the ſoule and body, with the diſpoſition of reaſon, be not in euery man equall, therfore god ordeyned a diuerſitie or precminence in degrees to be amōg men, for the neceſſary derection and preſeruatiō of thē in conformitie of lyuynge. Wherof nature miniſtreth to vs examples abundauntly, as in bees (wherof I haue before ſpokē in the fyrſte boke) cranes, red dere, wolfes, & diuers other foules & beſtes, which herdeth or flocketh, amonge whom is a gouernour or leader, towarde whom al the other haue a vigilante eye, awaytyng his ſignes or tokens, and accordinge therto reparinge thē ſelfe mooſte dylygently. If we thynke, that

this naturall inſtinction of creatures vnreſonable is neceſſary and alſo commendable, howe farre out of reaſon ſhall we iudge thē to be, that wolde exterminate all ſuperioritie, extincte all gouernance and lawes, and vnder the colour of holy ſcriptuxe, whiche they do violently wraſte to theyr purpoſe, endeuour them ſelfes, to brynge the lyfe of mau into a confuſion ineuitable, and to be in moche warſe aſtate, than the afore named beaſtes. Sens withoute gouernaunce and lawes, the perſones moſte ſtronge in body, ſhuld by violence conſtraigne them that be of leſſe ſtrengthe and weaker, to labour as bondemen or ſlaues for theyr ſuſtynaunce and other neceſſaryes, the ſtronge men beinge without labour or care. Than were al The neceſ ſite that is in gouernaunce. our equalytie daſſhed, and fynally as beaſtes ſauage, one ſhal deſyre to ſlee a nother. I omytte contynuall manſlaughters, rauiſhementes, aduoutryes, and euormyties horrible to reherce, whiche (gouernaunce lackynge) muſte nedes of neceſſitie enſue: excepte theſe euangelicall perſones coude perſwade god, or compelle hym to change men in to aungels, makynge them all of one dyſpoſition, and confirmyng them al in one fourme of charitie. And as concernynge al men in a generaltie, this fentence, Knowe thy ſelfe, whiche of all other is moſte compendious,

being made but of thre wordes, euery word being but one ſillable, induceth men ſufficiently to the knowlege of iuſtice.
            
            
               Of fraude and dyſceyte, whiche be agaynſt Iuſtyce. Cap. IIII.
               TUlli ſaith, that the foundation of perpetuall Ci. offi. 1. The exce lency of Iuſtice praiſe and renome, is Iuſtice, without the whiche nothynge maye be commendable. Whiche ſentence is verified by experience. For be a man neuer ſoo valyaunte, ſo wyſe, ſo lyberal or plentuous, ſo famylyare or courtayſe, if he be ſeene to exercyſe iniuſtice or wronge, it is often remembred: But the other vertues be ſeldome rekened, without an exception, whiche is in this maner. As in prayſyng a man for ſome good qualytie, where he lacketh Iuſtice, men wyll communely ſay, He is an honorable man, a bounteous manne, a wyſe man, a valyaunt man, ſauinge that he is an oppreſſour, an extortioner, or is deceytefull, or of his promyſe vnſure. But if he be iuſt, with the other vertues, than is it ſaid, he is good and worſhypfull, or he is a good man, and an honourable, good and gentyl, or good and hardy. ſo that Iuſtyce onely, beareth the name of good, and lyke a capitayne or leader precedeth all vertues in euery

commendation.
               ¶ But where as the ſayde Tulli ſaith, that iniurie, whiche is contrarye to Iuſtice, is Iniury by two meanes done. done by two meanes, that is to ſay, eyther by violence or by fraude, fraude ſemeth to be proprely of the foxe, violence or force of the lyon, the one and the other be far from the nature of mā, but fraude is worthy moſt to be hated. That maner of iniurie, which is done with fraude and dyſceyte, is at this Fraude & deceyte. preſent tyme ſo communely practyſed, that if it be but a lyttell, it is called polycie, and if it be moche, and with a viſage of grauite. it is than named and accounted wyſedome. And of thoſe wyſe men ſpeketh Tulli, ſayinge, Of all iniuſtice, none is more capitall thā of thoſe perſōs, that whā they diſceiue a man moſt, do it, as they wolde ſeme to be good men. And Plato faith, It is extreme Plato de repub. li. iniuſtice, one to ſeme rightous, whiche in dede is vniuſt, Of thoſe two maner of fraudes wyll I ſeuerally ſpeke. But firſt wyl I declare the moſt miſchiuous importance of this kinde of iniury in a generalte. Lyke as the phiſitions call thoſe diſeaſes moſt pryllous, againſt whom is foūden no preſeruatiue, & ones entred, be ſeldome or neuer recouered: Sēblably thoſe iniuries be moſt to be feared, againſte the whiche can be made no reſiſtence, and beinge taken, with great

difficoultie or neuer they can be redreſſed.
               ¶ Iniurie apparante and with power infor ced, either may be with like power reſiſted, or with wyſedome eſchued, or with entreatie refrained. But where it is by crafty enginne imagined, ſubtylly prepared, couertly dyſſembled, and dyſceitefully practyſed, ſuerly no man may by ſtrength withſtand it, or by wyſedome eſkape it, or by any other maner of meane reſiſte or a voyde it. Wherfore of all iniuryes, that whiche is done by fraude, is mooſte horryble, and deteſtable, not in the opynion of manne onely, but alſo in the ſyghte and iugement of god. For vnto hym nothynge may be acceptable, wher in lacketh veryte, called communely truth, he hym ſelfe beyng all veryte: and al thing conteynynge vntruthe, is to hym contraryons and aduerſe. And the dyuell is called a lyer, and the father of leaſinges. wher fore all thynge, whiche in vyſage or apparaunce pretendeth to be any other thanne verelye it is, maye be named a leaſynge, the execution wherof is fraude, whiche is in effecte but vntrouth, ennemye to truthe, and conſequentely ennemye to god. For fraude is (as experyence teachethe vs) an yuell dyſceyte, craftly imagined and deuyſed, which vnder a colour of truth and ſimplycitie, indomageth hym that nothynge

myſtruſteth. And bycauſe it is euyll, it can by no meanes be lefull. Wherfore it is repugnaunt vnto iuſtice.
               ¶ The Neapolitanes, and Nolanes the frande of an arbitrour. (peple  in Italy) contended to gether for the limites and boundes of theyr landes and fyeldes, And for the dyſcuſſyng of that cōtrouerſye, eyther of them ſent theyr ambaſſadours to the ſenate and peple of Rome (in whom at that tyme was thoughte to be the moſte excellente knowlege and execution of iuſtice) deſirynge of them an indifferent Arbitour, and ſuche as was ſubſtancyally lerned in the lawes Ciuile, to determin the variance, that was betwene the two cities: compromyttynge them ſelfes in the name of all theyr countrey, to abyde and perfourme all ſuche ſentence and awarde, as ſhulde be by hym gyuen. The Senate appointed for that purpoſe one named Quintus Fabius Labeo, whom they accounted to be a man of great wiſedome and lerning. Fabiꝰ, after that he was come to the place, which was in controuerſie, he ſeperatinge the one people from the other, communed with them both a parte, exhortyng the one and the other, that they wolde not doo or deſyre any thynge with a couetyfe mynde, but in treadynge out of theyr boundes, rather go ſhorte therof than ouer. They, doynge

accordynge to his exhortatyon, lefte betwene bothe companies a great quantite of grounde, whiche at this daye we cal batable. That perceyuing Fabius, aſſygned to euery of them the boūdes that they thē ſelfes had appoynted. And all that lande, whiche was lefte in the myddes, he adiuged to the Senate and people of Rome. That maner of dealynge (ſayth Tulli) is to diſceyue, and not to gyue iugemente. And verelye euery good man wyll thynke, that this lacke of iuſtice in Fabius, beinge a noble man and well lerned, was a greatte reproche to his honour.
               ¶ It was a notable rebuke vnto the Iſrahelites, Fraude in confederacies. that whan they beſyeged the Gabaonites (a people of Chanani) they in cō
                  cluſyon receyued theym in to a perpetuall leage. But after the Gabaonites had yelded them, the iewes perceyuing they were reſtrayned by theyr othe to ſlee theym, or cruelly entreate them, made of the Gabaonytes, beynge theyr confederates, theyr ſkullions and drudges, wherwith al mighty god was no thynge contented. For the leage or truce, wherin frendſhip and libertie was intended (which cauſed the Gabaonites to be yolden) was not duely obſerued, whiche was clerely agaynſt Iuſtice.
               ¶ Trewely in euery couenaunte, bargain,

or promyſe aught to be a ſymplicitie, that is to ſaye, one playne vnderſtandyng or meanynge Simplicitie in conenaunt promyſe. betwene the partes: And that ſymplicitie is properly iuſtice. And where any man of a couetous or malicious mynde will digreſſe purpoſely from that ſymplicite, takynge aduauntage of a ſentence or worde, whiche mought be ambiguous or doubtful, or in ſome thyng eyther ſuperfluous or lackyng in the bargaine or promyſe, where he certaynely knoweth the trouth to be other wiſe: this in mine opiniō is dānable fraude, beynge as playne agaynſte Iuſtice, as if it were enforced by violence.
               ¶ Fynally, all dyſceyte and dyſſimulation, in the opinion of them which exactely honour iuſtice, is nerre to dyſprayſe than cō
                  mendation, all though therof moughte enſue ſome thynge good. For in vertue maye be nothynge fucate or counterfayte: But therin is onely the image of veritie, called Symplicitie. Wherfore Tulli, being of the opynyon of Antipater the Phyloſopher, ſaythe, To concele any thynge, whiche thou knoweſt, to the entente that for thine owne profitte thou woldeſt a nother, who ſhall take any damage or benefyte thereby, ſhulde not knowe it, is not the act of a perſon playne or ſymple, or of a man honeſte, iuſte, or good: but rather of a perſon crafty,

vngentyll, ſubtylle, deceytefull, malicious, and wyly.
               ¶ And after he ſaythe, Reaſon requireth, that nothynge be done by treaſon, nothing by dyſſimulation, nothing by diſceyte. whiche he excellently (as he dothe all thynge) afterwarde in a briefe concluſyon proueth, ſayinge, Nature is the fountayne, wherof the lawe ſpringeth, and it is accordynge to nature, no man to do that, wherby he ſhuld take (as it were) a pray of a nother mannes ignoraunce.
               ¶ Of this matter Tulli writeth many propre exaumples and quycke ſolutions. But nowe here I make an ende to wryte any more at this tyme of fraude, whiche by no meanes maye be ioyned to the vertue, named iuſtice.
            
            
               That Iuſtice oughte to be betwene ennemyes. Cap. V.
               
                  SVCHE IS THE excellencye of this vertue Iuſtyce, that the practyſe therof hath not onely opteyned digne commendatyon of ſuche perſonnes, betwene whome hath benne mortall hoſtylytie, but alſo often tymes, hathe extyncte the ſame hoſtylytie. And the fyerce hartes of mutuall ennemyes hath benne thereby rather

ſubdued, thanne by armure or ſtrengthe of people. As it ſhall appere be examples enſuynge.
               ¶ Whan the valyaunte kinge Pyrrus warred moſte aſprely agaynſte the Romaynes, Treaſon hated of enemies. one Timochares, whoſe ſonne was yomā for the mouthe with the kynge, promyſed to Fabricius, than being conſul, to ſle kynge Pyrrus: which thinge beinge to the ſenate reported, by theyr ambaſſade warned the kynge, to be ware of ſuche maner of treaſō, ſayinge, The Romayns maynteyned their warres with armes, and not with poyſon. And yet not withſtandynge, they dyſcouered not the name of Timochares, ſo that they embraced equytie as well in that they ſlewe not theyr enemye by treaſon, as alſo that they betrayed not hym, whiche purpoſed them kyndnes.
               ¶ In ſo moche was Iuſtice of olde tyme eſtemed, that without it none acte was alowed, were it neuer ſo noble or profitable.
               ¶ What tyme Xerxes, kynge of Perſya, Honeſtye preferred before cō
                     moditie. with his army was expulſed out of Grece, all the nauye of Lacedemonia laye at rode in an hauen, called Gytheum, within the do minion of the Athenienſis. Themiſtocles, one of the princis of Athenes, a moche noble capitayne, ſayde vnto the people, that he had aduyſed hym ſelfe of an excellente

counſayle, where vnto if fortune inclyned, nothynge mought more augment the power of the Athenienſis. But it aught not to be diuulgate or publyſhed. He therfore deſyred to haue one appoynted vnto hym, to whom he mought ſecretly diſcouer the enterpriſe. Where vpon there was aſſigned to hym one Ariſtides, who for his vertue was ſurnamed ryghtwiſe. Themiſtocles declared to him, that his purpoſe was to put fire in the nauye of the Lacedemones, whiche laye at Gytheum, to thentent that it beinge brenned, the dominiō and hole power ouer the ſee, ſhulde be only in the Athenienſis. This deuyſe herde and perceyued, Ariſtides commynge before the people, ſayde, The counſayle of Themiſtocles was very profitable, but the enterpriſe was diſhoneſt and agaynſte iuſtice. The people herynge that the act was not honeſt or iuſte, cryed with one voyce, Nor yet expediente. And furthwith they cōmanded Themyſtocles, to ceſſe his enterpryſe. Wherby this noble people declared, that in euery acte, ſpeciall regarde, and aboue all thyng, conſideratiō ought to be had of Iuſtice & Honeſtitie.
            
            
               Of faythe or fidelitie, called in latine Fides, whiche is the foundation of Iuſtice. Capi. VI.
               
                  
THat which in latine is called FIDES, is a parte of iuſtice, and may diuerſely be interpreted: and yet finally tendeth to one purpoſe in effecte. Some tyme it may be called fayth, ſome time credence, other wyles truſt. Alſo in a frenche terme it is named loyaltie. And to the imitation of latine, it is often called Fydelytie. All whiche wordes, if they be intierly, and (as I moughte ſaye) exactelye vnderſtanden, ſhall appere to a ſtudious reder, to ſignyfye one vertue or qualitie, all thoughe they ſeme to haue ſome diuerſitie. As belcuinge the preceptes and promiſe of god, it is called faythe. In contractes betwene manne and man, it is communely called credence. Betwene perſones of equall aſtate or condytion, it is named truſte. Fro the ſubiecte or ſeruaunte to his ſoueraygne or mayſter, it is proprely named fidelite, & in a frēche terme loyaltie.
               ¶ Wherfore to hym, that ſhal eyther ſpeke or write, the place is diligently to be obſerued, where the propre ſignyfication of the worde may be beſt expreſſed. Conſidering (as Plato ſaythe) that the name of euerye thynge is none other, but the vertue or effecte Plato in Cratylo. of the ſame thinge, conceyued fyrſt in the mynd, and than by the voyce expreſſed, and finally in letters ſignified.
               
                  
¶ But nowe to ſpeke, in what eſtymation Fayth neglected. this vertue was of olde tyme amonge gentiles, whiche nowe (alas to the lamentable reproche, and perpetual infamy of this preſent time) is ſo neglected throughout chriſtendome, that neyther regarde of religion or honour, ſolempne othes or terrible curſis, can cauſe it to be obſerued. And that I am moch a ſhamed to wryte, but that I muſt nedes nowe remembre it: Neyther ſeales of armes, ſigne manuels, ſubſcryption, nor other ſpecyalties, ye vneth a multitude of wytneſſes be nowe ſufficiente, to the obſeruynge of promyſes. O what publike weale ſhulde we hope to haue there, where lacketh fidelitie? whiche as Tulli ſaith, is the foundation of Iuſtice. What meruayle is it, though there be in al places contention infinite, and that good lawes be tourned into Sophemes & inſolubles, ſens euery where fidelitie is conſtrayned to come in trial and credence (as I mought ſaye) is become a vagabounde?
               ¶ To Ioſue, which ſucceded Moyſes in the gouernance and leadyng of the iewes, almighty god gaue in cōmaundement to ſle as many as he ſhulde happen to take of the people, called Cananees. There hapned to Of what autoritie fidelitie is. be nyghe to Ieruſalem a countreye, called Gabaon, & in dede the people ther of were

Cananees, who herynge of the precepte gyuen to Ioſue, as menne (as it ſemed) of Cananees preſerued by Ioſue. great wyſedome, ſeute an ambaſſade to Ioſue, whiche approched theyr countrey, ſaiinge, They were ferre dyſtaunte from the Cananees, and deſired to be in perpetuall leage with hym and his people. And to diſſemble the length of theyr iournay, as their countrey had ben ferre thens, they had on them old worne garmētes, and torne ſhone. Ioſue ſuppoſinge all to be trewe that they ſpake, concluded peace with them, and cō
                  firmed the leage, and with a ſolempne othe ratified both the one and the other. Afterwarde it was dyſcouered, that they were Cananees, which if Ioſue had knowen before the leage made, he had not ſpared any of them. But whē he reuolued in his mind, the ſolempne othe that he had made, and the honour, which conſiſted in his promiſe: he preſumed, that faythe beinge obſerued vnperyſſhed, ſhulde pleaſe all myghty god aboue al thynges, which was than proued. For it appereth not, that god euer dyd ſoo moch as in any wyſe imbrayed him for brekynge of his commaundement.
               ¶ By this exaumple appereth, in what eſtimatiō and reuerence, leages and truces, made by princis, ought to be hadde, to the breache wherof none excuſe is ſufficyente.

But lette vs leaue princis affayres to theyr coūſaylours. And I wil nowe wryte of the partes of Fidelitie, which be more frequēt and accuſtomed to be ſpoken of. And fyrſt Truſt and fidelitie. of Loyaltie and truſt, & laſte of Credence, whiche principally reſteth in promyſe.
               ¶ In the moſt renoumed warres, btewene The loialty of Saguntines. the Romaynes and Anniball, duke of Carthaginenſis, a noble citie of Spayne, called Saguntum, whiche was in amytie and leage with the Romaynes, was by the ſaid Titus Liuius. Ualerius max. Anniball ſtrongely beſieged, in ſo moch as they were reſtrayned from vytayle and all other ſuſtenaunce. Of the which neceſſite, by theyr pryuie meſſages they aſſertayned the Romaynes. But they beynge buſyed, aboute the preparatyons for the defence of Italy, and alſo of the citie, agaynſte the intollerable power of Anniball, hauinge alſo late, two of theyr moſte valiaunte capitaynes, Publius Scipio, and Lucius Scipio, with a great hooſte of Romayns, ſlayne by Anniball in Spayne, deferred to ſende any ſpedy ſocours to the Saguntines. But not with ſtanding that Anniball deſired to haue with them amitie, offring them peace, with theyr citie and goodes at lybertie: Conſideryng that they were brought into extreme neceſſite, lackynge vitayle, and diſpayaing to haue ſocours from the Romaynes, All

the inhabitauntes, confortynge and exhortyng eche other to dye, rather than to violate the leage and amitie that they of longe tyme had continued with the Romayns, by one hole aſſent, after they had made ſondry greate piles of wodde and other matter to brenne, they laide in it al theyr goodes and ſubſtaunce, And laſt of al, conueyeng them ſelfes into the ſayd piles or bonefires, with theyr wyues and chyldren, ſette al on fyre, and there were brenned, er Annibal coude entre the citie.
               ¶ Semblable loyaltie was in the inhabytantes of Petilia the ſame time, who being lyke wyſe beſieged by Anniball, ſent for ſocoures to Rome: But for the great loſſe, that a lytel erſte the Romaynes had ſuſteined at the batayle of Cannas, they could in no wiſe delyuer them. Wherfore they dyſcharged them of theyr promyſe, and licenſed them to do that thinge, whiche mought be moſte for theyr ſaufegarde. By whiche anſwere they ſemed to be diſcharged, & lefully moughte haue entred in to the fauour of Anniball: yet not withſtanding, this noble people, preſeruinge loyalte before lyfe, puttynge out of theyr citie theyr women, & al that were of yeres vnable for the warres that they mought more frākely ſuſteine famyne, obſtynately defended theyr walles,

that in the defence they all peryſſhed. So that whan Annibal was entred, he founde, that he toke not the citie, but rather the ſepulchre of the loyall citie Petilia.
               ¶ O noble fidelitie, whiche is ſo moch the more to be wondred at, that it was not only in one or a fewe perſons, but in thuoſandes of men: and they not beinge of the blode or aliaunce of the Romaynes, but ſtraungers, dwellyng in ferre contreys from them, beinge onely of gentyll nature and vertuous courage, inclined to loue honour, and to be conſtant in theyr aſſuraunce.
               ¶ Nowe wyll I wryte from hensforthe of particuler perſones, whiche haue ſhewed examples of loialte, which I pray god may ſo cleue to the myndes of the reders, that they may be alwaie redy to put the ſemblable in experience.
               ¶ Howe moche ought all they, in whom is The commendatiō of loialtie. any portion of gentyll courage, endeuoure them ſelfes, to be alwayes truſty and loyall to theyr ſoueraygne, who putteth them in truſte, or hath ben to them beneficial, as well reaſon exhorteth, as alſo ſondrye examples of noble perſonages, whiche as cō
                  pendiouſly as I can, I wyl nowe brynge to the reders remembraunce.
               ¶ What tyme Saul, for his greuous offences Faythfulnes in ſubiectes. was abandoned of all myghtye god,

(whom of a very poore mannes ſonne, god ausunced to the kyngedome of Iſrael) and that Dauid beyng his ſeruant, and as poore a mannes ſonne as he, was elected by god to reigne in Iſrael, and enointed kynge by the prophet Samuell, Saul being therfore in a rage, hauing indjgnation at Dauid pur ſued hym with a great hooſt, to haue ſlayne him: who (as long as he mought) fled, and forbare Saul as his ſoueraigne lord. On a tyme, Dauid was ſo incloſed by the armye of Saul, that he mought by no wais eſcape, but was fayne to hyde hym and his men, in a great caue, whiche was wyde and depe in the erthe. Durynge the tyme that he was in the caue, Saul, not knowinge therof, entred in to the caue, to do his naturall eaſement: whiche the people of Dauid perceyuinge, exhorted hym, to ſlee Saul, hauinge ſuch oportunitie, ſaying, God had brought his ennemy into his handes, and that Saul being ſlayne, the warre were all at an ende, conſiderynge that the people lo ued better Dauid thanne Saul. But Dauid, refuſynge theyr counſayle, ſayde, He wolde not laye violent handes on his ſoueraygne lord, beinge a kynge enoynted of god: but ſoftely approched to Saul, and cutte of a peace of the nether parte of his mantell. And after that Saul was departed out of the caue

toward his campe, Dauid called after him, ſaying, Whom purſueſt thou noble prynce? with other wordes reherſed in the bible, in the fyrſte boke of kinges: and than ſhewed to hym the parte of his mantell. Whereat Saul being abaſhed, recogniſed his vnkindneſſe, callynge Dauid his dere ſonne and truſty frende, recommendynge to hym his chyldren and progenye, ſens by the wyl of god he was elected to ſuccede hym in the kyngedome of Iſrael. And ſoo departed Saul from Dauid.
               ¶ Yet not withſtandynge, afterwarde he purſued hym in Gaddy. And in a nyghte, whan Saul and his armye were at reſt, and that Dauid by an eſpiall, knewe they were all faſte on ſlepe, toke with hym a certayne of the moſte aſſured and valiaunte perſonages of his hoſte, and in moſte ſecrete wyſe came to the pauilion of kynge Saul, where he founde hym ſlepynge, hauynge by hym his ſpeare and a cup with water. Wherfore one of the company of Dauid ſayde, that he with the ſpeare of Saul, wolde ſtryke hym throughe, and ſlee him. Nay ſayde Dauid, our lord forbede, that I ſuffre my ſoueraign lorde to be ſlayne. For he is enoynted of god. And therwith he toke the ſpere, with the cup of water. And whan he was a good dyſtaunce from the hoſte of Saul, he cryed

with a loude voyce to Abuer, whiche was thanne marſhall of the armye of Saul, who aunſwered and ſayde, what arte thou that thus dyſeaſeſt the kynge, whiche is nowe at his reſte? To whom Dauid ſayd, Abner, thou and thy company are worthy deathe, that haue ſoo neglygentely watched your prynce. Where is his ſpeare, and the cup of water, that ſtode at his beddes hede? Suerlye ye be but dede men, whanne he ſhall knowe it. And there with he ſhewed the ſpeare and cuppe with water. Whiche Saul perceyuynge, and hearynge the voyce of Dauid, cried vnto hym, ſayinge, Is not this the voyce of my deere ſonne Dauid? I vncurteyſely do purſue hym, and he notwithſtandynge doth to me good for euyll. with other wordes, which to abbreuiate the mater, I paſſe ouer.
               ¶ This noble hiſtorie, and other ſemblable, Miſtories i hāgingis either wroughgt in Areſſe, or conningly paynted, wyll moche better beſeme the houſes of noble men, than the Concubines, and voluptuous pleaſures of the ſame Da, uid, and Salamon his ſonne, which be more frequentely expreſſed in the hangynges of houſes and counterpoyntes, than the vertue and holyneſſe of the one, or the wiſe experimentes of the other. But nowe wyll I paſſe ouer to hyſtoryes, whiche be more

ſtraunge, and therfore I ſuppoſe more pleſaunte to the reder.
               ¶ Xerxes beinge kinge of Perſia, the gret cite of Babylō rebelled againſt him, which louyng ſer uaunte. was of ſuche ſtrength, that the kynge was not of power to ſubdue it: that perceyning a gentilman, one of the counſayle of kynge Xerxes, named Zopirus, a man of notable wyſedome, vnwyttynge to any peſonne, dyd cutte of his owne eares and noſe, and pryuely departed towarde Babylon: And beynge knowen by them of the citie, was demaunded, who hadde ſo dyffigured him. Unto whom he aunſwered, with apparaunt tokens of heuyneſſe, that for as moche as he hadde gyuen to Xerxes Counſayle and aduyſe, to be reconſyled vnto theyr Citie, he beinge meued with ire and dyſpleaſure towarde hym, in mooſte cruell wyſe, cauſed hym to be ſoo ſhamefully mutulate. Addynge there vnto reprochefull wordes agaynſte Xerxes. The Babylonians beholdinge his miſerable aſtate, and the tokens, whiche (as it ſemed to them) approued his wordes to be true, moche pitied him: And as well for the greate wyſedome, that they knewe to be in him, as for the occaſiō, whiche they ſuppoſed ſhulde incenſe hym to be ſhortly auenged, made him theyr chiefe capytayne, and commytted hooly to hym the

gouernance and defence of their citie: whiche hapned in euery thinge accordynge to his expectacion. Where vppon he ſhortely gaue notice to the kynge of all his affayres and exploitures. And finally ſoo endeuoured hym ſelfe, by his wyſedome, that he accorded the kynge and the citie, without any loſſe or damage to eyther of them, wherfore on a tyme the ſayd kynge Xerxes, cuttynge an odly great pomegarnate, and beholdynge it fayre and full of kernels, ſayde in the preſence of all his counſayle, He had leuer haue ſuche one frende, as Zopirus was, thanne as many Babylons, as there were kernels in the pomegarnate. And alſo that he rather wolde, that Zopirus were reſtored agayne to his noſe, and his eares, than to haue a hundred ſuche cities as Babylon was, which by the reporte of wryters was incomparably the greatteſte and fayreſt citie of all the worlde.
               ¶ The Parthiens, in a ciuyle dyſcorde among them ſelfes, draue Arthabanus their kynge out of his realme, and elected amōg theym one Cinnamus, to be theyr kynge. Iazate kynge of Adiabenes, vnto whome Cinnamus Arthabanus was fled, ſente an ambaſſade vnto the Parthiens, exhortyng them to receyue agayne Arthabanus: but they made aunſwere, that ſens the departynge of Arthabanus,

they had by a hole aſſent choſen Cinnamus, vnto whom they had done their fealtie, and were ſworne his ſubiectes, whiche othe they mought not laufully breake. There of herynge Cinnamus, who at that tyme was kyng ouer them, wrate vnto Arthabanus and Iaſate, that they ſhuld come, and that he wold render the realme of Parthia vnto Arthabanus. And whā they were come, Cinnamus met with them, adourned in the robes of a kynge, and as he approched Arthabanus, a lightyng downe of his horſe, ſayde in this wyſe, Syr, whan the peple had expelled you out of your realme, and wold haue tranſlated it vnto a nother, at theyr inſtaunce and deſyre I toke it. But whan I perceyued theyr rancour aſwaged, and that with good wyll they wolde haue you agayne, whiche are theyr naturall ſouerayge lorde, and that nothyng letted, but onely that they wolde nothinge do contrary to my pleaſure, with good wyll, and for no drede or other occaſion, as ye may perceyue, do here rēdre your realme eftſones vnto you, and therwith taking the diademe of from his owne hed, dyd ſet it immediatly vpon the hed of Arthabanus.
               ¶ The fidelitie of Ferdynando (kynge of A faythful Tutor, Aragone) is not to be forgotten, whom his brother Henry, kynge of Caſtill, deceſſing,

made gouernour of his ſonne, beinge an infant. This Fernando with ſuche iuſtice ruled and ordred the realme, that in a parlement, holden at Caſtille, it was trayted by the hole conſent of the nobles and people, that the name or title of the kyngedome of Spaygne ſhulde be gyuen vnto hym. Whiche honour he fayning to receyue thankefully, dyd put vppon hym a large and wyde robe, wherin he ſecretely bare the yonge prince his neuewe, and ſo cam to the place, where for the ſayd purpoſe the nobles and people were aſſembled, demaundynge of euery man his ſentence. Who with one voice gaue vnto him the kyngedome of Spayne. With that he toke out of his robe the lytell baby his neuewe, and ſettynge hym on his ſhulder, ſayde all aloude vnto them, Loye Caſtilians, behold here is your kinge. And than he confirmynge the hartes of the people towarde his neuewe, finally delyuered to hym his realme in peace, & in all thynges abundaunt. This is the fidelite that appertayneth to a noble and gentyll harte.
               ¶ In what hatered and perpetuall reproche oughte they to be, that corrupted with peſtilencial auarice or ambicion, do betraie theyr mayſters, or any other that truſteth them? O what monſtrous perſonnes haue we red and herde of, which for the inordinate

and deuelyſhe appetite to raigne, haue moſte tyrannouſly ſlayne the chyldren, not onely of theyr ſoueraygne lordes, but alſo of theyr owne naturall bretherne, committed vnto theyr gouernance? of whom purpoſely I leaue at this time to write, bicauſe the mooſte curſed remembraunce of them ſhall not conſume the tyme, that the wel diſpoſed reder moughte occupie in examples of vertue.
               ¶ This one thynge I wolde were remembred, Uēgeance for treaſō. that by the iuſt prouidence of god, diſloyalte or treaſon, ſeldome eſcapeth great vengeaunce: Albe it that it be pretēded for a neceſſary purpoſe.
               ¶ Example we haue of Brutus and Caſſyus, two noble Romaynes, and men of excel lent vertues, whiche pretendinge an horarable zeale to the lybertye and commune weale of theyr Cytie, ſlewe Iulius Ceſar, who truſted them moſt of al other, for that he vſurped to haue the parpetuall dominion of the Impire, ſuppoſynge thereby to haue brought the ſenate and peple to theyr priſtinate libertie. But it dydde not ſo ſuccede to theyr purpoſe. But by the dethe of ſo noble a prynce hapned confuſyon and ciuile batayles: And bothe Brutus and Caſſius, after long warres, vainquiſhed by Octa uian, neuewe & heire vnto Ceſar, at the laſt

fallynge in to extreme deſperatyon, ſlewe them ſelfes. A worthye and conuenyente vengeaunce, for the murder of ſo noble and valyaunte a prynce. Many other lyke examples do remayne, as well in wrytyng as in late remembraunce, whiche I paſſe ouer for this tyme.
            
            
               Of promyſe and couenant. cap. VII.
               COncernynge that parte of fydelytie, whiche concernethe the kepynge of promyſe, or couenantes, experience declareth howe lyttel it is nowe had in regarde, to the notable rebuke of al vs, whiche do profeſſe Chriſtes religion. Conſideringe that the Turkes and Sarazens haue vs therfore in contempt and deriſion, they hauinge fidelite of promiſe aboue all thinge in reuerence. But no meruayle that a bare promyſe holdeth not, where an othe vpon the Euangeliſtes, ſolempnely and openlye taken, is but lytel eſtemed. Lord god, how frequente and famyliar a thynge with euery aſtate and degree throughout Chriſtendome, is this reuerent othe on the Goſpelles of Chriſte? Howe it hath ben hytherto kepte, it is ſo well knowen and had in dayely experyence, that I ſhal not nede to make of the neglectynge therof any more declaration.

Only I wyl ſhewe, howe the Gentiles, lackynge true religion, had ſolempne othes in great honour, and howe terrible a thynge it was amonge them, to breke theyr othes or vowes. In ſo moche as they ſuppoſed, that there was no power, victorye, or profyte, whiche mought be equall to the vertue of an othe.
               ¶ Among the Egiptians, they which were Periurye puniſhed. periured, had their heddes ſtryken of, as well for that they violated the honour due vnto god, as alſo that therby faith and truſt amonge people mought be decayed.
               ¶ The Scithes ſware onely by the chayre or throne of theyr kyng, which othe if they brake, they therfore ſuffred deathe.
               ¶ The auncient Romaynes (as Tulli writeth) the fourme of an othe amonge auncyente romaynes. ſware in this maner, He that ſhoulde ſwere, helde in his hande a ſtone, and ſayd in this wyſe, The Citie, with the goddes therof beinge ſaulfe, ſo Iupiter caſt me out of it, if I deceyue wittingly, as I caſt from me this ſtone. And this othe was ſo ſtraytely obſerued, that it is not remēbred, that euer any man brake it.
               ¶ Plutarche writeth, that the fyrſte Temple The gretteſte othe. that Numa Pompilius, the ſecond king of Romaynes, made in the citie of Rome, was the temple of faythe. And alſo he declared, that the greateſt othe, that mought

be, was faythe: whiche nowe a dayes is vneth taken for any othe, but mooſte communely Othes vſyd. is vſed in moekage, or in ſuch thinges as men forſe not, thoughe they be not beleued.
               ¶ In dayely communication the mater ſauoureth not, excepte it be as it were ſeaſoned with horrible othes, As by the holye blode of Chriſte, his woundes, whiche for our redemption he paynefully ſuffred, his gloryous harte, as it were numbles chopped in peaces. Children (which abhorreth me to remembre) do playe with the armes and bones of Chryſte, as they were chery ſtones. The ſoule of god, whiche is incomprehenſible, and not to be named of any creature without a wonderfull reuerence and drede, is not onely the othe of great gentilmen, but alſo ſo vndyſcretely abuſed, that they make it (as I mought ſay) theyr gonnes, wherewith they thunder out thretenynges and terryble menacys, whan they be in theyr fury, though it be at the damnable playe of dyſe. The maſſe, in which houourable ceremony is left vnto vs, the memorial of Chriſtis glorious paſſiō, with his corporall preſence in fourme of breade, the inuocation of the thre dyuine perſonnes in one deitie, with al the hole company of bleſſed ſpyrytes and ſoules electe, is made by

cuſtome ſo ſymple an othe, that it is nowe all moſte neglected and lyttell regarded of the nobilirie, and is only vſed amonge huſbande men and artificers: onelas ſome taylour or barbour, as well in his othes as in the exceſſe of his apparayle, wyll counterfayte and be lyke a gentilman.
               ¶ In iudiciall cauſes, be they of neuer ſoo lyght importaunce, they that be no parties but ſtraungers, I meane wytneſſes and iurates, whiche ſhall procede in the triall, do make no leſſe othe, but openly do renounce the helpe of god and his ſaintes, & the benefite of his paſſion, if they ſay not true, as fer furth as they know. Howe yuel that is obſerued, where the one partie in degree fer excedeth the other, or where hope of rewarde or affection taketh place, no man is ignoraunte, ſens it is euery yere more commune than haruiſt. Alas what hope ſhal we haue of any publike weale, where ſuch a pe ſtilence reigneth? Doth not Salomō ſay, A man moche ſweryng, ſhall be filled with iniquitie, and the plage ſhall not depart from his houſe? O mercyfull god, howe manye men be in this realme, whiche be horryble ſwerers, and commune iurates periured? Than howe moch iniquite is there? & how many plages are to be feared, where as be ſo many houſes of ſwerers? Suerly I am in

more drede of the terryble vengeaunce of god, than in hope of amendemēt of the publyke weale. And ſo in myne opinion ought all other to be, which beleue, that god knoweth all thynge that is done here in erthe: and as he hym ſelfe is al goodnes, ſo loueth he all thynge that is good, whiche is vertue, and hateth the contrary, which is vice. Alſo all thynge that pleaſeth hym, he preſerueth, and that thynge that he hateth, he at the laſte deſtroyeth, but what vertu may be without veryte, called trouthe, the declaration wher of is faythe or fidelitie? For as Tulli ſaythe, Fayth is a conſtaunce and truthe of thynges ſpoken or couenaunted. And in a nother place he ſaythe, Nothyng kepeth ſoo to gether a publyke weale, as doth fayth. Than foloweth it wel, that with our fayth a publyke weale maye not continue. And Ariſtotle ſaith, By the ſame craft or meanes, that a publyke weale is fyrſt cō
                  ſtituted, by the ſame crafte or meanes is it preſerued. Than ſens fayth is the foundation of Iuſtice, whiche is the chiefe conſtitutour and maker of a publyke weale, and by the afore mencioned auctoritie, conſeruatour of the ſame, I maye well conclude, that fayth is bothe the originall, and (as it were) principal conſtitutour and conſeruatour of the publyke weale.
               
                  
¶ It is alſo no lyttell reproche vnto a man, Promyſe. whiche eſtemeth honeſtie, to be lyte in makynge promiſe: or whan he hath promiſed, to breke or neglecte it. Wherfore nothynge ought to be promyſed, whiche ſhulde be in any wyſe contrary to iuſtice.
               ¶ On a tyme, one remembred kynge Ageſilaus Plutarchin apophthegma. of his promyſe. By god, ſayde he, that is truthe, if it ſtande with iuſtice: if not, I than ſpake, but I promyſed not.
               ¶ But nowe at this preſent tyme, we may make the exclamation, that Seneca dothe, ſayinge, O the foule and dyſhoneſt confeſſion Seneca de benefi. iii. of the fraude or miſchiefe of mankinde nowe a dayes, ſeales be more ſette by than ſoules. Alas what reproche is it to chriſten men, and reioyſynge to Turkes and Sarazens, that nothynge is ſo exactely obſerued amonge them, as fayth, conſiſtinge in laufull promyſe and couenaunte: And amonge chriſten mē, it is ſo neglected, that it is more often tymes broken than kepte? And not onely ſealinge (whiche Seneca diſdained, that it ſhulde be more ſet by then ſoules) is vneth ſufficient, but alſo it is nowe come in to ſuche a general contempt, that al the lerned men in the lawes of this realme, which be alſo men of great wyſedome, canne not with all theyr ſtudy, deuiſe ſo ſufficiente an inſtrument, to bynde a man to his promyſe

or couenaunt, But that there ſhall be ſome thynge therin eſpied, to brynge it in argument, if it be denied. And in caſe that bothe the parties be equall in eſtymation or credence, or elles he that denyeth, ſuperyour to the other, and no wytneſſes depoſeth on knowlege of the thynge in demaunde, the promyſe or couenaunte is vtterly fruſtrate, whiche is one of the pryncypall decayes of the publyke weale, as I ſhall traite therof more largely here after. And here at this tyme I leaue to ſpeke any more of the partes of that moſte royall and neceſſary vertue, called Iuſtice.
            
            
               Of the noble vertue fortitude, and of the two extreme vices, Audacite, and Timeroſitie. Ca. VIII.
               
                  IT IS TO be noted, that to hym, that is Gouernāce double. a gouernour of a publyke weale, belongeth a double gouernance, that is to ſay, an interiour or inwarde gouernaunce, and an exterior or outwarde gouernaunce. The fyrſte is of his affectes and paſſyons, whiche doo inhabyte within his ſowle, and be ſubiectes to reaſon. The ſeconde is of his chyldren, his ſeruauntes, and other ſubiectes to his auctoritie. To the one and the other is requyred the vertue morall called

fortitude, which as moche as it is a vertue, is a Mediocritie or meane betwene two extremities, the one in ſurpluſage, the other in lacke. The ſurpluſage is called Audacitie, the lacke Timoroſitie or feare. I name Audacitie that AVDACITIE, whiche is an exceſſife and inordinate truſt, to eſcape al daungers, and cauſeth a man to do ſuche actes, as are not to be ieoperded. TIMOROSITIE is Timoroſytie. as wel whan a man feareth ſuche thynges, as be not to be feared, as alſo whan he feareth thynges to be feared, more thanne nedeth. For ſome thynges are neceſſary and good to be feared, and not to feare them is but rebuke. Infamye and reproche, be of al honeſt men to be dradde. And not to feare thynges that be terrible, agaynſte whiche no power or wytte of manne can reſyſte, is foole hardyneſſe, and worthy no prayſe, as erthe quakes, rages of greatte and ſodaine floddes, whiche doo beare downe before them mountaines and greatte townes. Alſo the horryble furye of ſodayne fyre, deuourynge all thynge that it apprehendeth. Yet a man that is valyaunte, called in latine A valyan man. 
                  Fortis, ſhall not in ſuche terryble aduentures be reſolued into waylinges or deſperation. But where force conſtrayneth him to abide, and neyther power or wyſedome aſſayed, may ſuffice to eſcape, but wyl he or

no, he muſt nedes peryſſhe, there dothe he paciently ſuſteine dethe, which is the ende of al euyls. And lyke as an excellente Phiſition cureth moſt dangerous dyſeaſes and dedely woundes, ſo dothe a man that is valiaunte, auaunce hym ſelfe as inuyncible in thynges that do ſeme moſt terrible, not vnaduiſedly, and as it were in a beſtely rage, but of a gentyl courage, and with premeditation, eyther by victorie, or by dethe winnynge honour and perpetuall memory, the iuſte rewarde of theyr vertue.
               ¶ Of this maner of valiaunce was Horatius Cocles, an auncient Romayne, of whoſe example I haue all redy writen in the firſte booke, where I commended the feate of ſwymmynge.
               ¶ Pirrhus, whom Anniball eſtemed to be King Pirrhus the hardye. the ſeconde of the moſte valyaunt capitaynes, aſſaultyng a ſtronge fortreſſe in Sicile called Erice, fyrſte of all other ſcaled the walles, where he behaued him ſo valiantly, that ſuche as reſiſted ſome he ſlewe, and other by his maieſtie and fierce coūtenaunce he dyd dyſcomfit. And finally before any of his armye, entred the walles, and there alone ſuſteyned the hole bronte of his ennemyes, vntyll his people, whiche were with out, at the laſte myſſynge hym, ſtered partly with ſhame, that they had ſo loſte hym,

partely with his couragious example, toke good harte, and inforced them ſelfes in ſuche wyſe, that they clymed the walles, and came to the ſuccour of Pirrhus, and ſo by his proweſſe wanne the gariſon.
               ¶ What valyant harte was in the Romayn Mutius Sceuola, whiche whan Porcena, kynge of Ethruſcanes, had by great power conſtrayned the Romayns, to kepe theym within their citie, toke on hym the habyte of a begger, and with a ſworde priuely hid vnder his garment, went to the ennemyes Campe, where he beinge taken for a begger, was nothynge myſtruſted: and whan he had eſpied the kynges pauilliō, he drew hym thyther, where he founde dyuers noble men ſyttynge. But for as moche as he certaynly knewe nat, whiche of them was the kynge, at the laſte perceyuynge one to be in more ryche apparayle than any of the other, and ſuppoſinge hym to be Porcena, he or any man eſpied him, ſtepte to the ſaid lorde, and with his ſworde gaue hym ſuche a ſtroke, that he imediatly died. And Sceuola being takē (for he coude nat eſcape ſuche a multitude) boldly confeſſed, that his hande erred, & that his intent was to haue ſlain kinge Porcena. Wherwith the kynge (as reaſon was) all chauffed, cōmaunded a great fyre forthewith to be made, wherein

Sceuola ſhulde haue ben brenned, but he nothynge abaſſhed, ſayde to the kynge, Thynke nat Porcena, that by my deathe onely, thou mayſte eſcape the handes of the Romayns, for there be in the citie thre hundred yonge men, ſuche as I am, that be prepared to ſlee the by oone meanes or other, and to thaccomplyſſhemente therof, be alſo determyned to ſuffre all tourmentes, wherof thou ſhalte haue of me an experyence in thy ſyghte: and incontynently went to the fyre, whiche was made for to brenne hym, and with a gladde countenaunce, dydde putte his hande into the flame, and there helde it withoute chaungynge of any countenance, vntyll his ſayde hande was brenned vnto aſſhes. In lyke wyſe he wolde haue putte his other hande into the fyre, if he had not bene withdrawen by Porcena, who wonderynge at the valyaunt courage of Sceuola, lycenced hym to retourne vnto the citie. But whan he conſydered, that by the wordes of Sceuola, ſo greatte a nombre of yonge men of ſemblable proweſſe, were confederate to his diſtruction, ſo that or all they coude be apprehended, his lyfe ſhulde be alwaye in ieoperdye, he dyſpayrynge of wynnynge the cytie of Rome, rayſed his ſiege, and departed.
            
            
               
               ¶ In what actes fortitude is, and conſiderations therto belongyng. Ca. ix.
               BUt all though I haue nowe reherſed ſondry examples, to the cōmendation of Fortitude, concernyng actes martiall, yet by the way I wold haue it remē
                  bred, that the prayſe is proprely to be referred vnto the vertue, that is to ſaye, to enterpriſe thynges dredfull, eyther for the publike weale, or for winnyng of perpetual honour, orels for eſchewynge reproche or diſhonour. Whervnto be annexed theſe cō
                  ſiderations, what importaunce the enterpriſe is, and wherfore it is done, with the tyme and oportunitie whan it oughte to be done. For (as Tulli ſayth) to entre in batayle, and to fyght vnauyſedly, is a thynge wylde, & a maner of beaſtes: but thou ſhalt fyght valyantly, whan tyme requireth and alſo neceſſitie. And alway deathe is to be preferred before Seruitude, or any diſhoneſtie. And therfore the actes of Annibal, ageynſt the Saguntynes, which neuer did him diſpleaſure, is nat accounted for anye proweſſe. Neither Cataline, which for his ſingular cōmodite, & a fewe other, making deteſtable warres agaynſte his owne coū
                  trey, entendyng to haue brenned the noble citie of Rome, and to haue diſtroyed all the

good men, is nat numbred amonge valyant men, all though he faught manly and with great courage, vntyll he was ſlayne.
               ¶ What auayled the boldneſſe of Uarro & Flamimus, noble capitayns of Romayns, whiche deſpiſynge the proweſſe and crafte of Anniball, & contemning the ſobre coūcel of Fabius, hauyng only truſt in their owne hardyneſſe, loſte two noble armyes, wherby the power of the Romayns was nyghe vtterly peryſhed. Wherfore eftſones I ſay, who maye be called a valyaunt man. that a valyaunt man is he, that dothe tollerate or ſuffre that, which is nedefull, and in ſuche wyſe as is nedefull, and for that whiche is nedefull, and alſo whan it is nedeful. And he that lacketh any of this, may be called hardy, but nat valyant.
               ¶ More ouer, all though they, whyche be hardy, or perſons deſperate, haue a ſimilytude, and ſeme to be valiant, yet be they nat valiant, no more than kinges in may games and enterludes be kinges. For they that be hardy, er they come to the perylle, ſeme to be fierce and egre, and in begynnyng their enterpriſe wonderful haſty, but whan they feele the thing more hard and greuous thā they eſtemed, theyr courage decaieth more and more, and as men abaſhed and vnprepared, their hartes vtterly do fayle, and in concluſyon they appere more faynte, than

they that be cowardes.
               ¶ Alſo in Deſperatiō can nat be fortitude: for that beinge a morall vertue, is euer voluntary. Deſperation is a thyng as it were conſtrayned, ne hath any maner conſyderatyon, where fortitude expendeth euery thynge and acte diligently, and dothe alſo moderate it with reaſon.
               ¶ Here now appereth (as I ſuppoſe) th
                     •
                  t neyther they, whiche employe their force without iuſt cauſe or neceſſite, ne they, whiche without forecaſte, or (as I mought ſay) circumſpection, wyll take in hande an hard enterpriſe: ne they, whiche heedlong wyll fall into daungers, from whens there is no hope to eſcape: nor yet men deſperate, whiche dye wyllyngly without any motion of honor or zeale towarde the publike weale, be in the nombre of valyant perſons, but of a refuſe company, and rather to be rekned with beſtes ſauage, than amonge men, whiche do participate with reſon. For as Curtius Q. curſtus ſaythe, It appertaineth to men, that be valyaunt, rather to diſpiſe deathe, thanne to hate lyfe.
               ¶ A Man is called in latine VIR, whereof ſaythe Tulli, VERTVE is named. And the moſte propre vertue longynge to a man, is FORTITVDE, wherof be two excellente propreties, that is to ſay, the contempte of

dethe, and of griefe. But what very fortitude is, he more playnely declareth afterwarde, in a more larger circūſcription, ſaying, Thinges humain ought to be litell eſte med, deth nat regarded, labours & griefes to be thought tollerable. Whan this is ratified by iugement and a conſtant opinyon, than that is valyant and ſtable fortitude. But there vnto I wolde ſhulde be added, whyche opynyon and iugement procedeth of a reaſon, and nat repugnant to Iuſtice. And than it ſhall accorde with this ſayinge of Ariſtotle, A valyant man ſuſteineth, and Ariſtotle. dothe that, whiche belongeth to fortitude, for cauſe of honeſtie. And a lyttell before he ſaith, A man that is valyant, as well ſuffreth, as dothe that, whiche agreeth with his worſhyp, and as reaſon commaundeth. So no violence or ſturdy mynde, lackynge reaſon and honeſtie, is any parte of fortitude. Unto this noble vertue be attendant, or as it were continuall adherentes, diuers vertues, whiche do enſewe, and be of right great eſtimation.
            
            
               ¶ Of peynefulneſſe, the fyrſt companion of Fortitude. Cap. x.
               IN theym, whiche be eyther gouernours or capytaynes, or in other offyce, where vnto appertayneth greatte cure or diſpatchynge

of ſondry great affayres, peynfulneſſe, namyd in latyne TOLLERANTIA, is wonderful cōmendable. For therby thinges be in ſuche wiſe exployted, that vtilitie procedeth therof, and ſeldom repentance. For as moche as thereof commeth an excellent fruite, called oportunitie, whiche is euer rype, and neuer in other aſtate. For lacke of this vertue, moche wyſedom, and many a valyaunt enterpriſe, haue peryſhed and tourned to none effecte. For if thinges ſharpely inuented, prudently diſcuſſed, and valyauntly enterpryſed, be nat dylygentely folowed, and without ceſſynge applyed and pourſewed, as it were in a momente all thynge is ſubuerted: and the peynes before taken with the tyme therin ſpente, is vtterly fruſtrate.
               ¶ The peinfulnes of Quintus Fabius (be inge dictator or principall capitayne of the Romayns) in leadynge his army by mountaynes, and other harde paſſages, ſo diſapoynted Anniball of the hope of vyctorie, wherin he ſo moche gloried, that at the laſt he trayned and drewe Anniball & his hoſte into a fyelde, incloſed aboute with mountaynes, and deepe ryuers, where Fabius had ſo enuironned hym, by the fortifieng of two mountayns with his people, that they were in ie oper dye, eyther to be famyſhed,

for lacke of vitayle, or elles in fleinge, to be ſlayne by the Romaynes, yf the crafty and polytyke wytte of Anniball hadde not delyuered them. Which for the notable inuention, I wyll borowe ſo moche tyme of the reder, to renewe the remembraunce therof in our Engliſhe tonge.
               ¶ Anniball, perceyuinge the daunger that he and his armye were in, commaunded in The polycye of Annibal to eſcape from the Romaynes. the depe of the nyghte, whan nothyng was ſterynge, to be brought before hym, about two thouſande greate oxen and bulles, whiche a lyttel before his men had taken in foragynge, and cauſed fagottes made of dry ſtickes to be faſtned vnto theyr hornes, and ſette on fyre. The beaſtes, troubled with the flame of fire, rāne as they were woode vp towarde the mountaynes, where as lay the hoſte of the Romaynes. Anniball with his hoole armye folowynge in araye.
               The Romaynes, whych kepte the mountaynes beinge ſoore afrayde of this newe and terryble ſyght, forſoke theyr places. And Fabius dredynge the deceytefull wyt of Annibal, kept the army within the trēch, and ſo Anniball with his hoſt eſcaped with out domage. But Fabius, beinge payneful in purſuinge Anniball from place to place, awaytynge to haue hym at aduauntage, at the laſte dyd ſo fatigate hym and his hoſte,

that therby in concluſion his power myniſhed, and alſo the ſtrength of the Carthaginenſes, of whom he was generall capytayne. In ſo moche as they were at the laſt conſtrayned to countermande hym by ſondry meſſangers, wyllynge him to abandon the warres in Italy, and to retourne to the defence of his owne citie. Which by the opinion of moſte excellent writers ſhuld neuer haue hapned, yf Fabius wold haue left any part of his purpoſe, eyther for the tediouſneſſe of the peyne and trauayle, or ſor the intollerable rebukesg, yuen vnto hym by Minutius, who imbrayded hym with cowardyſe.
               ¶ Amonge the vertues, whiche abounded in Iulius Ceſar, none was accounted more excellente, than that in his counſayles, affaires, and exploitures, he omitted no time, ne forſoke any peine. Wherfore moſt ſoneſt of any man, he achieued & brought to good paſſe, all thynge that he enterpriſed.
               ¶ Suppoſe ye that the ſame Anniballe, of whome we late ſpake, coulde haue wonne frome the Romaynes, all Spayne, and haue perced the mountaynes, called Alpes, makynge a way for his armye, where before was neuer any paſſage, & alſo haue gotten all Italye vnto Rome gates, yf he had not bene a man peynefull and of labour

incomparable?
               ¶ Iulius Ceſar, after he had the intier gouernaunce and dominion of the empyre of Peynefulnes in heringe controuerſies. Rome, neuer omitted labour and diligence as well in commune cauſes as priuate, concernynge the defence and aſſiſtence of innocētes. Alſo he laborouſly and ſtudiouſly diſcuſſed controuerſies, whiche almoſt dayly, he harde in his owne perſon.
               ¶ Traiane, and both Antonines emperors of Rome, and for their vertue worthy to be emperours of all the worlde, as wel in exteriour affaires, as in the affaires of the citie, were euer ſo continually occupied, that vneth they founde any lyttel tyme, to haue any recreation or ſolace.
               ¶ Alexander alſo, for his incōparable grauitie, The paine of a perfite gouernour called Seuerus, being but of the age of .xviii. yeres, whan he fyrſte was made emperour, finding the noble citie of Rome, than mayſtreſſe of the worlde, throughely corrupted with moſte abhomynable vices, by the moſte ſhamefull example and liuyng of that deteſtable monſter, Uarius Heliogabalus next emperour before hym, a gret parte of the ſenate and nobilitie, being reſolued into ſemblable vices, the chiualry diſperſed, martiall prowes abandoned, & well nyghe the maieſtie imperiall diſſolued and brought in contempt, was ſo inflamed with

the zele of the priſtinate honour of the Romayns, that he vtterly laid apart al pleaſures and quietnes, & holly gaue his wyt and body to ſtudy and trauayles intollerable, & choſing out of all partes of the world, men of greatteſt wiſdom & experience, & conſultyng with them, neuer ceaſſed, vntil he had reduced, aſwell the Romayns as all other cities & prouinces, vnto theym ſubiecte, to their olde moderation and temperance.
               ¶ Many other examples could I reherſe to the cōmendation of peinfulnes: but theſe ſhal ſuffiſe at this preſēt tyme, to proue that a gouernour muſt nedes be peinefull in his owne perſon, if he deſire to haue thoſe thin ges proſper, that ar vnder his gouernance.
            
            
               ¶ Of the noble and fayre vertue named Pacience. Cap. XI.
               
                  PACIENCE is a noble vertue, apperteinyng as well to inward gouernāce, as to exterior gouernaunce: and is the vanquyſhour of iniuries, the ſure defence agaynſt al affectes and paſſiōs of the ſoule, retayning always glad ſemblant in aduerſitie and dolour.
               ¶ Saynt Ambroſe ſaith in his boke of offices, Ambroſſiꝰ Off. 
                        •
                     . Better is he, that contemneth iniurie, than he that ſoroweth. For he that contem

neth it, as he nothyng felte, paſſeth nat on it: But he that is ſorowfulle, is therwith tourmented, as though he felte it.
               ¶ Whiche was wel proued by Zeno Eleates, a noble philoſopher, who being a man of excellent wiſdome and eloquence, came to a citie, called Agrigentum, where reigned Phalaris, the mooſte cruell tyrant of al the worlde, who kept and vſed his owne people in moſte myſerable ſeruytude. And fyrſt he thought by his wyſedome and eloquence, to haue ſo perſwaded the tyrant to temperaunce, that he ſhoulde abandon his cruel and auaricious appetite: but cuſtome of vice more preuailed in him than profitable counfayle. Wherfore Zeno, hauyng pitie at the wretched aſtate of the people, excited dyuers noble men, to delyuer the citie of that ſeruyle condytion. This counſayle was nat ſo ſecretely gyuen, but that notice therof came to the tyrant, who cauſyng al the people to be aſſēbled in the market place, cauſed Zeno there to be cruciate with ſondry turmentes, alwais demandyng of hym, who dyd participate with hym of his ſayd counſayle: but for no peynes wold he confeſſe any perſon, but induced the tyraunt to haue in myſtruſt his nexte frendes and familyar ſeruantes. And reprouing the people for their cowardyſe and drede, he

at the laſt ſo inflamed thē vnto libertie, that ſodainly with a great vyolence they fell on the tyrant, and preſſed him with ſtoones. The olde Zeno, in all his exquiſite turmē
                  tes neuer made any lamentable crie, or deſyre to be relyued.
               ¶ But for this fourme of Pacyence, this onely example ſuffyſeth at this tyme, ſens there be ſo frequent examples of martyrs, whiche for true religiō ſuſtayned paciently not onely equalle tourmentes with Zeno, but alſo farre excedynge. But nowe wylle I write of that Pacience, that pertayneth vnto interior gouernaunce, wherby the naturall paſſions of man be ſubdued, and the malyce of fortune ſuſteyned. For they whiche be in autorite, & be occupied about gret affaires, their liues be nat only repleniſhed with labours and greuous diſpleſures, but alſo they be ſubiectes to ſondry chances.
               ¶ The meane to obtayne Pacience, is by Pacience howe hit may be opteyned. two thinges principally, A dyrecte and vpright conſcience, & true and conſtant opinion in the eſtimation of goodnes: which ſeldome commeth onely of nature, excepte it be wonderfull excellent, but by the diligent ſtudy of very philoſophy. (nat that whiche is ſophiſticate, and conſiſteth in ſophiſmes) nature is therto prepared & holpen. This Opinion good or yl opinion is of ſuch power, that ones cleuing

faſt to the mynd, it draweth a mā as it were by violēce to good or euyl. Therfore Tulli ſaith, Like as whā the blod is corrupted, and either fleume or colere, black or redde, Tuſc. g. 3. is ſuperhabūdāt, than in the body be ingē
                  dred ſores & diſeaſes: ſo the vexation of euyll opinions, & their repugnancie, diſpoyleth the mynd of all helth, and troubleth it with griefes. ¶ Contrarywiſe afterwarde Tulli deſcribeth good OPINION, and calleth it the beautie of the ſowle, ſayinge in this wiſe, As of bodily membres, there is an apt figure, with a maner pleſantneſſe of colour, & that is called beautie: ſo in the ſowle, the equalitie and conſtance of opinions, & iuge mentes enſuyng vertue, with a ſtable & ſted faſte purpoſe, or conteynyng the ſelfe ſame effect, that is in vertue, is named Beautie. Whiche ſentences depely inueſtigate, and well perceyued, by them that be about prin cis and gouernours, they maye conſyder, howe ware and circumſpecte they oughte to be in the inducynge them to opinions.
            
            
               ¶ Of pacience in ſuſteynyng wronges and rebukes. Cap. XII.
               
               VNto hym that is valyant of courage, it is a great peyne and diffycultie to ſuſteyne iniurie, and nat to be forthe

with reuenged: and yet oftentymes there is accounted more valiantneſſe, in the ſufferance, than in an haſty reuēgyng. As it was in Antoninus the emperour, called the philoſopher, ageynſt whom rebelled one Caſſius, & vſurped the imperial maieſtic in Syria, & in the caſte partis. Yet at the laſte the ſame Caſſus being ſlayn by the capitaynes of Antonine next adioyning, he ther of vnwittinge, was therwith ſoore greued. And therfore takyng to him the childrē of Caſſius, entreated them honorably, wherby he acquired euer after, the incomparable and moſte aſſured loue of his ſubiectes.
               ¶ As moche diſhonour & hatred his ſonne Cōmodus wanne by his impacience, wherin he ſoo exceded, that for as moche as he founde not his bayne hette to his pleſure, he cauſed the keper therof to be throwē in to the hote brennyng fornais. What thyng mought be more odible, thanne that moſte dyuellyſhe impacience?
               ¶ Iulius Ceſar, whan Catullus the poete wrate agaynſt him contumelious or reprocheable verſis, nat onely forgaue hym, but to make hym his frende, cauſed him oftentymes to ſoupe with hym.
               ¶ The noble emperour Auguſtus, whan it was ſhewed him, that many mē in the cite had of him vnſittynge wordes, thought it a

ſufficient anſwere, that in a fre citie mē muſt haue their tūges nedes at liberte. Nor neuer was with any perſon, that ſpake euyl of hym, in worde or countenance wors diſcon tented. ¶ Some men wylle nat prayſe this maner of paciēce, but account it for foliſhenes: Remedy agaynſt impacience. but if they beholde on the other ſide, what incommoditie cōmeth of impaciēce, howe a man is therwith abſtract fro reſon, & tourned into a monſtruous fygure, and do cōferre all, that with the ſtable countenāce and pleaſant regarde of him that is p aciēt, and with the commoditie that dothe enſue therof, they ſhall affirme, that that ſimplicitie is an excellent wyſedome.
               ¶ More ouer, the beſte way to be aduenged, is ſo to contemne iniurie and rebuke, and lyue with ſuche honeſtie, that the doer ſhall at the laſte be therof aſhamed, or atte the leſte, leſe the fruite of his malyce, that is to ſay, ſhall nat reioyce and haue glorye of thy hyndrance or domage.
            
            
               ¶ Of pacyence in repulſe or hynderance of promotion. Ca. XIII.
               
               TO a man, hauynge a gentyl courage, lykewiſe as nothinge is ſo pleaſaunt, or equally reioyceth hym, as reward or preferremente ſodaynelye gyuen, or aboue

his merite: ſo nothynge maye be to hym more dyſpleaſaunt or payneful, than to be neglected in his payne takynge, and the rewarde and honour, that he loketh fore, and for his merites is worthy to haue, to be gyuen to one of laſſe vertue, and perchance of no vertue or laudable qualitie.
               ¶ Plato in his Epiſtoll to Dion kynge of Scicile ſayth, It is good ryght, that they, whiche be good men, and doo the ſemblable, obteyne honour, whiche they be worthy to haue.
               ¶ Undoughtedly in a prince or noble man, Commodities which do happen by the aduancement of good men. maye be nothynge more excellente, ye nothynge more neceſſary, than to aduaunce men after the eſtimation of theyr goodnes, and that for two ſpeciall commodities, that come therof. Fyrſte that therby they prouoke many men to apprehend vertue. Alſo to them, whiche be good, and all redy aduanced, they gyue ſuche courage, that they endeuour them ſelfes with al theyr power, to encreaſe that opinion of goodnes, wher by they were broughte to that aduauncement, which nedes muſte be to the honour and benefyte of thoſe, by whom they were ſópromoted. Contrarye wyſe, where meu frome theyr infancye haue enſued vertue, worne the floryſſhynge tyme of youthe in paynefull ſtudy, abandonynge al luſtes and

other thynge, whiche at that tyme is pleaſaunte, truſtynge thereby to profytte the publyke weale, and to obteyne honoure: whan eyther theyr vertue and trauayle is lyttell regarded, or the preferment, which they loked for, is gyuen to other not equal in meryte, it not onely perceth theyr harte with moehe anguyſſhe, and oppreſſeth thē with dyſcomforte, but alſo mortyfyeth the courages of many other, whiche be aptely diſpoſed to ſtudy vertue, & hoped therby to haue the propre rewarde therof, whiche is commendation and honour, whiche beynge gyuen to men, lackynge vertue and wyſedome, ſhall be occaſion for them to do yuell, as Democritus ſayth. For who douteth, but that auctoritie in a good man doth publyſhe his vertue, which before lay hid. In an yuell man it miniſtreth boldneſſe and lycence to do yuel, which by drede was before couered.
               ¶ Surely this Repulſe, or (as they vulgarly ſpeake) puttynge backe frome promotion, is no lyttell payne or dyſcomforte, but it maye be withſtande, or at the leaſt remedied with Pacience, whiche maye be in this wyſe induced.
               ¶ Firſt, conſideryng that the worlde was Pacience howe hit may be induced. neuer ſo conſtant, that at all tymes before, good men were iuſtely rewarded, and none

but they onely promoted.
               ¶ Cato, called Uticenſis, at whoſe wyſedome all the world wōdred, and whoſe grauitie, as wel the ſenate and peple of Rome, as other kynges and pryncis, reuerenſed, lokynge to be one of the Conſules, was openly reiected, wherwith his frendes and kynſemen toke no lyttell diſcomforte. But Cato hym ſelfe, ſo lyttell regarded that repulſe, that where allwayes he wente very homely, he the nexte day folowynge, decked and trymmed hym ſelfe more freſhclye than he was wonte: and whan he had ſhewed hym ſelfe ſo to the peple, at after none he walked with one of his frendes in the markette place, bare legged, and in ſengle apparayle, as he was accuſtomed.
               ¶ Scipio called Naſica, who by the hoole ſenate was iuged the beſte man in the citie, and of an auncyente howſe, was lyke wyſe put backe, fro beinge Conſule.
               ¶ Lelius lyke wiſe, which was openly called the wyſe man, was ſemblably refuſed. And dyuers other, of whom hyſtories doo make mēcion, were abiecte, whan they had well deſerued honours, and theyr inferyors in merites promoted.
               ¶ Alſo a mannes confeyence ſhal wel comforte hym, whanne he hath ſoo lyued, that where he is knowen, men do iuge hym worthy

preferment. And than maye he ſaye to them, whiche meruayle, why he is not aduaunced, as Cato ſay de to a perſone, that tolde to hym, that menne wondred, why amonge A Wiſe ſentence of Cato. ſoo many noble mennes images, as were ſet vp in the citie, Catos image was not eſpyed. By god ſayde Cato, I had leuer that men wondred why I haue none image ſette vp, than why men ſhulde ſet vp myne image. So if menne meruayle, why a man is not aduanced, knowyng him a good man, than iuge they hym to be worthy promotion, whiche iugement procedeth of fauour: and than though he lacke promotiō, yet hath he perfecte glory, whiche euerye noble harte deſireth. For Tulli ſayth, The perfecte and moſte pryncipall glorie, conſyſteth in thoſe thre thynges, If the multitude loue vs: if they putte confydence in vs: if alſo, as it were meruaylynge at vs, they thynke vs worthy to haue honour gyuen vnto vs.
               ¶ With this glory and clenneſſe of conſcience, ſhall a wyſe man content hym, and be induced to Pacience, & not be greued with his fortune, but to folowe Democritus, in laughing at the blinde iugementes of men, in beſtowynge promotions.
               ¶ I omytte at this tyme, to write any more of this vertue Pacience, ſens to the inſtytution

of a gouernour, this ſemeth to be ſufficient, to the reſidue he ſhal be better perſwaded by the warkes of Plutarche, Seneca, and Pontane, where they wryte of Pacience, whiche warkes he maye rede at his leaſour.
            
            
               Of Magnanimitie, whiche maye be named valyaunt courage. Cap. XIIII.
               
                  MAGNANIMITIE is a vertue moche commendable, and alſo expedient to be in a gouernour, and is as I haue ſay de, a companion of fortitude, And may be in this wyſe defyned, that it is an excellencie of mynde, concernynge thynges of great importaunce or eſtimation, doinge althynge, that is vertuous, for the achieuing of honour.
               ¶ But nowe I remembre me, this worde Magnanimitie, being yet ſtraunge, as late borowed out of the latine, ſhall not content all men, and ſpecially them, whom nothing contenteth out of theyr accuſtome Mumpſimus: I wyl aduenture to put for Magnanimitie, a worde more familiar, callynge it Courage, good CORAGE, whiche hauinge reſpect to the ſaid definition, ſhall nat ſeme moche inconuenyente. But nowe concernynge a more larger deſcription of the ſayd vertue,

Ariſtotle ſayth, That man ſemeth to be of noble courage, that is worthy, and alſo iugeth him ſelfe worthy to haue thinges that be great. He ſayth alſo afterwarde, Noble courage is an ornamente of vertues, for it maketh them the more ample, and without them ſhe her ſelfe may not be.
               ¶ But I wyll for a lyttell tyme leaue this noble Philoſopher Aryſtotelle, and reuerentely interprete a place in the offices of Tulli, where he mooſte eloquentely and playnely ſetteth out this vertue ſayinge, Alwaye a valyaunte and noble courage is diſcerned by two thynges ſpecyally, wherof one is in dyſpyſynge thynges outewarde, whan a man is perſwaded, neyther to meruayle at any thynge, neyther to wyſſhe or deſyre any thynge, but that whiche is honeſte. More ouer, that a manne ſhulde not bowe for any fortune or trouble of mynde. A nother thynge is, whan thou art of that mynde or courage, as I before ſayde, that thou thanne practyſe thoſe thynges, not onely whiche be greate, and moſte profytable, but alſo that be very dyfficile and full of labour and perylle, as well concernynge mannes lyfe, as many other thynges therto perteynynge.
               ¶ And afterwarde the ſame Tulli ſaythe, To eſteme lyttel thoſe thynges, which vnto

the more parte of men ſemeth excellent, and alſo with reaſon firme and ſtable to cō
                  tempne them, is ſygne of a noble and valyaunt courage. Alſo to tollerate thoſe thinges, whiche doo ſeeme bytter or greuous (wherof there be many in the lyfe of man, and in fortune) in ſuch wyſe as thou depart not from the aſtate of nature, neyther from the worſhyp perteyninge vnto a wyſe man, betokeneth a good courage, and alſo moche conſtaunce.
               ¶ By this it ſemeth, that MAGNANIMITIE, or good courage, is as it were the garmente of Uertue, wher with ſhe is ſette oute (as I moughte ſaye) to the vttermooſte. I meane not, that therby vertue is amended or made more beauteous, whiche of her ſelfe is perfecte: but lyke wyſe as a ladye of excellente beautye, thoughe ſhe be all wayes ſayre, yet a ryche and a freſſhe garmente declareth her aſtate, and cauſeth her the more to be loked on, and thereby her naturall beautye to be the better perceyued. Semblably doth Magnanimitie, ioyned with any vertue, ſette it wonderfullye furthe to be beholden, and (as I mought ſay) meruayled at, as it ſhall appere aboundauntly in the examples enſuynge.
               ¶ Ageſylaus, kyng of Lacedemonia, in the

begynnynge of his youthe, perceyuynge all Greece to be in great feare, for the fame that was ſprade of the Perſians, comynge with an infinyte armye: with a noble courage profred, not only to defende his owne countrey, but alſo with a ſmall hoſt to paſſe the ſees into Aſia, and frome thens eyther to brynge victory of the Perſians, or els a ſure and honorable peace. With whoſe courage, the Lacedemones hyghely recomforted, delyuered vnto hym .x. thouſande ſouldiours, with the whiche hoſte he went into Aſia, and there vainquiſſhed the Perſians, and retourned ioyfully into his coū
                  treye, with his people all ſaulfe, to his perpetuall renoume, and alſo the honour and ſuertie of all Greece.
               ¶ Antigonus, kyng of Macedonia, being on the ſee, one of his capytaynes aduyſed hym to departe, ſayinge, The nauye of his ennemye was moche greatter in noumbre than his: where vnto with a noble courage he aunſwered, And for howe many ſhyppes accounte you our perſonne? wherwith his people toke ſuche comforte, that they boldely dyd ſette furthe, and vaynquiſſhed theyr enemyes.
               ¶ Suche noble courage was in great king Alexander, that in his warres agaynſt Darius, he was ſene of al his people fightynge

in the preaſe of his enemyes bare heeded.
               ¶ I wyll nat be ſo vncurtaiſe, to leue vnremembred in this place, the notable magnanimitie of a kynge of Englande, whiche I hapned to rede late in an olde cronycle.
               ¶ Edgar, who in the tyme that the Saxōs had this realme in ſubiection, hadde ſubdewed all the other kynges Saxons, and made theym his trybutaries. On a tyme he had them all with hym at dyner, and after it was ſhewed him, that Aynande, king of Scottes, hadde ſayd, that he wondred howe it ſhoulde happen, that he and other kynges, that were talle and greatte perſonages, wolde ſuffre them ſelfes to be ſubduaed by ſo lyttell a body as Edgare was. Edgare diſſembled and anſwered nothing, but faynynge to go on huntyng, toke with hym the Scottyſhe kynge in his company, and purpoſely withdrewe hym from them that were with hym: And cauſynge by a ſecrete ſeruaunte, two ſwerdes to be conueyde into a place in the foreſte, by hym appoynted. As ſoone as be came thither, he toke the oone ſworde, and delyuered the other to Kinande, byddynge hym to proue his ſtrength, and to aſſaye, whither his dedes wolde ratifie his wordes. Wherat the Scottyſſhe kynge beynge abaſhed, beholdynge the noble courage of Edgar,

with an horrible feare confeſſed his error, deſyrynge pardon, whiche he with mooſte humble ſubmiſſion, at the laſte optayned.
               That noble kynge Edgare, declarynge by his Magnanimitie, that for his vertue and nat by chaunce, he was elected to reygne ouer ſo noble a region.
               ¶ Plato for his diuine wyſedome and eloquence, named the god of Philoſophers, was ſent for by Dionyſe kyng of Sicile, to the intent, as it ſemed, that he wolde be of hym inſtructed, concernynge the polytike gouernance of his realme. But whan he had ben with him a certaine ſpace, & wolde nat flatter with the kynge, and vpholde his tyranny, the kynge became wery of him, in ſo moche that if it hadde nat ben at therequeſt of Architas, price of Tarēt, he wold haue put hym to dethe. Wherfore partely at the deſyre of that prince, partly for feare of the Athenienſes, he lycenced Plato to depart without damage: but at his departynge, he ſayde vnto hym, as it were in deſpite, O howe euylle wylte thou ſpeake of me Plato, whan thou commeſt among thy companyons & ſcolers? Than Plato with a noble courage anſwered, God defende, there ſhuld be in my ſcole ſo moche vacant tyme frome the ſtudye of wyſedome, that there mought be anye place lefte, ones to

remembre the.
               ¶ Nowe wyl I make an ende of this vertue, & procede further to wryte of ſome vices, which cōmōly do folow magnanimite, and with gret difficultie may be eſchewed.
            
            
               ¶ Of Obſtinacy, a familiar vice, folowinge Magnanimitie. Cap. XV.
               
               
                  THE PRINCE OF Oratours, Marcus Cullius, in his fyrſt boke of officis, ſayth, In height and greatnes of courage, is mooſte ſooneſt ingendred Obſtinacye, and inordinate deſyre of Soueraignetie. OBSTINACIE is an affection immoueable, fyxed to wylle, abandonynge reaſon, which is ingendred of Pryde, that is to ſay, whan a manne eſtemeth ſo moche him ſelf aboue any other, that he reputeth his owne wytte onely, to be in perfection, and contemneth al other councell. Undoutedly this is an horrible & peryllous vyce, and very familiar with theym, whiche be of moſte noble corages. By it many a valiant capitayne and noble prince, haue nat onely fallen them ſelfes, but alſo brought al theyr countreys in daunger, and oftentymes to ſubuercion and ruine.
               ¶ The wiſe king Salomon ſaith, Amonge proude men be all waye contentions: And

they that do all thinges with counſayle, be gouerned by wyſedome. I nede nat to reherſe examples out of olde writers, what damage hath enſued of Obſtinacie, conſyderyng that euery hyſtorie is full therof, & we ſtyll haue it in dayly experience. But of one thyng am I ſure, where Obſtinacy ruleth, and reaſon lacketh place, there coūcel auaileth nat: And where councell hath nat auctoritie and franches, there may nothing be perfect. Salomon ſayth, Where be many Prouer. xi. counſayles, there the people is in ſuretie. Nowe wyll I declare the reſydue of Tullies ſentence, concernynge inordynate deſyre of ſoueraignetie, whiche is proprelye callyd Ambition.
            
            
               ¶ Of an other vyce folowing magnanimitie, called Ambition. Cap. XVI.
               
               IT was nat without a high and prudente conſideration, that certayne lawes were made by the Romaynes, whyche were named the lawes of Ambition, whereby men were reſtrayned in the citie to obtayn offyces and dignities in the Publyke wele, eyther by gyuynge rewardes, or by other ſynyſter laboure or meanes: And they, whyche by that lawe were condempned, were putte to deathe without any fauoure.

Uerily it was a noble lawe, and for all places neceſſary, conſyderinge what inconuenience hapneth by this vaine and ſuperfiuous appetite, wytneſſes amonge the Romayns, Sylla, Marius, Carbo, Linna, Pō
                  pei, and Ceſar, by whoſe ambicion mo Romains were ſlayne, than in acquyrynge the empire of al the world. Sylla condemned, and cauſed to be ſlayne, foure ſcore thouſande Romayns, beſide many mo that were ſlayne in the battayles, betwene hym and the bothe Marius.
               ¶ Alſo Pompei, and Iulius Ceſar, the one ſuffrynge no piere, the other no ſuperiour, by theyr ambycion cauſed to be ſlayne betwene them, people innumerable, and ſubuerted the beſte and mooſte noble publyke weale of the worlde, and fynally hauynge lyttel tyme of reioyſing theyr vnlefull deſire, Pompeie ſhamefully fleinge, had his heed ſtriken of, by the cōmandment of Pro lomee, king of Egipt, vnto whome as vnto his frende he fledde for ſuccour. Ceſar the vanquyſſher, was murdred in the Senate with daggers, by them, whome he mooſte ſpecially fauoured.
               ¶ I could occupie a great volume with hiſtories of them, whiche couetynge to moūt into excellent dignities, dyd therby bringe in to extreme perylles, bothe them ſelues

and their countreys. For as Tacitus ſaith, wonderfull elegantly, With them, whyche deſyre ſoueraygnetie, there is noo meane place betwene the toppe & the ſtep downe. To the whyche wordes agreynge Tullie ſayth, Hygh auctorities ſhulde nat moche Ci. off. 1. be deſired, or rather nat to be taken at ſomtyme, and oftentymes to be lefte and forſaken. So dyd Sylla, whome I late ſpake of. And Diocleſyan Emperour of Rome, who after he hadde gouerned the empyre Sextus Aurelius. 
                  XXV. yeree honourably (yf he hadde nat ben polluted with the blod of innumerable Chriſten men) wyllyngely abandoned the crowne and dignitie imperial, and lyued .ix. yeres on his priuate poſſeſſions. And on a tyme beinge deſired of Herculius and Galerius, vnto whom he had reſigned the empire, to take efteſo ones on him the gouernance, abhorringe it as a peſtilence, anſwered in this wyſe, I wolde ye dydde ſee the herbes, that I haue with myn owne hādes ſowen and ſet at Salona, ſurely ye wold nat than in this wyſe aduiſe me.
               ¶ Alſo Octauius Auguſtus, which in felicitie paſſed all emperours, deuiſed often times with his frendes, to haue reſygned his auctoritie. And if at that tyme the Senate had ben as wel furniſhed with noble & wife ꝑſonages, as it was before the Ciuile

warres, betwene Ceſar and Pompeie, it is to be thought, that he wolde ſurely haue reſtored the publike weale to his priſtinate glorie. But nowe lette vs ſee, what is the cauſe, that Ambytion is ſo pernicious to a publyke weale.
               ¶ In myn opinion it is for two cauſes prin Ambition why it is il cipally. Fyrſte for as moche as they, whyche be of that courage and appetite, whan they be in auctoritie, ſuppoſe al thing to be lefull that lyketh them. And alſo by reaſon of their preeminence, wolde ſoo be ſeperate from other, that no man ſhuld cōtrolle them, or warne them of their enormyties, and finally wolde do what they lyſte without contradiction. Wherof do enſewe dyuers iniuries and ſubuertion of iuſtyce.
               And this, whiche I haue nowe ſayd, Tulli affirmeth to be true, ſayinge, Uerily it is a great difficultie, where thou woldeſt be aboue all men, to obſerue equitie. Whiche is the thing moſt appropried to iuſtyce. And ſhortely after he ſayth, The more hygher of corage that a mā is, & deſirous of glory, the ſoner is he meued to do thīges ageinſt ryght. Seing it was ſo, in the time of Tulli, whan almoſte euery man, that was in auctoritie, had de excellent lernyng (the Romaines bryngyng vp their children in ſtudye of morall philoſophye (what ſhall we

ſuppoſe in our tyme, whan fewe men in auctoritie do care for lernyng? Why ſhuld we thynke to be more iuſtyce nowe vſed in auctoritie, than was in the tyme of Tulli? Is there nat nowe priuate affection, particular fauour, diſpleaſure and hatrede, as was at that tyme? I wolde the reders hereof, ſhuld be iuges, examinyng theſe my wordis with daily experience.
               ¶ The ſecond cauſe, that condēneth Ambicion, Conetyſe. is couetyſe of treaſure, therwith to mainteyn their oſtentation and vaynglory, whiche ambicious perſons, doo call theyr honour, wherby they be procured to fynde vniuſte meanes by their auctoritie, to prouyde for ſuche ſubſtaunce, wherwith they may be nat onely ſatisfied (they beinge inſaciable) but accordynge to their owne appetite fully ſuffyſed. Wherfore the philoſophers, called Stoici, vſed this ſentēce, gret indigence or lacke cometh nat of pouertie, but of great plentie, for he that hath moch, ſhall nede moche.
               ¶ But certes ſuche ambycious perſones, may well conſider, that the magnificence & pompe, whiche they couete, is nat ſo moch wondred at, as auarice & collection of money is vniuerſally hated. Wherfore Darius, Plutarchꝰ in apoth. kyng of Perſia, and father to Xerxes, whā he had cōmanded a ſubſidie to be leuyed of

his ſubiectes, demanded the chiefe men of the countreyes, whether they founde themſelfe greued. They anſwerynge, that they were in a merely good caſe, he commaunded the one halfe to be efteſones reſtored, leſte he of any auarice ſhulde be ſuſpected. By the whiche acte he ſtabyſſhed his dignitie, and made it more perfecte.
               ¶ More ouer, Tulli ſaythe, To take any Ci. off. iii. thynge from an other man, and one man to encreaſe his cōmoditie with an other mans detryment, is more repugnaunt to nature, than deathe, than pouertie, payne, or other thynge that mought happen, eyther to the body or other goodes worldly.
            
            
               The true definicion of abſtinence and Contynence. Cap. XVI.
               
               
                  ABSTINENCE and continencie be alſo cōpanions of fortitude, and be noble and excellent vertues, and I can not tel, wheter there be any to be preferred before them, ſpecially in men hauynge autoritie, they being the brydles of two capitall vices, that is to ſaye, Auarice and Lecherie. Whiche vices being refrayned by a noble man, that lyueth at libertie and without controlement, procureth vnto hym, beſyde the fauour of god, immortall glorye.

And that cite or realme, wherof the gouernours with theſe vices be lyttel or nothing acquainted, do abide longe in proſperytie. For as Ualerius Maximus ſaythe, where ſo euer this feruent peſtilence of mankynd hath entry, Iniury reygneth, reproche or infamy is ſpradde and deuoureth the name of nobylitie. The propretyes of theſe two vertues, be in this maner.
               ¶ Abſtinence is, wherby a man refraineth from any thyng, which he may lefully take, for a better purpoſe. CONTINENCE, is a vertue whiche kepeth the pleaſaunte appetite of man vnder the yoke of reaſō. Ariſtotell, makynge them bothe but one, deſcribeth them vnder the name of continēce, Ethi. vii. ſayinge, He that is continent, for as moche as he knoweth, that coueitous deſyres be yuell, dothe abandone theym, reaſon perſwadynge hym. For this tyme I take abſtynence, for the refuſynge of money, poſſeſſions, or other thynge ſemblable. Continence, the only forbearyng the vnlefull cō
                  pany of women.
               ¶ Martius Coreolanus, a noble yonge Abſteynig from rewardes, Coreolanꝰ man, whiche lyneally deſcended from Ancus, ſometyme kynge of Romaynes, whan he had done many valyaunte actes, and achyeued ſondrye enterpryſes, was accordyng to his merites commended in the armye

by Poſtumius, than being conſull, and by theyr vniuerſall aſſente, was rewarded with all ſuche honours, as than apperteyned to a good warryour: Alſo with one hū
                  dred acres of arable lande, the election of ten priſoners, ten horſis apparayled for the warres, one hundred of Oxen, and as moche ſyluer as he moughte beare. But of all this wolde he take no thynge, but one onely pryſoner, whiche was of his acquayntaunce, and one courſer, whiche al wayes after he vſed in batayle.
               ¶ Marcus Curius, the very rule & paterne Curius, of Fortitude and moderate liuing, whā the people, called Samnites, which had warres with the Romaynes, founde hym ſyttyng in his houſe by the fire vpon a homely fourme, catyng his meate in a dyſhe oftre, they bringing to him a great ſome of golde by the conſent of the people, and wondring at his pouertie, with courtaiſe langage, deſyred hym to take that they had broughte him, he therat ſmylyng, ſaid thus vnto thē, Ye miniſters of a vaine and ſuperfluous meſſage, ſhewe you to the Samnites, that Curius had leuer haue domynyon ouer theym that be ryche, than he hym ſelfe to haue richeſſe. And as for this golde, which ye accounte precious, take it agayne with you, & remembre, that ye can neyther vaynquiſhe

me in batayle, nor corrupte me with money
               ¶ Quintus Tubero, ſurnamed Catelius, what tyme he was Conſull, the people in Tubero. Greece, called Aetoli, ſente to hym by theyr ambaſſadonrs, a great quantitie of ſiluer veſſel, curiously wrought and grauen. But whan they came to hym, they founde on his table veſſel only of erthe. And whan he ſawe them, he exhorted them, that they ſhulde not ſuppoſe, that his contentation in pouertie, ſhulde be with theyr preſentes relyued. And with that ſaying, commaunded them to depart.
               ¶ To Epaminondas, the Thebane, beinge Epaminō
                     das. in his tyme, as well in vertue as proweſſe, the moſte noble man of all Grece, Arthaxerſes, kynge of Perſya, to make hym his frende, ſent one of his ſeruauntes to Thebes, with a greatte quantitie of treaſoure, whiche ſeruaunte knowynge his maners, darſte not offre it vnto hym whan he came, but ſpeakynge to a yonge man, which was famyliar with Epaminōdas, gaue vnto him a great rewarde, to meue Epaminondas to receiue the kinges preſent. Who vneth herynge the fyrſte wordes of the yonge man, commaunded the kynges ſeruaunte to be broughte vnto hym, vnto whome he hadde theſe wordes.
               Frende, ſhewe to the kynge, that he nedeth

not to offre me money: for if he haue any thynge to do with the Thebanes for a good purpoſe, he may haue theyr aſſiſtence with out any rewarde: if the purpoſe be nought, he can not with al the treaſoure of the worlde hope to obteyne it
               ¶ Whiche wordes were ſpoken with ſuche a grauitie, that the ſayde ſeruaunte, beinge a ferde, deſyred Epamynondas, that he mought be ſaulfly conuayed out of the cite: whiche he graunted with good wyll, leaſte if the money were taken away, he mought of the receyuynge therof, haue ben ſuſpected. More ouer, he cauſed the Thebane, whiche was his frende and companyon, to reſtore to the meſſager the money that he had receyued.
               ¶ Semblable abſtinence was there in Pho Phocion. cion, a noble counſaylour of Athenes, vnto whome the ambaſſadoure of the greatte kynge Alexaunder, broughte from theyr mayſter a hundred Talentes of gold, whiche were of englyſhe money .xii. thouſand pounde. But before that he herde theym ſpeke any thynge, He demaunded of them, why to him onely the kynge ſente ſo bounteous a rewarde. And they anſwered, for as moche as kynge Alexander iuged hym only to be a good man and a iuſt. Than ſuffre ye me (ſay de Phocion) to be & to ſeme

the ſame man, that your king doth iuge me, and cary your golde agayne to hym.
               ¶ To the ſame Phocion, the ambaſſadour of Antypater (who ſucceded the greatte kinge Alexander in Macedonia) offred to gyue a great ſome of money: whiche Phocion deſpyſynge, ſayde in this wyſe, Sens Antipater is not greatter than Alexander, nor his cauſe better, I doo nothynge perceiue, why I ſhulde take any thing of him. And whan the Oratour wolde haue hadde Phocions ſonne, to haue taken the money, Phocion anſwered, If his ſonne wolde be lyke vnto him, he ſhuld haue no nede, neyther of that money, nor of none other. If he wolde be vnlyke vnto hym, and of dyſſo lute maners, neyther Antipaters gyſtes, nor none others, were they neuer ſo great, ſhulde be ſufficient.
               ¶ By theſe examples it doth appere, how good men dyd alwaye flee from rewardes, all though they mought haue ben lefully taken, whiche in them was neyther folyſhenes nor yet ruſticitie, but of a prudent conſideracion. For as moche as bothe by wiſedome and experyence they knewe, that he which taketh a rewarde before any thinge done, is no lenger at lybertye, but of a free man is made bonde, bycauſe he hath taken erneſte for his true endeuour. Alſo by the

takynge, he is become an yuel man, though before he were good, For if he receyue it for an yuel purpoſe, he is than a wretche & deteſtable: If the matter were good, than is he not ryghtwyſe in ſelling a good dede, which he ought to do thankfully, and with out rewarde.
               ¶ And I doubte not who ſoo euer is contented with this preſente aſtate, and ſuppoſeth felycitie to be in a meane, and al exceſſe to be peryllous, wyll alowe theſe ſentences, and thynke them worthy to be had in remembraunce, ſpecyally of theym that be gouernours. For that realme, or Cytie, where men in auctorytie haue theyr handes open for money, and theyr howſes for preſentes, is euer in the way to de ſubuerted▪ Wherfore Caius Pontyus, prynce of Samnytes, was wont to ſaye, I wold god, that fortune had reſerued me vnto the time and that I hadde be than borne, whan the Romaynes ſhulde begynne to take gyftes, I ſhulde thanne not ſuffre them any lenger to rule.
               ¶ Paulus Emilius, whan he had vaynquiſhed Paulꝰ Aemilius. kynge Perſes, and ſubdued al Macedonia, brought into the commune treaſory of Rome an infinite treaſure, that the ſubſtaunce of that one prynce dyſcharged all the Romaynes to paye euer after any taxe

of ſubſidie. And yet for all that goodes Emilius brought nothing into his own houſe but onely perpetuall renoume.
               ¶ Scipio, whan he had goten and deſtroied Scipio Affrican. the greatte Citie of Chartage, was not therfore the rycher one halfepeny.
               ¶ By this appereth, that honour reſteth not in rycheſſe, all though ſome perchance wyll ſaye, that theyr reuenues be ſmal, and that they muſte take ſuche rewardes as be lefull, only to maynteyne theyr honour: but let them take hede to the ſayinge of Tulli, Nothynge is more to be abhorred, than Auarice, ſpecially in princis, and in them whiche Ci. off. ii. do gouerne publyke weales.
            
            
               The examples of continence, gyuen by noble men. Capl. XVII.
               
               NOwe wil I ſpeke of CONTINENCS, whiche is ſpecially in refraynynge or forbearynge the acte of carnall pleaſure, whervnto a man is feruently meued, or is at libertie to haue it. Whiche vndoubtedly is a thynge not onely diffycyle, but alſo wonderfull in a man noble or of great autoritye▪ but in ſuche one as it hapeneth to be, nedes muſte be reputed moche vertue and wyſedome, & to be ſuppoſed, that his minde is inuincible, conſyderynge that nothynge

ſo ſharpely aſſaileth a mans minde, as doth carnalle affection, called (by the folowers therof) loue. wherfore Plato ſaith, that the ſoule of man, which by loue is poſſeſſed, dieth in his owne body, & lyueth in an other.
               ¶ The gret kyng Alexāder, after his firſt Alexander victorie agaynſt kynge Darius, hauyng all wayes in his hooſte, the wyfe of the ſame Darius, whiche incomparably excelled all other women in beaultie, wolde neuer, after he had ones ſene her, haue her come in his preſence. Al be it that he cauſed her aſtate ſtyl to be mainteined, and with as moche honour as euer it was: and to theym, whiche wondrynge at the ladyes beautie, meruayled, why Alexander dyd nat deſire to haue with her company, he aunſwered, ſaying, It ſhuld be to hym a reproche, to be ony wyſe ſubdued by the wyfe of hym, whō he had vanquyſhed.
               ¶ Antfochus, the noble kynge of Aſia, in Antiochꝰ the citie of Epheſum, behelde a virgin (beinge a Mynchen in the temple of Diana) of excellent beautie, and perceyuyng hym ſelfe to be rauyſhed in the loue of the maiden, haſtily and immediatly departed oute of the citie, leſt loue ſhulde conſtrayn hym to violate the virgine: wyſely conſydering that it was beſt, to abſteyne from doing batayle with that enmy, which vneth mought

be vanquiſhed, but by flyght onely.
               ¶ The valyaunt Pompei, whan he hadde Pompeius vanquyſhed the kynge Mithridates, and had taken dyuers of his concubynes, whiche in beautie excelled, wold haue no carnall knowlege with any of them: but whan he knewe, that they were of noble lignage, ſente theym vndefyled to theyr parentes and kynneſfolke.
               ¶ Semblably dyd Scipio, whan he wanne Scipio. Carthage. For amonge dyuers womenne, whiche were there taken: one moſt faireſte of other, was brought vnto him, to do with her his pleſure. But after that ſhe had diſcouered to hym, that ſhe was affyanced to a gentylle man, called Indibilis, he cauſed him to be ſent for, and whan he behelde the lamētation & ſignes of loue betwene them, he nat only deliuerid her to Indibilis, with her raunſome, whiche her frendes hadde payde for her redemption: but alſo added therto an honorable porcion of his owne treaſure. By the whyche contynence and lyberalitie, he wan the hartes of Indibilis and all his blode, wherby he the ſoner optayned and wanne all the countrey.
               ¶ Of this vertue be exāplesinnumerable, as well of gentiles as of chriſten men: But theſe for this tyme, ſhall ſuffyſe, ſauynge for the ſtrangeneſſe of it, I wyll reherſe a

notable hyſtorie, whiche is remembred by the moſt excellent doctor ſaynte Hierome.
               ¶ Ualerian beinge emperour of Rome, & A wonder full continence in & Chriſtian martyr. perſecutyng the churche, In Egipt was a chriſten man preſented vnto hym, whome he beholdynge to be yonge and luſty, thinkynge therfore to remoue hym frome the faythe, rather by veneryall mocions, than by ſharpeneſſe of tourmentes, cauſed hym to be layde in a bedde within a fayre gardayne, hauynge aboute hym all flowres of ſwete odour and moſte delectable ſauours and perfumes. And than cauſed a fayre ten der yonge woman to be layd by hym al naked, who ceaſſed nat ſwetely and louyngly to embrace and kyſſe hym, ſhewing to hym all pleſant deuiſes, to the intent to prouoke him to fornication. There lacked litle, that the yong mā was nat vāquiſſhed, & that the fleſhe yelded nat to the ſeruyce of Uenus. That ꝑceiuing the yong mā, which was ar mid with grace, & ſeing none other refuge, with his teth did gnawe of his owne tūge, wherwith he ſuffred ſuche incredible pein, that therwith the brennyng of voluptuous appetite was vtterly extincte.
               ¶ In this notable acte, I wote not which is to be commended, eyther his inuincible corage, in reſiſting ſo moch againſt nature, or his wiſedome, in ſubduing the laſſe peyn

with the more: and bytyng of that, wherby he mought be cōſtrained to blaſphem god, or renounce his religion. Sure I am, that he therfore receyued immortalle lyfe, and perpetuall glorie.
               ¶ And this I ſuppoſe ſuffiſeth, to ꝑſwade mē of good nature, to embrace Continēce. I meane nat to lyue euer chaſt: but to honour matrimony, and to haue good awayt, that they let nat the ſparkes of concupiſcence grow in great flames, wherwith the wyttes ſhal be dryed vp, and all noble vertues deuoured.
            
            
               ¶ Of conſtance or ſtabilitie. Ca. XVIII.
               
               
                  IN BVYLDYNGE of a fortreſſe, or other honorable mancion, it ought to be welle conſydered, that the cement or morter, wherwith the ſtones be layd, be fyrme and well byndynge. For if it be brokle, and wyl mouldre away with euery ſhowre of rayn, the buyldyuge may not contynewe, but the ſtones, nat ſurely couched and mortred, fall away one after an other, & finally the holle houſe is defaced and falleth in ruine. Semblably, that man, whiche in chyldehode is brought vp in ſondry vertues, if eyther by nature, or els by cuſtom, he be nat induced, to be alwaye conſtant and ſtable, ſo that he

meue nat for any affection grefe or diſpleaſure, all his vertues wyll ſhortly decay, and in the eſtimation of men be but as a ſhadow and ſo one forgotten. For though he haue all the gyftes of nature and fortune, & alſo is adorned with doctrine and vertue, whiche he in his chyldhod hath acquired with moche trauayle, watche, and ſtudy, & adde nat to Conſtaunce, whan he cometh to the tyme of experience, whiche experience is as it were the warke of the craftes of man, being meued with any priuate affection, or feare of aduerſitie, or exterior damage, will omytte any parte of his lernyng or vertue, the eſtymation of his perſone immediately ceſſeth amonge perfecte warkemen, that is to ſaye, wyſe men, and finally being wauerynge or vnſtable, what thynge in him may be commended?
               ¶ And in one thyng me ſemeth that Conſtance Conſtance equall to Iuſtyce. hath equail prayſe with iuſtyce: that is to ſaye, that he that is hym ſelfe iniuſte, loueth that perſon, that dealeth iuſtly with hym, and contrary wiſe, hateth that perſon that dealeth iniuſtly, or doth hym wronge. In lykewyſe he, whiche is inconſtant, extolleth hym, whom he fyndeth conſtaunt, and deſyrethe to haue hym his frende: on the other parte, heis angrye with hym, whom he prouethe inconſtaunt and wauerynge,

and accounteth hym a beaſte, and vnworthy company of men: and awayteth diligently to truſte hym with nothyng.
               ¶ We note in chylderne inconſtancie, and lykewyſe in women, the one for ſklendernes of wyt, the other as a naturall ſicknes. Therfore men vſe in rebuking a man of inconſtance, to calle hym a chyldyſhe or womanly perſone. All be it ſome women now adayes be founden more conſtant than mē, and ſpecially in loue toward their huſbandes, or els mought there happen to be ſom wronge inheritours.
               ¶ Conſtance is as propre vnto a man as is reaſon: And is of ſuch eſtymation, that accordyng as it was ſpoken of a wiſe man, It were better to haue a conſtant ennemy, thā an inconſtant frende. Whereof I my ſelfe had ſufficiente experience.
               ¶ But now to declare ſome experience of Conſtance, wherby the reders may be the more therto prouoked, I wyl reherſe ſome examples therof, out of olde hiſtories, as I ſhall happen to remembre them.
               ¶ After that Sylla had vanquiſhed Marius, 
                     
                        •
                     ceuols. and diſtroyed the parte of his aduerſaries, he, with a great numbre of perſons all armed, enuironned the ſenate, intending to compell them by violence to condemne Mariꝰ for a traitour. Whiche requeſt none

darſte geyneſaye, Sceuola onely excepte, who beinge therof demanded wolde gyue no ſentence. But whan Sylla dyd caſt therfore on him a cruell countenance, he with a conſtant vyſage, and noble courage, ſaid to hym, Sylla, although thou faceſt and thret neſt me with thy multytude of ſouldiours, with whome thou haſte thus beſieged this courte, ye and although thou doeſt menace me with dethe neuer ſoo moche, yet ſhalte thou neuer bring to paſſe, that for ſhedinge a lytell olde blode, I ſhall iudge Marius a traytour, by whom this citie and all Italye haue ben preſerued.
               ¶ The conſtance, that great kyng Alexā
                  der had, in truſtyng his frende againſt fals Alexāders confidence reporte, ſaued his lyfe: wher of all men deſpaired. for after that noble battaile, wherin he had vanquyſhed Darius, & taken his treaſure, as he paſſed through Cilicia, beinge fore chaufed with feruente heate, and the length of his iourney, he came by the ryuer, called Cydnus, & beholding it clere and pleaſaunt, and thynkynge to aſſwage therin the heates that he ſuffered, wente thereinto naked, and dranke therof: But immediatly, by the excedyng colde, which was in that water, his finewes ſhranke, and his ioyntes became vnweldy, and as they were deed, & all his hoſte being diſcōforted

he was conueyed to a cytie thereby, called Tarſum. Wherevpon the phiſitions aſſemblyd to deuyſe the beſte remedy. All were determyned, to gyue hym one medycyne, and that it ſhuld be myniſtred by one Philyppe, chiefe phyſicyon with Alexander. In the meane tyme Parmemo, one of the greatteſt capytaynes about Alexander, ad uertyſed hym by his letters, that he ſhuld beware of the treaſon of the ſayde Philip ſayenge, he was corrupted with a greatte ſomme of moneye by Darius. Wherwith he beynge nothynge eſbaied, helde in his handes the letter, and receyuyng the medycyne, that Philippe gaue hym, at oone tyme delyuered the letter open to Philyp, and dranke alſo the medycine, declarynge therby the conſtāce that was in his frendſhyppe. Whyche truſt, nat onely cauſed nature the better to wark with the medicine, but alſo bounde ſoo the harte of the Phyſition towarde hym, that he euer after ſtudyed more diligently for the helpe and pre ſeruation of the noble prince, that dydde ſo moche truſte hym.
               ¶ The Conſtance of Cato Uticenſis was Cato. alway immoueable, in ſo moche that at ſondry tymes, whan he in the Senate egrely defended the publike weale, with vehemēt & longe orations, agaynſte the attemptates

of ambicious perſons, he was by them rebuked, and commytted to pryſon, But he therfore not ceſſynge, but goynge towarde priſon, detected to the people as he went, the vnlefull purpoſes and enterpryſes of them, by whom he was punyſhed, with the peryll that was imminente to the publyke weale, whiche he dyd with ſuche courage and eloquence, that as well the Senate as the people drewe ſo aboute hym, that his aduerſaryes were fayne for feare to dyſcharge hym.
               ¶ Who can ſufficiently commende this noble man Cato, whan he redeth in the warkes of Plutarche of his excellent courage and vertue? Howe moche worthyer had he ben, to haue had Homere the trumpe of his fame immortal, than Achilles? who for a lytell wenche contended with Agamemnon onely: where Cato for the conſeruation of the weale publyke contended, and alſo reſyſted agaynſte Iulius Caeſar and the great Pompey, and not only agaynſt their menaces, but alſo agaynſte theyr deſyres, and offres of alyaunce. Whereof I wolde gladly haue made a remembraunce in this warke, if the volume thereby, ſhulde not to moche haue increaſed and becomen vnhandſome.
               ¶ Undoughtedly conſtaunce is an honourable

vertue, as inconſtance is reprocheful and odious. Wherfore that man, whiche is mutable for euery occaſyon, muſt nedes often repent hym, and in moch repentaunce is not onely moche foly, but alſo great detrymente: whiche euery wyſe man wyll eſchue, if he can. Wherfore to gouernours no thyng is more propre, than to be in their liuynge ſtable and conſtant.
            
            
               The true ſignification of Temperaunce, a morall vertue. Cap. XIX.
               
                  THIS BLESSED company of vertues, in this wiſe aſſēbled, foloweth TEMPERANCE, as a ſad and dyſcrete matrone and reuerent gouerneſſe, awaytynge dylygentely, that in any wyſe voluptie or concupiſcence haue no preemynence in the ſoule of man.
               ¶ Ariſtotelle defyneth this vertue, to be a Ariſt. ethi. mediocritie in the pleſures of the body, ſpe cially in taſte and touchynge. Therfore he that is temperate, fleeth pleaſures voluptuous, and with the abſence of them is not diſcontented, and from the preſence of thē, he wyllyngely abſteyneth. But in myne oppynyon Plotinus, the wonderfull philoſopher, maketh an excellent definition of tē
                  peraunce, ſayinge, that the propretie or office

therof is, to couaite nothynge, whiche maye be repented, alſo not to excede the boundes of mediocritie, and to kepe deſire vnder the yocke of reaſon.
               ¶ He that practiſeth this vertue, is called Tēperate incōtinēce. a temperate man, and he that doth contrary therto, is named intemperate: betwene whom and a perſon incontinent, Ariſtotell maketh this diuerſytie, that he is intemperate, whiche by his owne election is ladde, ſuppoſynge the pleaſure that is preſente or (as I moughte ſaye) invre, ſhulde alwaye be folowed. But the perſonne incontynent ſuppoſeth not ſo, and yet he not withſtandynge dothe folowe it. The ſame auctour alſo maketh a diuerſitie, betwene hym that is temperate, and hym that is contynente, ſayinge, The continente man is ſuche one, that nothynge wyll do for bodely pleaſure, whiche ſhall ſtande agaynſte reaſon. The ſame is he, which is temperate, ſauing that the other hath corrupt deſyres, which this man lacketh.
               ¶ Alſo the temperate man delyteth in nothynge, contrary to reaſon. But he that is contynent delyteth: yet wyll he not be lad agaynſt reaſon. Fynally to declare it in few wordes, we maye well call hym a Temperate man, that deſyreth the thyng which he ought to deſire, and as he ought to deſyre,

and whan he ought to deſyre. Not withſtā
                  dyng there be diuers other vertues, which do ſeme to be as it were companions with temperaunce. Of whom (for the exchuing of tediouſnes) I wyll ſpeke nowe onely of two, moderation, and ſo breneſſe, whiche no man (I ſuppoſe) doubteth to be of ſuche efficacie, that without them no man may attayne vnto wyſedome: and by them wyſedome is ſoneſt eſpied.
            
            
               Of Moderation a ſpyce of temperaunce. Capi. XX.
               
                  MODERATION in the lymyttes and boundes, whiche honeſtie hath appoynted in ſpeakynge and doynge: lyke as in rennynge, paſſyng the gole, is accounted but raſſheneſſe, ſo rennynge halfe way is reproued for ſlowneſſe. In like wiſe, wordes and actes be the paces, wherin the witte of man maketh his courſe, and moderation is in ſtede of the gole, whiche yf he paſſe ouer, he is noted eyther of preſumpti on, or of foole hardyneſſe, if he come ſhort of the purpoſe, he is contempned as dulle and vnapt to affayres of great importance. This vertue ſhall beſt be perceyued by reherſyng of examples ſhewed by noble men, whiche is in effecte but dayly experience.
               
                  
¶ Fabius Maximus, beynge fyue tymes Conſul, perceyuyng his father, his graūd father, and greate graundefather, and dyuers other his auncetours, to haue hadde often tymes that moſte honourable dignytie, whan his ſonne by the vniuerſal conſent of the people ſhuld be alſo made conſul, erneſtely intreated the people, to ſpare his ſonne, and to gyue to the houſe of Fabius, as it were a vacatiō time from that honour: Not for any myſtruſte that he hadde in his ſonnes vertue and honeſtie, but that his moderation was ſuche, that he wolde not that excellente dignitie ſhulde alwaye continue in one familie.
               ¶ Scipio Affricanus the elder, whan the ſenate and people had purpoſed, that accordynge to his merytes he ſhulde haue certaine ſtatues or imagis ſet in al courtes and places of aſſembly, Alſo they wolde haue ſet his image in triumphāt apparayle within the capitole, and haue graunted to hym to haue ben conſul and Dictator duryng his lyfe, not withſtandyng he wolde nat ſuffre, that any of them ſhulde be decreed, eyther by the acte of the ſenate, or by the peoples ſufferage. wherin he ſhewed hym ſelfe, to be as valyaunt in refuſynge of honours, as he was in his actes, wherin he hadde them well deſerued.
               
                  
¶ There is alſo moderation in tolleration of fortune of euery ſorte, whiche of Tulli Tolleration of fortune good and badde. is called equabilitie. whiche is, whan there ſemeth to be alway one viſage and countenaunce, neyther changed nor for proſperytie nor for aduerſitie.
               ¶ Metellus, called Numidicus, in a commune ſedicion being baniſhed from Rome, and abydynge in Aſia, as he hapned to ſyt with noble men of that countrey, in beholdynge a great play, there were letters delyuered hym, wherin he was aſſertayned, that by the hole conſente of the ſenate and people, his retourne into his countrey was graunted. Not withſtandynge, that he was of that tidinges excedinge ioiful, yet he remeued not, vntyll the playes were ended, nor any mā ſitting by him, mought perceiue in his countenaunce any token of gladnes.
               ¶ Whan the gret kinge Antiochus, which long time had in his dominion al Aſia, whiche is accoūted to be the third parte of the world, was at the laſt vāquiſhed by Lucius Scipio, & had loſt the more part of his empire, & was aſſigned but to a ſmall portiō, vſed his fortune ſo moderately, that he gaue gret thākes to the Romains, that being delyuered of ſo gret burdō & charge, he more caſely mought gouerne a lyttell dominion.
               ¶ Alexander beyng elect and made emperour

of Rome at .xvi. yeres of his age ſo excelled al other in vertue, that the ſenate and people wolde haue hym called, the greatte Alexander, and father of the coūtrey, whiche of al names was higheſt, he with a wō
                  derfull grauitie refuſed it, ſaying, It behoued, that thoſe names were obteyned by merites and ripeneſſe of yeres.
               ¶ The ſame prince alſo wold not ſuffre his empreſſe to vſe in her apparayle any richer ſtones than other ladyes, and if any were giuen her, he either cauſed them to be ſold, or els gaue them vnto Temples, affyrming that the examples of pompe and inordinate expenſys, ſhoulde not procede of the Emperours wyfe.
               ¶ And whan for the honoure, that he dyd to the Senate and lawes, his wyfe and his mother rebuked hym, ſayinge, he ſhulde brynge the imperiall maieſtye into to lowe aſtate, he aunſwered, It ſhuld be the ſurer, and continue the longer.
               ¶ There is alſo a Moderatiō to be vſed agaynſt Moderation of wrathe. wrathe or appetite of vengeaunce.
               ¶ Hadriane the Emperour, while he was but a pryuate perſon, bare towarde a capytayne greuous dyſpleaſure, who afterward herynge, that he was made emperour, was in great feare, leaſt Hadrian wolde be aduenged. But whanne he came to the Emperours

preſence, he nothynge dyd or ſaid to hym, but onely theſe wordes, Thou haſt well eſcaped. By whiche wordes he well declared his moderation, and alſo that who ſo euer putteth on the habyte of a comune perſon or gouernour, it ſhal not beſeme him to reuenge priuate dyſpleaſures
               ¶ Architas, whan he had ben a long ſpace out of his countrey, & at his retourne foūde his poſſeſſyons and goodes dyſtroyed and waſted, ſayde to his balyfe, I wolde ſurely punyſſhe the, if I ſhulde not be angry.
               ¶ Moche lyke dyd Plato. For whan his ſeruaunte had offended hym greuouſly, he deſyred Speuſyppns his frende to puniſhe hym, leaſte (ſayde he) if I beate hym, I ſhulde hap to be angry. Wherin Plato deſerued more prayſe than Arthitas, in as moche as he obſerued pacience, and yet dyd not ſuffre the offence of his ſeruaunte to be vnpunyſhed. For moſt often tymes the omittyng of correction redoubleth a treſpace.
               ¶ Semblable moderation and wyſedome Aulus Gellius remembrethe to be in Plutarche Aulꝰ Gell. the philoſopher, whiche was mayſter to Trayane the emperour. It hapned that the bondeman of Plutarch had cōmitted ſomme greuous offence: wherfore his mayſter wylled, that he ſhulde be ſharpely punyſſhed: and commaundynge hym to be

ſtryded naked, cauſed an other of his ſeruantes in his prneſence to beate hym. But the ſlaue, who as it ſemid was lerned, while he was in beatyng cried out on Plutarche, and in maner of reproche ſaide vnto hym, Howe agreeth this with thy doctrine, that preacheſt ſo moche of paciēce, and in al thy leſſons reproueſt wrath: and nowe contrary to thyne owne teachynge, thou arte all inflamed with wrathe, and clene frō the pacience, which thou ſo moch prayſeſt? Unto whom Plutarche, without any chaunge of countenaunce, aunſwered in this fourme, Thou embraydeſt me cauſeles with wrath and impacience, I praye the, what perceiueſt thou in me, that I am angry or oute of pacience? I ſuppoſe (excepte I be moche deceyued) thou ſeeſt me nat ſtare with myn eyen, or my mouth imboſed, or the coloure of my face chaunged, or any other deformitie in my perſone or geſture, or that my wordes be ſwyfte, or my voyce louder than modeſtie requyreth, or that I am vnſtable in my geſture or motion, whyche be the ſignes and euydent tokens of wrathe & impacience. Wherfore ſaid he to the correctour, ſens he can not proue, that I am yet angry, in the meane tyme, whyle he and I do diſpute of this matter, and vntyll he vtterly do ceſſe of his preſumption and obſtinacy,

loke that thou ſtyl beate hym.
               ¶ Uerily in myne opinion Plutarch herin declared his excellent wyſedome and grauitie, as well in his exaumple of pacience, as alſo in ſubduyng the ſtubborne courage of an obſtinate ſeruaunte. Whyche hyſtory ſhall be expediēt for gouernours to haue in remembrance, that whan accordyng to the lawes, they do punyſſhe offendours, they them ſelfes be nat chaufed or meued with wrathe. But (as Tulli ſayth) be like to the lawes, whiche be prouoked to punyſhe nat Off. 1. by wrathe or diſpleaſure, but only by equitie. And immediatly the ſame auctour gyueth an other noble precepte, concernyng moderation in punyſhment, ſaying, In correctynge, wrath is principally to be forboden, for he that punyſſheth whyle he is angry, ſhall neuer kepe that meane, whyche is betwene to moche and to lyttell.
            
            
               ¶ Of ſobrietie in diete. Cap. XXI.
               VErily I nothinge doute, but that the more part of the reders of this wark wyll take in good parte al that is before writen, conſyderynge the benefyte, & alſo the ornament, that thoſe vertues, of whom I haue ſpoken, of good reaſon and congruence muſt be to them, in whom they

ſhall be planted and do contynewe. But I knowe well, that this chapiter, which now enſueth, ſhal vneth be thankfully reſceiued of a fewe reders, ne ſhall be accoūted wor thy to be radde of any honourable perſon, conſyderynge that the mattier therin conteyned is ſo repugnant and aduerſe, to that pernicious cuſtome, wherin of longe tyme men haue eſtemed to be the more parte of honour, in ſo moche as I very wel knowe, that ſome ſhall accounte great preſumption in this myne attemptate, in writyng ageinſt that, whiche hath bene ſo longe vſed. But ſens I haue taken vppon me to wryte of a publyke weale, whyche taketh his begynnynge at the example of them that be gouernours, I wyl nat lette, for the diſprayſe gyuen by theym, whyche be abuſed, with all ſtudy and dyligence to diſcriue the auncient temperaunce, and moderation in diet, called SOBRIETIE, or in a more generall terme FRVGALITIE, The acte whereof is at this daye as infrequente or out of vſe Frugalite. amonge all ſortes of men, as the termes be ſtraunge vnto them, whiche haue nat bene well inſtructed in latyn.
               ¶ The noble emperour Auguſtus, who in all the reſydue of his lyfe, was for his moderation & tēperance excellētly cōmended, ſuffred no lytle reproche, for as moch as he

in a ſecrete ſouper or banket, hauyng with hym ſixe noble men his frendes, and ſyxe noble women, and namyng him ſelfe at that tyme Apollo, and the other men and women the names of other goddis and goddeſſis, fared ſumptuouſly & delycately, the citie of Rome at that tyme beinge vexyd with ſcarcitie of grayne: he therfore was rente with curſes and rebukes of the people: in ſo moch as he was openly called Apollo the turmentour, ſayinge alſo that he with his goddis had deuoured their corn, with whiche libertie of ſpeche being more perſwaded than diſcontēted, fro than forth he vſed ſuche a frugalitie or moderation of diete, that he was contented to be ſeruid at one meale with thre diſſhes, or ſyxe at the mooſte: whiche alſo were of a moderate price, and yet therin he vſed ſuch ſobrenes, that either he hym ſelfe wold nat ſytte, vntyll they whiche dyned with hym, had eatē a good ſpace: or els if he ſatte whan they dyd, he wolde aryſe a great ſpace, or any of them had lefte eatynge. And for what purpoſe, ſuppoſe ye, dyd this emperour in this wiſe, in whom was neuer ſpot of auarice or vile courage? Certes for two cauſes. Fyrſt, knowing the inconueniencis, that alway do happen by ingurgitations and exceſſiue fedynges: Alſo that lyke as to hym was cō
                  mitted

the ſouerayne gouernance of al the worlde, ſo wolde he be to al men the generall exāple of lyuynge.
               ¶ Nowe what damages do happen among men by immoderate eatyng and drinkynge, we be euery day taught by experience: but to brynge them (as it were to mens eien) I wyll ſet them out euidently.
               ¶ Fyrſte, of ſacietie or fulneſſe be ingēdrid paynfull diſeaſes & ſickneſſes, as ſquynces, diſtillatiōs, called reumes or poſes, hemorroydes, Galenꝰ de ſa
                           •
                        tuend lib. v. great bledynges, crampes, duſkeneſſe of ſight, the tiſike, and the ſtiche, with many other that come nat nowe to my remembrance. Of to moche drynkynge procedeth dropſies, wherwith the body, & oftē tymes the vyſage, is ſwollen and defaced, beaſtly fury, wherwith the myndes be periſhed, and of all other moſt odious, ſwyne dronkennes, wherwith both the body and ſoule is deformed, and the fygure of man is as it were by inchauntement tranſfourmed into an vgly and lotheſome ymage. Wherfore the Lacedemones ſomtime purpoſely cauſed their ruſticall ſeruantes to be made very dronk, and ſo to be brought in at their commune dyners, to the intent that yonge men, beholdynge the deformitie and haſtye fury of them, that were dronkardes, ſhuld lyue the more ſobrely, and ſhulde eſchewe

dronkenneſſe, as a thyng fowle and abhomynable.
               ¶ Alſo pittacus (one of the ſeuen ſages of Grece) did conſtitute a law, that they, whiche beinge dronke dyd offende, ſhulde ſuſtayne double punyſhement: that men ſhuld the more dily gently forbeare to be dronke.
               ¶ It is right euydente to euery wiſe man, who at any time hath haūted affaires, wher what profite is in ſo briete, and what diſcommodite hapneth by the con trary. vnto was required contēplation or ſeryous ſtudy, that to a man, hauing due concoction and digeſtion, as is expediente, ſhall in the mornyng faſtyng, or with a lytel! refection, not onely haue his inuencion quycker, his iugement perfecter, his tonge redyar, but alſo his reaſon freſher, his eare more atten tife, his remembrance more ſure, and generally al his powers & wittis more effectual, and in better aſtate, than after he hath catē abundantly. And I ſuppoſe for this cauſe, the auncient courtes of recorde in this realme, haue euer benne vſed to be kept only before none. And ſurely the conſideration is wonderfull excellent, and to be (as I mought ſaye) ſuperſtytiouſly obſerued: the reaſons why, be ſo apparant, that they nede nat here to be reherſed.
               ¶ Pythagoras was neuer ſene to eate any fyſhe or fleſhe, but onely herbes & fruites. Semblably dyd many other, who exactely

folowed his doctrine. Wherfore it was ſup poſed, that they the rather excelled all other, in fyndyng out the ſecretes and hidde knowleges of nature, which to other were impenctrable.
               ¶ Plato, or rather Socrates, Plato indictynge, in his ſeconde boke of the publyke weale, wylleth, that the people of his citie, whiche he wolde conſtitute, ſhulde be noryſhed with barly brede & cakes of wheat, and that the reſidue of their diete ſhuld be ſalte, olyues, cheſe and lykes, and more ouer wortes, that the fieldes do bring forth, for their potage: but he addeth to, as hit were to make the dyner more delycate, figges, beanes, myrtylberies, and beche maſt, whiche they ſhulde roſte on the coles, and drynk to it water moderately. So (ſaith he) they liuig reſtfully & in helth vnto extreme age, ſhall leaue the ſame maner of lyuynge vnto their ſucceſſours.
               ¶ I knowe wel, ſome reders, for this diete appoynted by Socrates, wyll ſcorne hym, accountynge hym for a foole, who nat only by the aunſwere of Apollo, but alſo by the conſente of all excellent writers, that folowed hym, and the vniuerſall renoume of all people, was approued to be the wyſeſte man of all Grecia.
               ¶ Certes I haue knowen men of worſhip

in this realme, whiche, during their yo uth dranke for the more parte water.
               ¶ But here menne ſhal nat note me, that I write this, as who ſaythe, that noble men in this realme, ſhulde liue after Socrates diete, wherin hauynge reſpecte to this time and region, they mought perchaunce fynd occaſion to reproue me. Surely lyke as the exceſſe of fare is to be iuſtely reproued, ſo in a noble man moch pinchyng and nygard ſhyp of meate and drynke is to be diſcommended. Nigardeſhyppe.
               
               ¶ I can nat cōmēde Aelius Pertinax, who beinge emperour of Rome, wold haue his geſtes ſerued with a plante of lettuſe, deuided in two partes: and excepte ſome thyng were ſente hym, he wolde appoynte nyne pounde weight of fleſhe vnto thre meſſes, and if any dyſhe hapned to be broughte to hym, he cauſed it to be ſette vppe vntyll the nexte daye.
               ¶ I am aſhamed to remēbre, that he wold ſend to his frendes: two morſels of meate, a pece of podynge, or the carkaiſſe of a capon. This was but myſerye and wretched nygardſhyp in a man of ſuche honour.
               ¶ In lyke maner, who wyll nat haue in extreme beteſtation, the inſatiable glotōny of Uitelli', Fabius Gurges, Apicius, and dyuers other, to which carmorantes, neither

lande, water, ne ayre, mought be ſufficient?
               ¶ Neyther the curioſitie and wanto appetite of Heliogabalus, emperour of Rome, is of any wyſe man alowed, who beinge at Rome, or ferre from the ſee, wold eate only ſee fyſhe: And whan he ſoiourned nighe to the ſee, he wolde touche no fyſſhe, but whiche was taken out af the ryuer of Cyber, or other places of equal or of more diſtaunce. Alſo he wold haue diſhes of meate made of Camelles heeles, the combes of cockes, newely cutte, the tungues of pecockes and nyghtyngales, partriches egges, and other thynges harde for to come by: wherto be no englyſſhe names founden (as I ſuppoſe) apt to the true ſignificatiō.
               ¶ More ouer, all though I dyſprayſed nigardſhyp and vicious ſcarcitie, yet in theſe nōbre of dyſhes, whiche I haue commended, I deſyre not, to haue therin meates for any occaſion to moche ſumptuous. For in one or two dyſhes may be emploied as moche money as in twenty, perchāce as good or better in eatynge. Wherof there remayneth a noble exāple of Cleopatra, doughter to Ptholomee, late kyng of Aegipt, whom Ceſar in his lyfe helde for his Concubyne. The ſame lady Antony (with whome Octauian deuided the empire) loued alſo perramours, abandonynge his wyfe, whiche

was ſuſter to Octauian. And the warres betwene hym and Octauian ceſſynge by a littell ſpace, he (durynge that tyme) lyued in moſte prodigall riotte, and thynkyng all thynge in the ſee, the lande, and the ayre to be made for ſatiſfienge his glotony, deuoured al fleſhe and fiſhe that moughte be any where founden. Cleopatra, diſdayninge to be vainquiſhed in any exceſſe by a Romayne, layde a wager with Antony, that ſhe her ſelfe wold receiue in to her body at one ſup per, the value of fyfty thouſande poundes, whiche to Antony was thought in a maner to be impoſſible. The wager was put in to the handes of Numatius Plancus, a noble Romayne. The next day Cleopatra prepared for Antony a ryght ſūptuous ſuper, but therat Antony nothing meruailed, knowig the value thereof by his accuſtomed fare, than the quene ſmylynge, called for a goblet, where into ſhe dyd powre a quantitie of very tarte vineger, and taking a perle, whiche hinge at one of her eares, quickely did let it falle into the vinegre, wherin beynge ſhortely dyſſolued (as is the nature of the perle) ſhe immedyately dranke it. And all thoughe ſhe had vainquiſſhed Antony, accordynge to her wager, the perle without any dought, beinge of the value of .l. M. li. yet hadde ſhe lykewyſe dronken an other

perle of lyke value, whiche was hangynge at her other eare, had not Numatius Plancus, as an indifferent iudge, forthewith giuen iudgemente, that Antony was all redy vainquiſſhed.
               ¶ I haue reherſed this hiſtory, written by Macrobiꝰ ſatu. li. 9. Plin. li. 19. ca. 35. Macrobius, and alſo Plini, to the intente, that the vanite in ſumptuous feaſtyng ſhuld be the better expreſſed.
               ¶ Androcides (a man of excellente wyſedome) Plinius li. xiiii. natural. hiſt. cap. 5. wrate vnto the great kynge Alexander an epiſtell, deſiryng hym to refraine his intemperaunce, wherein he ſayde, Noble prince, whan thou wylt drinke wyne, remē
                  ber than, that thou drynkeſte the bloude of the erthe. Sygnyfienge therby (as I ſuppoſe) the myghte and power of wyne, and alſo warnynge Alexander, of the thirſte or appetite of blode, which wold enſue by his intemperate drynkynge. For Plini (that writeth this hiſtorie) ſaythe immedyately, If Alexander hadde obeied the preceptes of Androcides, he hadde neuer ſlayne his frendes in his dronkennes. for vndoubtedly it maye be ſayde with good ryghte, that there is nothynge to the ſtrengthe of mans body more profitable than wyne, ne to voluptuouſe appetites more pernicious, if me ſure lacketh.
               ¶ Alſo it is very truely and proprely written

of propretius the poete, in this ſentence folowynge or lyke,
               ¶ By wyne beautie fadeth, and age is defaced wyne maketh forgotē, that late was embraced.
               ¶ More ouer, Salomō in his boke named Eccleſiaſtes, calleth that countrey happy, where of the gouernours doo eate in theyr tyme. And what ſhall we ſuppoſe is theyr tyme, but only that, whiche nature and the vniuerſall conſent of all people hath ordeyned? And of what ſpace is that tyme? But only that, which ſuffiſeth to the abundaunte ſuſtentation and not oppreſſiō of nature, ne letteth any parte of theyr neceſſary affaires about the publyke weale.
            
            
               Of Sapience, and the definition therof. Capi. XXII.
               AL be it that ſome men, whiche haue hitherto radde this boke, wyll ſubpoſe, that thoſe vertues, whereof I haue treated, be ſufficient to make a gouernour vertuous and excellent: yet netheles for as moche as the effecte of myne enterpryſe in this warke is, to expreſſe, as farre furthe as god ſhal inſtruct my poore wytte, what thynges do belonge to the makynge of a perfeytte publyke weale, whiche well nygh may no more be without an excellent

gouernour, than the vniuerſal courſe of nature maye ſtande or be permanent without on chiefe dyſpoſer and meuer, whiche is ouer all ſupereminent in power, vnderſtandynge, and goodnes. Wherfore bycauſe in gouernaunce be included Dyſpoſition and Order, which can not be without ſoueraine knowelege, procedynge of wyſedome, in a more elegant worde called SAPIENCE, Therfore I wyll nowe declare, as moche as my lytel with dothe comprehende of that part of Sapience, that of neceſſitie muſt be in euery gouernour, of a iuſte or perfeytte publyke weale.
               ¶ The noble philoſopher, and moſte excellent Ci. tuſc. q. lib. iiii. oratour CICERO, ſayth in this wyſe, SAPIENCE is the ſcyence of thynges dyuine and humayne, whiche conſidereth the cauſe of euerye thynge, by reaſon wherof, that, whiche is dyuine, ſhe foloweth, that, whiche is humayne, ſhe eſtemeth ferre vnder the goodnes of fortune.
               ¶ This definitiō agreeth wel with the gift of ſapience, that god gaue to Salomō, king of Iſrael, who aſked onely wyſedome, to gouerne there with his realme. But god, whiche is the fountayne of ſapience, graciouſly ponderynge the yonge princes petition, whiche proceded of an apt inclination to vertue, with his own moſt bounteous liberalitie,

whiche he purpoſed to employe on hym, for the entiere loue that he had to his father: he therfore infuſed in hym plē
                  tie of all wyſedome and connynge, in thynges as well naturall as ſupernaturall: as it appereth by the warkes of the ſame kynge Salomon, wherein be well nyghe as many wyſedomes, as there be ſentences. And in myne opynion, one thynge is ſpecially to be noted.
               ¶ Kynge Dauid, father to Salomon, was a man of a rare and meruaylous ſtrengthe, in ſo moche, as he hym ſelfe reporteth in the boke of kynges, beynge a chylde, and carienge to his bretherne theyr dyner, where they kepte theyr cattell, ſlewe fyrſt a great beare, and after a lyon, whiche fyerce and hungry aſſaulted hym, all thoughe he were vnarmed: and whether he had any weapon or no, it is vncertayne, ſens he maketh therof no menciō. Alſo of what prowes he was in armes, and howe valiaunt and good a capitayne in battayle, it maye ſufficiently appere to them that wyll rede his noble actes and achieuaunces in the bokes before remembred. wherin no good catholyke man wyll any thynge doubte, thoughe they be maruaylous. Yet not withſtandynge al his ſtrengthe and puyſſaunce was not of ſuche effecte, that in the longe tyme of his raign,

whiche was by the ſpace of .xl. yeres, he coulde haue any tyme vacant from warres. But all waye had eyther continuall batayle with the Philiſties, or elles was moleſted with his owne chyldren, and ſuch as ought to haue bene his frendes. Contrary wyſe, his ſonne Salomon, of whome there is no notable mention made, that he ſhewed any commendable feate, concernynge martiall proweſſe, ſauinge the furniture of his garriſons with innumerable men of warre, horſes, and chariotes, which proueth not him to be valiaunte and ſtronge, but onely prudente: after a lyttell bykerynge with the Philiſties, in the beginning of his raygne, continued in peace without any notable batayle, or moleſtation of any perſone: wherfore he is named in ſcrypture, REX PACIFICVS, which is in englyſhe, The peaſyble kynge. And onely by ſapience ſo gouerned his realme, that though it were but a lyttell realme in quantitie, yet it excelled incomparably all other in honour and ryches. In ſoo moche as ſyluer was at that tyme in the citie of Ieruſalem, as ſtones in the ſtrete. Wherfore it is to be noted, that Sapience in the gouernaunce of a publyke weale, is of more efficacie, than ſtrengthe and puyſſaunce.
               ¶ The auctoritie of Sapience is wel declared

by Salomon in his prouerbes, ſayinge. By me kynges do raygne, and makers of lawes dyſcerne thynges that be iuſte. By me prynces do gouerne, and men hauynge power and auctoritie, do determin Iuſtice. I loue all them that loue me, and who that watcheth to haue me, ſhall fynde me. With me is bothe ryches and honour, ſtately poſſeſſions and Iuſtice. Better is the fruyre, that commeth of me, than golde and ſtones that be precious.
               ¶ The ſame kynge ſaythe in his boke, called Eccleſiaſtice: A kyng without ſapience ſhal loſe his people, and cities ſhal be inhabited by the wytte of them that be prudent. whiche ſentence was verifyed by the ſōne and ſucceſſour of the ſame kinge Salomon, called Roboaz, to whom the ſayd boke was written, who neglectinge the wiſe and vertuous doctrine of his father, comtempned the ſage counſayle of auncyente men, and imbraced the lyght perſwaſions of yonge men and flatterers, wherby he loſte his honour, and brought his realme in perpetuall deuiſyon.
               ¶ The empire of Rome (whoſe beginning, proſperytie, and deſolation ſemeth to be a mirrour and exāple to al other realmes and countreys) declareth to them that exactely beholde it, of what force and value Sapiēce

is to be eſtemed, beinge begonne with ſhepardes, fleinge the wrathe and diſpleaſure of their maiſters.
               ¶ Romulus, duringe the time of his reigne Diodorus Scicuius libr. 1. (whiche was .xxxvii. yeres) nothynge dyd enterpriſe, without the auctorite & conſent of the fathers, whom he hym ſelfe chaſe to be Senatours. And finally, as longe as the ſenate continued in the citie of Rome, and reteyned their auctoritie, whiche they receyued of Romulus, and was increaſed by Tullus Hoſtilius, the thyrde kynge, they wonderfully proſperid and alſo augmentid theyr empyre ouer the more parte of the worlde. But ſone after the emperour Cō
                  ſtantine had abandoned the citie, and tranſlated the Senate from thens to Conſtantynople, and that finally the name and auctoritie of the Senate, was by lytel and litel exhauſte, by the negligence & foly of ignorant emperours, not only that moſte noble cite, heed and princeſſe of the world, & foū
                  tayne of all vertue and honour, felle into moſt lamentable ruine, but alſo the maieſtie of the empire decaied vtterly, ſo that vneth a lyttell ſhadowe therof nowe remayneth, whiche who ſo beholdeth and conferreth it with Rome, whan it flouriſhed, according as it is lefte in remembrauce by noble writers, he ſhall vneth kepe reares out of his

eyen, beholdyng it now as a rotten ſhepecote in comparyſon of that cytie noble and triumphaunt. O poore and myſerable citie, what ſondry tourmētes, exciſions, ſubuertions, depopulations, and other euyll aduentures hath hapned vnto the, ſens thou were byrefte of that noble courte of Sapience? whoſe auctoritie if it had alway cō tinued, beinge alſo confyrmed in the fayth and trewe religion of Chriſte, god beinge with the pleaſed, thou couldeſt neuer haue bene thus deſolate vnto the fynall conſummation and ende of the worlde.
               ¶ I dout nat, but it is wel knowen to euery Catholyke man, that hathe the lyberall vſe of reaſon, that all maner of vnderſtanding and knowlege, wher of procedeth perfecte operation, do take their origynalle of that hygh ſapience, whiche is the operatrice of all thynges. And therfore Salomō or Phi lo, or who ſo made the boke callid Sapiētia, made his prayer to god in this wiſe,
               ¶ Gyue to me, good lorde, Sapience, that ſytteth by thy throne. And in the later ende of the prayer he ſayth, Sende her from the ſete of thy holynes, that ſhe maye be with me, & labour with me, and that I may know what may be accepted with the.
               ¶ Orpheus (one of the eldeſte poctes of Muſis what they do ſignifie. Grece) affirmeth in his hymnes, that the

Muſis were gotē betwene Iupiter & Memorie. whyche ſayinge well vnderſtande, and exactly tried, ſhal appere manifeſtly to agree with the ſayinge of the wyſe manne, conteyned in the ſaid prayer late reherſed.
               ¶ Euſtathius, the expoſytour of Homere, ſayth, Muſa is the knowlege of the ſoule, and is a thynge diuine, as the ſowle is.
               ¶ But fynally, as by olde autors a mā may aggregate a definition, that which is callid in greke and latyne Muſa, is that parte of the ſowle, that induceth and moueth a man to ſerche for knowlege, in the whiche motion is a ſecrete and inexplicable delectation. All be it, bicauſe knowlege is in ſondry wiſe diſtributed, and the nombre of nyne amonge olde authors was alway reherſed, where they ſpake of a multitude, as it ſhall appere to them that rede Homer & Uir gil, Therfore there were diuiſed to be nine mu ſes, which alſo for the reſemblance of their diſpoſition, were fayned by the poctes to be nyne virgins, that firſt inuented all liberal ſciences: but the other opynion approchith more nere vnto the trouth, and agreeth better vnto my purpoſe.
               ¶ More ouer, Iupiter was alway takē of the poetes & philoſophers for the ſupreme god, whyche was the gyuer of lyfe, and creatour of all thynges, as appereth in all

their warkes, wherfore ſomtyme they call hym omnipotēt, ſomtime the fader of goddis & of men, ſoo that vnder that name they knowleged to be a very god, thoughe they honored hym nat as one only god, as they ought to haue done.
               ¶ But nowe Orpheus ſayenge, that the Muſes proceded of Iupiter and memory, may be in this wyſe interpreted, That god almyghty infuded Sapience into the Memory of man: for to the acquirynge of ſcience belongeth vnderſtandyng and memorye, which as a treaſory, hath power to retayne, and alſo to erogate and dyſtribute, whan oportunitie happeneth. And for the excellency of this thyng, ſome noted to be in mans ſowle a dyuine ſubſtaunce. As Pythagoras, or ſomme of his ſcolers, wrytynge his ſentence, ſayth in this wiſe, ſpeakynge to man,
               
                  
                     ¶ Nowe in thy ſelfe haue thou good confidēce
                     Sens mortall men be of the kynde diuine
                     In whoſe nature a reuerent excellence
                     Appereth clere, which all thynge doth defyne.
                  
               
               ¶ Whyche ſentence of Pythagoras, is nat reiected neither of Plato, whiche approched nexte vnto the catholyke writers, nor of diuines, which interprete holy ſcripture,

takynge the ſowle for the image and ſimilitude of god.
               ¶ More ouer, Plato affirmeth, that there Sciēce frō whens hit procedeth. plato in Time us. is ſette in the ſoule of man, cōmyng in to the worlde, certayn ſpices, or as it were ſedes of thinges, and rules of artes or ſciences. Wherfore Socrates, in the boke of ſcience, reſembleth hym ſelfe to a midwife, ſayinge, plato in Theage. In teachynge yonge men, he dyd put into them no ſcience, but rather brought for the that, whyche all redy was in them, lyke as the mydwyfe brought nat in the childe, but beynge conceyued, dyd helpe to brynge it forthe. And lyke as in houndes is a power or diſpoſition to hunt, In horſes and greyhoundes an aptitude to renne ſwyftly, ſo in the ſowles of men is ingenerate a leme of ſcience, whyche with the mixture of a terreſtryall ſubſtaunce is obfuſcate, or made darke. But where there is a perfite maſter prepared in tyme, the bryghtnes of the ſcience appereth polyte and clere, like as the power and aptitude of the beaſtes before reherſed, appered nat to the vttermoſt, excepte it be by Exercyſe prouoked, and that ſlouthe and dulneſſe, beinge plucked from theym by Induſtrie, be induced vnto the contynualle acte: whyche as Plato affyrmethe, is proued alſo in the mayſter and the dyſciple.
               
                  
¶ Semblablye the foreſay de Socrates, in Platos boke of ſapiēce, ſaith to one Theages, Neuer man lerned of me any thynge, all though by my company, he became wyſer, I onely exhortynge, and the good ſpiryte inſpirynge.
               ¶ Whiche wonderfull ſentence, as me ſeemeth, may wel accorde with our catholike faythe, and be receyued into the commentaryes of the moſte perfecte dyuines. For as well that ſentence, as al other before reherſed, doo comprobate with holy Scripture, that god is the fountain of Sapience, lyke as he is the ſouerayne begynnyng of all generation.
               ¶ Alſo it was wonderfully well expreſſed, of whom Sapiēce is ingendred, by a poete Sapience frō whens named Affranius, whoſe verſes were ſette ouer the porche of the Temple, where the Senate of Rome moſte commonly aſſembled. Whiche verſes were in this maner,
               
                  Vſus me genuit, mater peperit Memoria. Sophiam me Graii vocant, vos Sopientiam. Whyche in Englyſhe maye be in this wyſe tranſlated.

                     Memory hight my mother, my fader Experyēce
                     Grekes call me Sophi, you name me Sapiēce.
                  
               
               ¶ By vſe or experience, in theſe verſis expreſſed, the poete intēded, as wel thoſe actes, which we our ſelfe daily do practiſe, as

alſo them, whiche beinge done by other in tyme paſſed, for the fruite or vtilitie, whyche thereof ſucceded, were allowed and alſo proued to be neceſſary. And the cauſe, why the poete conioyneth Experience and Memorye togyther (as it were in a lefulle matrimonye, Experience by gettynge, and Memorie alwaye producynge that incomparable fruite, called Sapience) is, for that Memorie in her operation proprelye ſuccedeth Experience, for that, whych is preſently do one, we perceyue, that whiche is to come, we coniecte or dyuyne: but that, whiche is paſſed, onely we haue in our memorye. For as Ariſtotel declareth wonder Ariſtoteles de memoria et reminiſcētis lib. ii. fully in an example, In the princypall ſenſe of Manne there is conceyued an image or fygure of a thynge, whyche by the ſame ſenſe is perceyued, as longe as it is retayned intiere or hole, and (as I mought ſay) conſolydate, pure, manyfeſte, or playne, and withoute blemmyſſhe, in ſuche wyſe, that in euerye parte of it, the mynde is ſtered or occupyedde, and alſo by the ſame mynde, hit maye be throughely perceyued and knowen, nat as an ymage in it ſelfe but as repreſentynge an nother thynge.
               This is proprelye Memorie. But yf the hoole ymage or fygure be nat retayned in the mynde, but parte therof onely remayneth,

parte is put out, eyther by the length of tyme, or by ſome other myſhappe or iniurie, ſo that it can neyther bryng the mynd eftſones vnto it, nor it can be called agayne of the mynde, as often as by that portion, whyche ſtyll remayneth, and hath aboden alway intiere and cleane, the reſidewe that was therto knytte and adioyned, and late ſemed for the tyme deed or bireft from the mynde, is reuiued and (as it were) retourned home agein, it is than had for redemed or reſtored, and is proprely called REMEM BRAVNCE.
               
               ¶ This is the expoſition of the noble Philoſopher, which I haue writen, principally to thentent to ornate our langage, with vſynge wordes in their propre ſignification. Wherof, what commoditie maye enſue, all wyſe men wyll (I doubte nat) conſider.
            
            
               ¶ what is the true ſignification of vnderſtandynge. Cap. XXIII.
               
               FOr as moche as in the begynnynge of the fyrſte boke of this warke, I endeuoured my ſelfe to proue, that by the order of mannes creation, preeminence in degree ſhulde be amonge men, accordynge as they do excell in the pure influēce of vnderſtandynge, whiche can nat be denyed to

be the pryncipall parte of the ſowle: ſome reder perchaunce, meued with dyſdayne, wyl for that one aſſertiō, immediatly reiect this warke, ſayinge, that I am of a corrupt or folyſhe oppinion, ſuppoſynge that I do intende by the ſayde wordes, that no man ſhulde gouerne or be in auctoritie, but onely he whiche ſurmounteth all other in doctryne, whiche in his haſtye malyce he demeth, that I only do meane, where I ſpeke of vnderſtandynge.
               ¶ I ſuppoſe all men do knowe, that man is made of body and ſoule, and that the ſoule in preeminence excelleth the body, as moche as the mayſter or owner excelleth the houſe, or the artificer excelleth his inſtrumentes, or the kynge his ſubiectes. And therfore Saluſte in the conſpiracie of Cathalyne ſaythe, We vſe ſpecially the rule of the ſoule, and ſeruice of the body: the one we participate with goddis, the other with beaſtes. And Tulli ſayth, Mannes ſoule, Ci. tuſ
                        •
                     . 
                        •
                     . lib. 1. being decerpt or taken of the portion of diuinitie called MENS, maye be compared with none other thynge (if a man moughte lefully ſpeke it) but with god hym ſelfe.
               ¶ Alſo the noble dyuine CHRISOSTOMVS, 
                  Chriſoſtode reparatione lapſi. ſayth, The body was made for the ſoule, and not the ſoule for the body. Howe it is to be further knowen, that the ſoule is

of thre partes: the one, wherein is the power or efficacie of growynge, whiche is alſo in herbes and trees, as well as in man, & that parte is called vegetatyfe. An other part, wherin man doth participate with all other thinges liuing, which is called ſenſytife, by reaſon that ther of the ſenſis do procede, which be dyſtributed into dyuers inſtrumentall partes of the body, as ſyght into the eien, heryng to the eares, ſmellynge to the noſe, taſtynge to the mought, felyng to euery part of the body, wherin is blode, without the whiche vndoubtedly maye be no felynge. The thyrde part of the ſoule is named the parte intellectuall or of vnderſtandynge, whiche is of all the other moſte noble, as wherby man is moſt like vnto god and is preferred before al other creatures. For where other beaſtes by their ſenſes do feele, what thynge do profytte theym, and what doth annoy them: onely man vnderſtandeth, wherof the ſayde contrary diſpoſitions do come, and by what meanes they do eyther helpe or annoy: alſo he perceyueth the cauſes of the ſame thyng, and knoweth howe to reſyſt, where and whan'nede dothe requyre: and with reaſon and crafte howe to gyue remedye: and alſo with labour and induſtry, to prouyde that thynge, whiche is holſome or profitable. This moſt

pure parte of the ſoule, and (as Ariſtotelle Ariſt. li. 1. de anima. ſaythe) deuine, impaſſyble, and incorruptibic, is named in latine INTELLECTVS, whervnto I can finde no propre englyſſhe, but Underſtanding. For intelligēce, which cōmeth of Intelligentia, is the perceiuing of that, which is fyrſt conceyued by vnderſtā
                  dyng, called Intellectus. Alſo intelligence is now vſed for an elegant word where there is mutuall treaties or appointmentes, eyther by letters or meſſage, ſpecially concerning warres, or like other gret affaires betwene princis or noble mē. wherfore I wyl vſe this word vnderſtanidng, for Intellectus, vntyll ſomme other more propre englyſſhe worde may be founden and broughte in cuſtome. But to perceiue more playnly, what thyng it is, that I call vnderſtandynge, It is the principall parte of the ſoule, which is occupied about the beginninge or originall cauſes of thynges that maye fall in to mans knowlege: and his office is, before that any thyng is attempted, to thinke, conſidre, and prepence, and after often toſſynge it vp and downe in the mynde, to exercyſe that power: the propretie wherof is to eſpie, ſeke for, enſerche, and fynde out: which vertue is referred to wyt, which is as it were the inſtrument of vnderſtandynge.
               ¶ Moreouer after the thinges be inuēted,

coniected, perceyued, and by longe tyme and often conſydered, and that the mynde dyſpoſeth her ſelfe to executiō or actual operation: thanne the vertue, named PRVDENCE, fyrſt purteth her ſelfe forwardes, and thā appereth her induſtry and labour, for as moche as ſhe teacheth, warneth, exhorteth, ordereth, and profiteth, lyke to a wyſe capitayne, that ſetteth his hoſt in arraye. And therfore it is to be remembred, that the office or duetie of vnderſtandynge, precedeth the interpriſe of actes, and is in the begynnynge of thynges. I call that begynnynge, wherin before any matter taken an hande, the mynde and thoughte is occupied, and that a man ſercheth and douteth, whether it be to be entrepriſed, & by what way, and in what tyme it is to be executed. Who by this lytell introduction knowynge, what vnderſtandynge doth ſignifie, wyl not ſuppoſe, that he, whiche therin doth excel, is not with honour to be aduaunced? Than it foloweth not by this argumente, that for as moche as he that excellethe other in vnderſtandyng, ſhuld be preferred in honour, therfore no man ſhulde be preferred to honour, but onely they that excel other in lernynge. No man hauynge naturall reaſon, thoughe he neuer redde logyke, wyliudge this to be a good argument, conſiderynge

that vnderſtandynge, called in latine Intellectus and Mens, is by it ſelfe ſufficient, and is not of any neceſſite annexed to doctrine, but doctrine procedeth of vnderſtandynge. But if doctrine be alwaye attendynge vpon vnderſtandynge, as the daughter vpon the mother, vndoubtedly than vnderſtandyng muſt be the more perfect, and of a more efficacie, beinge increaſed by the inuentions and experiences of many other declared by doctrine, no one man without inſpyration hauinge knowlege of all thyng. I call DOCTRINE 
                  Ariſt. ethi. li. 5. poſteriorū. i. politice. li. 1. dyſcipline intellectife, or lerning, whiche is eyther in writinge or by reporte of thynges before knowen, whiche procedith from one man to an other. That which I haue ſayde, is in this wyſe confyrmed by Salomon, ſaying, A man that is wiſe, by heryng Prouer. 
                        •
                     . ſhall become wyſer, And he that hath vnderſtandynge, ſhall be a gouernour. Seneca ſayth, We inſtructe our chyldren in liberall ſciences, not bycauſe thoſe ſcyences may gyue any vertue, but bycauſe they prepare the mynde, and make it apt to receiue vertue. Whiche beinge conſidered, no man wyll deny, but that they be neceſſary, to eeuery man, that coueyteth very nobylitie. whiche, as I haue often tymes ſayde, is in the hauynge and vſe of vertue. And verely in whom doctrine hath ben founden, ioynid

with vertue, there vertue hath ſemed excel lent, and as I mought ſaye triumphant.
               ¶ Scipio, cōmon of the moſte noble houſe of the Romaynes, in hyghe lernynge and knowlege of the nature of thinges wonder full ſtudyous, hauynge all waye with hym the mooſte excellente Philoſophers and poetes that were in his time, was an example and myrrour of martiall proweſſe, contynence, deuotion, liberalitie, and of all other vertues.
               ¶ Cato, called vticenſis, named the chiefe pilar of the publike weale of the Romains, was ſo moche inflamed in the deſire of lernyng, that (as Suetonius writeth) he coude not tēpre him ſelfe in redinge greke bokes whiles the Senate was ſyttynge.
               ¶ Howe moch it profited to the noble Auguſtus, whiche vntyll the deathe of his vncle Iulius Ceſar, dylygentely applyed his ſtudy in Athenes, it wel appered after that the Ciuile warres were all finiſſhed: whan he refourmynge the hole aſtate of the publyke weale, ſtablyſhed the Senate, and takyng vnto hym ten honorable perſonages, dayely in his owne perſone conſulted with them of matters, to be reported twyſe in a monethe to the Senate, in ſuche wyſe aydynge and helpynge forthe that moſte noble court with his incomparable ſtudy and

dylygence.
               ¶ The emperour Titus, ſonne to Uaſpaſian, for his lernynge and vertue was named the delycate of the worlde.
               ¶ Marcus Antoninus, the ēperour, was in euery kynde of lerning ſo excellent, that he was therefore openly named the philoſopher, not in reproche (as men do nowe a days in deſpite cal them philoſophers and poetes, whom they perceyue ſtudyous in ſondry good diſciplines) but to the augmē tatiō of his honour. For being of his owne nature aptly inclined to embrace vertue, he addynge to abundance of lerning, became therby a wonderfull and perfecte prynce, beynge neither of ſtudy withdrawen from affayres of the publyke weale, nor by any buſynes vtterly plucked from philoſophy, and other noble doctrines. By the whiche mutuall coniunction and iuſte temperaunce of thoſe two ſtudyes, he attayned to ſuche a fourme in all his gouernaunce, that he was named and taken for father of the ſenate, of the people, and vnynerſally of all the hole empyre.
               ¶ Moreouer, his dedes and wordes were of all men had in ſo hyghe eſtimation and reuerence, that bothe the Senate and peo ple toke of him lawes and rules of their liuinge. And in his gouernance and propre

lyuinge, as well at home in his houſe, as in his ciuile buſines, he was to hym ſelfe the onely lawe and example. And as he was aboue other hygheſt in auctoritie, ſo by the vniuerſall oppinion of al men he was iuged to be of all other men than lyuinge the beſt and alſo the wyſeſte.
            
            
               Of Experience whiche haue preceded our tyme, with a defence of Hiſtories. Ca. XXIIII.
               
               
                  EXPERIENCE, wherof commeth wyſe dome, is in two maner of wyſe: The one is actes commytted or done by other men, wherof profytte or damage ſuccedynge, we maye (in knowynge or beholdinge it) be therby inſtructed to apprehēde Titus Liuius in ꝓemio. li. 1. the thyng, which to the publyke weale, or to our owne perſones, maye be commodious: and to exchue that thynge, which eyther in the begynnynge, or in the concluſyon appereth noyſome and vycyous. The knowlege of this Experience is called Example, & is expreſſed by hyſtory, whiche of Tulli is called the lyfe of memory. And ſoo Hyſtoryes wherfore they be cō mendable. it agreeth wel with the verſis of Affranius, by melate declared. And therfore to ſuche perſones, as do contempne auncient hiſtories, reputynge them among leaſynges and

fātaſies (theſe be their wordes of reproch) it maye be ſayde, that they fruſtrate Experience: whiche (as the ſayde Tulli ſaythe) is the lyght of vertue, whiche they wolde be ſene ſo moche to fauour, all though they do ſeldome embrace it. And that ſhall they perceyue many feſtely, if they wyll a lyttell whyle laye a parte theyr accuſtomed obſtinacie, and ſuffre to be diſtilled into their eares two or thre dropes of the ſwete oyle of remembraunce.
               ¶ Let them reuolue in theyr myndes generally, that there is no doctryne, be it eyther diuyne or humayne, that is not eyther all expreſſed in hiſtory, or at the leſte mixte with hyſtorie. But to thentente that there ſhall be lefte none ignoraunce, wherby they mought be detained in theyr errour, I wyl nowe declare vnto them what it is, that is called an hyſtorye, and what it comprehendeth.
               ¶ Fyrſte it is to be noted, that it is a greke name, and commeth of a worde or verbe in Myſt or yewhat it ſi gnifieth. Greeke Hiſtoreo, whiche dothe ſignifie, to knowe, to ſe, to enſerche, to enquere, to here, to lerne, to tell, or expounde vnto other. And than muſte hiſtorie, which commeth therof, be wonderful profitable, whiche leaueth nothynge hyd from mans knoledge, that vnto hym maye be eyther pleaſaunte

or neceſſary. For it not onely reporteth the geſtes or actes of pryncis or capitaynes, theyr counſaylles and attemptates, entrepriſes, affaires, maners in liuing good and bad, deſcryptions of regions and cities with theyr inhabitantes: but alſo hit bryngeth to our knowlege, the fourmes of ſondry publyke weales, with theyr augmē
                  tations and decayes, and occaſyon therof. More ouer preceptes, exhortations, counſayles, and good perſwaſyons, comprehē
                  ded in quicke ſentences and eloquente orations. Fynally ſoo large is the compaſe of that, whiche is named hiſtorie, that it comprehendeth all thynge that is neceſſarye to be put in memory. In ſoo moche, as Aryſtotelle, where he declareth the partes of mannes body, with theyr deſcryption and offices, and alſo the ſondry formes and diſpoſytions of all beaſtes, foules, and fiſhes, with theyr generation, nameth his boke an hiſtorye. Semblably Theophraſt his ſcholer, a noble philoſopher, deſcryuynge all herbes and trees, whereof he mought haue the trewe knowledge, intytleth his boke, The hyſtorye of plantes. And finally Plini the elder, calleth his mooſt excellent and wonderfull warke, the hiſtorye of nature: in the whiche boke he nothynge omytteth, that in the boſome of Nature is conteyned,

and maye be by mannes wytte comprehended, and is worthye to be hadde in remenbraunce. Whiche auctorities of theſe three noble and excellent lerned men, approueth the ſygnification of HISTORIE, to agree wel with the expoſition of the verbe Hiſtoreo, wherof it commeth.
               ¶ Nowe let vs ſe what booke of holy ſcripture, I meane the olde teſtament and the newe, maye be ſayde, to haue no part of hiſtorie. The fiue bokes of Moiſes, the boke of Iuges, the foure bokes of kinges, Iob, Heſter, Iudeth, Ruth, Thobias, And alſo the hiſtorie of Machaebes (whiche frome the other is ſeperate) I ſuppoſe no manne wyll denye, but that they be all hiſtoricall: or (as I mought ſay) intier hiſtories. Alſo Eſdras, Nemias, Ezechiell, and Daniel, all though they were prophetes: yet be their warkes compacte in fourme of narrations, whiche by oratours be called enunciatyue, and onely perteyneth to hyſtories, wherin is expreſſed a thynge done, and perſonnes named. All the other prophetes, thoughe they ſpeake of the tyme future or to come, whiche is out of the deſcription of an hiſtorie, yet eyther in rebukinge the ſynnes and enormities paſſed, or bewayling the deſtruction of their countrey, or captiuitie of the people, and ſuch like calamitie or miſerable

aſtate, alſo in meuynge or perſwadynge the people, they do recite ſome circumſtaunce of a narration.
               ¶ But now be we commen to the newe teſtamēt, and principally the bokes of the Euangeliſtes, vulgarely called the goſpelles, whiche be one contexte of an hiſtorie: doo not they conteyne the temporall lyfe of our ſauiour Chryſte, kyng of kynges, and lorde of the worlde, vntyll his glorious aſſention? And what thynge lacketh therin, that dothe perteine to a perfect hiſtorie? There lacketh not in thynges, ordre and dyſpoſition, in the contexte or narration, verytye, in the ſentences grauytye, vtylytie in the counſaylles, in the perſwaſyons doctryne, in expoſytions or declaratiōs facylitie. The bokes of actes of apoſtelles, what thynge is it elles but a playne hyſtorie? The epiſtles of ſayncte Paule, ſaincte Peter, ſainct Iohn̄, ſayncte Iames, and Iudas, the apoſtles, do conteyne counſayles and aduertiſementes in the fourme of orations, recytynge diuers places, as wel out of the olde teſtament, as out of the goſpels, as it were an abbreuiate, called of the grekes and latines Epitoma. This is well knowen to be true, of them that haue had any leaſure to rede holy ſcripture: who remembring them ſelfes by this my lytel induction, wyl leaue

to neglecte hiſtorye, or contemne it with ſo generalle a dyſprayſe as they haue benne ac cuſtomed.
               ¶ But yet ſome wyll impugne them with a more particuler obiection, ſayinge, The hiſtories of the Grekes and Romayns be nothynge but lyes, and faynynge of poetes: ſome ſuche perſons there be, betwene whō and good auctours haue euer ben perpetual hoſtilitie. Fyrſte howe doo they knowe, that all the hyſtoryes of Greekes and Romaynes be leaſynges, ſens they fynde not, that any ſcripture autentyke, made aboute that tyme that thoſe hiſtories were writen, do reproue or cōtemne them? But the moſt catholike and renoumed doctours of Chriſtis religiō, in the corroboratiō of their argumentes and ſentēces, do allege the ſame hiſtories, and vouche (as I mought ſay) to theyr aide the autoritie of the writars. And yet ſom of thoſe Rabines (in goddis name) whiche in compariſon of the ſayd noble doctours, be as who ſaythe petites, and vnneth lettred: wyl preſume, with theyr owne ſely wittes, to dyſproue that, whiche bothe by auncientie of time, and conſent of bleſſed and noble doctours, is allowed, & by theyr warkes honoured.
               ¶ If they wyl coniect hiſtories to be lyes, bycauſe they ſome tyme make reporte of

thynges ſene, and actes doone, whiche do ſeme to the reders incredyble: by the ſame reaſon maye they not onely condempne all holy ſcripture, whiche conteyneth thynges more wonderful, thanne any hyſtorian writeth, but alſo exclude credulitie vtterly from the company of man? For howe many thynges be daily ſene, whiche being reported vnto hym that neuer lawe them, ſhulde ſeme impoſſible?
               ¶ And if they wyl allege, that al thyng cō
                  teined in holy ſcripture, is approbat by the hole conſent of all the clergie of Chryſtendome, at diuers generall counſayles aſſembled: Certes the ſame counſailes neuer diſproued or reiected the hiſtories of grekes or Romaynes, but the moſte catholike and excellent lerned men of thoſe congregations, embraced theyr examples, and ſowing them in their warkes, made of them to the churche of Chriſte, a neceſſarye ornament. Admytte, that ſome hiſtories be interlaced with leaſynges: why ſhulde we therfor neglecte them? ſens the affaires there reported, nothynge concerneth vs, we beynge therof no parteners, ne therby onely, may receyue any damage. But if by redyng the ſage counſayle of Neſtor, the ſubtylle perſuaſions of Uliſſes, the compendious grauitie of Menelaus, the imperyall maieſtie

of Agamemnon, the proweſſe of Achilles, and valiant courage of Hector, we may apprehende any thynge, wherby our wyttes maye be amended, and our perſonages be more apte to ſerue our publyke weale and our prynce: what forceth it vs, though Homere write leaſynges?
               ¶ I ſuppoſe no man thynketh, that Eſope wrate goſpels: yet who doubteth, but that in his fables, the foxe, the hare, & the wolf, though they neuer ſpake, do teache many good wyſedomes? whiche being well conſydered, men (if they haue not auowed to repugne agaynſt reaſon) ſhall confeſſe with Quintilian, that fewe, and vneth one maye be founde of auncient writars, whiche ſhall not bringe to the redars ſome thyng cōmodious: And ſpecially they that do write maters hiſtoricall, the leſſon wherof is as it were the myrrour of mans life, expreſſinge actually, and (as it were at the eyen) the beautie of vertue, and the deformytie and lothelynes of vice. Wherfore Lactantius Lactātius lib. 3. ſaythe, Thou muſte nedes peryſhe, if thou knowe not, what is to thy lyfe profytable, that thou maiſt ſeke for it: and what is daū
                  gerous, that thou maiſt flee and eſcheue it. Whiche I dare affirme maye come ſoneſt to paſſe by the redyng of hiſtories, and reteinynge them in continuall remembraunce.
            
            
               
               The Experience or practyſe neceſſary in the perſon of a gouernour of a publyke weale. Cap. xxv.
               THe other experiēce, whiche is in our propre perſones, and is of ſome men called practiſe, is no ſmal moment or efficacie in the acquiringe of Sapience: in ſo moche that it ſemeth, that no operation or affaire may be perfecte, nor no ſcience or arte complete, except experience be there vnto added, wherby knowlege is ratyfied, and (as I mought ſaye) conſolidate.
               ¶ It is written, that the gret kynge Alexander, on a tyme beinge (as it hapned) vnoccupied, came to the ſhop of Apelles, the excellent paynter, and ſtandynge by hym, whiles he paynted, raiſoned with him of lines, adumbrations, proportions, and other like thinges perteining to imagery, whiche the paynter a lytel whyles ſufferyng, at the laſt ſaid to the kynge, with countenance all ſmylynge, Seeſt thou noble prynce, howe the boye, that gryndeth my colours, dothe laughe the to ſcorne? whiche wordes the kynge toke in good parte, and helde hym therwith iuſtely corrected, conſideringe by his owne office in martiall affaires, that he than had in hande, howe great a portion of knowlege faileth, where lacketh experiēce.

And therin gouernours ſhall nat diſdayne to be reſembled vnto phiſitions, conſyderynge their offyces in curynge and preſeruynge, be moſte lyke of any other.
               ¶ That parte of Phiſycke, called Rationall, whereby is declared the faculties or powers of the body, the cauſes, accidentes, and tokens of ſyckeneſſes, can nat always be ſure, without ſome experience in the temperature or diſtemperature of the regions, in the diſpoſition of the pacyente, in diete, concoction, quyetneſſe, exercyſe, and ſlepe. And Galene, prince of phiſitiōs, exhorteth them, to knowe exactely the accuſtomed diete of their patientes, whyche can nat happen without moche reſorte into their companies, ſeryouſely notynge their vſage in dyete. Semblably the vnyuerſalle ſtate of a countray or citie, may be well likened to the body of man. Wherfore the gouernours, in the ſtede of phiſitions, attendynge on their cure, oughte to knowe the cauſes of the decay of theyr publike weale, whyche is the helthe of theyr countrey or cytie, and than with expedition to procede to the mooſte ſpedy and ſure remedy. But certes the very cauſe of decay, ne the true meane to cure it, may neuer be ſufficientely knowen of gouernours, except they themſelues wylle perſonally reſorte and pervſe

all partes of the countreyes, vnder theyr gouernaunce, and inſerche diligentely, as well what be the cuſtomes and maners of people good and badde, as alſo the cōmodities and diſcommodities: howe the one may be preſerued, the other ſuppreſſed, or at the leaſte wayes amended.
               ¶ ALSO amonge them that haue miniſtration or execucyon of Iuſtyce (whyche I maye lyken vnto the membres) to taſte and fele, howe euery of them do practiſe their offyces, that is to ſaye, whether they do it febly or vnprofytably, and whether it happen by neglygence, diſcourage, corruptiō, or affection.
               ¶ BVT NOVVE may the reder with good reaſon demaunde of me, by what maner experiēce, the govnors may come to the true knowlege herof. That ſhal I now declare.
               ¶ Fyrſt the gouernours them ſelfes, adorned withvertue, being in ſuche wiſe an example of lyuyng to their inferiors, and makyng the people iudges of them and theyr domeſticall ſeruātes and adherentes, ſhuld ſondry tymes duringe their gouernaunce, eyther purpoſely, or by waye of ſolace, repayre into dyuers partes of their iurisdiction or prouince, and makyng their abode, ſhal partly thē ſelfes attentifely here, what is cōmonly or priuately ſpoken, concerning

the aſtate of the countrey or perſons, partly ſhall cauſe theyr ſeruauntes or frendes, of whoſe honeſtie and trouthe they haue good aſſuraunce, to reſorte, in diſportynge them ſelues in dyuers townes & vyllages, and as they happen to be in company with the inhabytauntes, priuyly and with ſome maner of circumſtance, enquire, what men of hauour dwelle nygh vnto them, what is the forme of their lyuyng, of what eſtimation they be in iuſtyce, liberalitie, diligence in executyng the lawes, and other ſemblable vertues. Contrary wyſe, whether they be oppreſſours, couetous men, mayntenors of offendours, remiſſe or negligent, if they be offycers. And what the examyners doo here the greater nombre of people report, that they intierly and truely denounce it to the ſayde gouernour: by the whiche intymation, and their owne prudent endeuour, they ſhall haue infallible knowlege, who amonge the inhabytauntes be men towarde the publike weale beſt diſpoſed. Them ſhal they call for, and mooſte courtaiſely entertayne, and (as it were) louyngely embrace, with thankes for their good wyl and endeuour towarde the publike weale, commending them opēly for their vertue & diligēce: offryng to them their aſſiſtēce in their ſemblable doinges, and alſo their furtherance

towarde the due recompence of theyr trauayles.
               ¶ On the contrary part, whan they ſe any of them, who amonge their inferiours, obſerue nat Iuſtyce, and lyke wyſe offycers, whyche be remiſſe or fauourable to common offendours and brekers of lawes, and negligent in the execution of their auctorities, to them ſhall they gyue condigne reprehentions, manifeſting their defautes in omyttynge their dueties, and in gyuyngeuyl example to theyr cōpanyons, alſo boldnes to tranſgreſſe and to contemne the lawes. Declaryng alſo, that they mynyſtring ſuch occaſion, deſer ue nat only a ſharpe rebuke, but alſo ryght greuous puniſhement.
               ¶ And if he, that thus admonyſſheth, be a ſouerayne gouernour or prince, and ſhortly herevpon doth ratifye his wordes, by expellynge ſomme of theym, whyche I nowe reherſed, from theyr offyces, or otherwiſe ſharpely correctynge them, and contrary wiſe aduaunſynge higher ſome good man, and whom he hath proued to be diligent in the execution of Iuſtyce, vndoubtedly he ſhall inflame the appetite and zele of good mynyſters, and alſo ſuſcytate or raiſe the courage of all men, inclyned to vertue, ſo, that there ſhall neuer lacke men apte and propyie to be ſet in auctoritie. Where the

merites of menne be hydde and vnknowen to the ſoueravgne gouernour, and the neglygent miniſters or inferiour gouernours haue not onely equalle thanke or rewarde, but perchance moch more than they, whiche be diligent, or wolde be, if they mought haue aſſiſtence, there vndoubtedly is greuous diſcourage, and peryll of conſcience: for as moche as they omytte oftentymes theyr dueties and offyces, reputyng it gret foly and madnes, to acquyre by the executynge of Iuſtyce, nat onely an opinyon of tyrannye amonge the people, and conſequently hatred, but alſo malignitie amonge his equalles and ſuperiours, with a note of ambition.
               ¶ This reuolued and conſidered by a circumſpecte gouernour, lorde GOD, howe ſhortely, and with howe lyttell diffycultie, ſhall he diſpoſe the publycke weale, that is greued, to receyue medycyne, wherby hit ſhoulde be ſoone healed and reduced to his perfection.
            
            
               ¶ Of Detraction, and the ymage therof made by the peynter Appelles. Cap. XXVI.
               
                  THERE IS MOCHE conuerſaunt amonge men in authoritie a vyce very vgly and monſtruous, who vnder the

pleaſant habyte of frendſhyp & good counſayle, with a breathe peſtilenciall infecteth the wyttes of them that nothynge myſtruſteth. This monſter is called in englyſſhe DETRACTION, in latin Calumnia, whoſe propretie I wyll nowe declare.
               ¶ If a man, be determined to equitie, hauynge the eyen and eares of his mynde, ſet onely on the trouth, and the publike weale of his countreye, wyll haue no regarde to any requeſte or deſyre, but procedeth directely in the admyniſtration of iuſtyce, eyther he, whiche by Iuſtyce is offended, or ſome his fautours, abbettours, or adherē
                  tes, if he hym ſelfe, or any of them be in ſeruyce or famyliaritie with hym that is in auctoritie, as ſoone as by any occaſyon, mention happeneth to be made of hym, who hath executed Iuſtyce exactely, forthwith they imagine ſome vyce or defaut, be it neuer ſo lyttell, wherby they maye mynyſſhe his credence, & craftily omittyng to ſpeake any thynge of his rygour in Iuſtice, wylle note and touche ſomme thynge of his maners, wherin ſhall eyther ſeme to be lyghtnes, or lacke of grauitie, or to moch ſowernes or lacke of Ciuilytie: or that he is nat beneuolent to hym in auctoritie, or that he is nat ſufficient to receyue any dygnitie, or to diſpatche matters of weighty importāce

or that he is ſuperfluous in wordes, or els to ſcarſe. Alſo if he lyue temperately, and delyteth moche in ſtudy, they embrayd him with nygardſhyp, or in deriſlon, calle hym a clerke or a poete, vnmete for any other purpoſe. And this do they couertely and with a more grauitie, than any other thyng that they enterpriſe.
               ¶ This euyll reporte, called Detraction, The image of detraction. was wonderfully wel expreſſed in figures, by the mooſte noble peynter APELLES. After he was dyſcharged of the cryme, wherof he was falſely accuſed to Ptholomee, kyng of Aegypt, hauyng for his amē
                  des of the ſaid kyng. xii. M. poundes ſterlynge, and his accuſer to his bondman perpetually, the table, wherin detraction was expreſſed, he peynted in this forme.
               ¶ At the ryght hande was made ſyttyng a man, hauynge longe cares, puttynge forth his hande to DETRACTION, who farre of came towardes hym. Aboute this man ſtoode two womenne, that is to ſaye, Ignorance, and Suſpicion. On the other ſide came Detraction, a woman aboue meaſure well trymmed, all chaufed and angrye, hauynge her aſpecte or loke lyke to the fyre, in ſhewynge a maner of rage or furye. In hyr lefte hande, ſhe helde a brennynge torche or bronde, and with her other hand

ſhe drewe by the heare of his heed, a yong man, who helde vppe his handes towarde heuen, callynge god and the ſaynctes for wytneſſe: with her came a man pale, and euyll fauoured, beholdynge the yonge man intentifely, like vnto one that had ben with longe ſicknes conſumed, whom ye mought lyghtely coniecte, to be enuye. Alſo there folowed two other women, that trymmed and apparayled Detraction, the one was Treaſon, the other Fraude. After folowid a woman, in a mournyng weede, blacke and ragged, and ſhe was called Repentaunce, who tournynge her backe, weepynge and ſoore aſhamed, behelde Ueritie, who than approched.
               ¶ In this wyſe Apelles deſcribed Detraction, by whome he hym ſelfe was in peryll. Whyche in myne opynion is a ryghte neceſſary matter to be in tables or hangynges, ſet in euery mans houſe, that is in auctorytie, conſyderynge what damage and loſſe, hath enſued, and may hereafter enſue, by this horrible peſtilence, falſe Detraction, to the auoydynge, wherof Luciane, who writeth of this picture, gyueth a notable counſayle, ſayenge,
               ¶ A wyſe man, whan he douteth of the honeſtie and vertue of the perſone accuſed, ſhulde kepe cloſe his eares, and nat open

them haſtely to them, whiche be with this ſickneſſe infected, and put reaſon for a dyligent porter and watche, whiche oughte to examyne and lette in the reportes that be good, and exclude and prohibite them that be contrary. For it is a thyng to laughe at, and verye vnſyttynge, to ordeyne for thy houſe a keper or porter: and to leaue thine eares and mynde to all menne wyde open. Wherfore, whan any perſone commeth to vs, to tel vs any reporte or complaint: Firſt it ſhall behoue vs throughly and euenly to conſidre the thynge, not hauinge reſpecte to the eares of hym that reporteth, or to his fourme of lyuynge, or wyſedome in ſpekynge. For the more vehement the reporter is in perſwadynge, the more dylygente and exacte triall and examynation ought to be vſed. Therfore truſte is not to be giuen to an other mannes iudgement, moche leſſe to the malice of an accuſer. But euery man ſhall reteyne to him ſelfe the power, to enſerche out the trouthe, and leauyng the enuye or dyſpleaſure to the detractour, ſhall ponder or waye the matter indifferentely, that euery thynge, in ſuche wiſe beinge curiouſly inſerched and proued, he may at his pleaſure eyther loue or hate hym, whom he hath ſoo ſubſtauncially tried. For in good fayth, to giue place to detraction at the begynnynge,

is a thynge chyldiſſhe and baſe, and to be eſtemed amonge the moſte great inconueniences and myſchiefes. Theſe be well nyghe the wordes of Luciane: whether the counſayle be good, I remytte it to the wyſe reders. Of one thinge I am ſure, that by Detraction, as wel many good wittes haue ben drowned, as alſo vertue and peynefull ſtudy vnrewarded, and many zelatours or fauourers of the publyke weale, haue ben dyſcouraged.
            
            
               ¶ Of Conſultation and counſaylle, and in what fourme they ought to be vſed in a publyke weale. Capi. XXVII.
               THe griefes or diſeaſes, which of Ariſtotelle, be called the decayes of the publyke weale, being inueſtigate, examyned, and tried by the experience before expreſſed, thā commeth the time and oportunitie of conſultation: wherby, as I ſayd, is prouided the remedies mooſte neceſſary for the healynge of the ſayde grefes, or reparation of decayes.
               ¶ This thynge, that is called CONSVLTATION, 
                  Conſultation. is the generall denomination of the acte, wherin men do deuyſe to gether, and reaſon, what is to be done. Counſayle Counſaile.
                  
is the ſentence or aduiſe particulerly giuen by euery man for that purpoſe aſſembled. Conſultation hath reſpecte to the tyme future or to come, that is to ſaye, the ende or purpoſe ther of is adreſſed to ſome acte or affaire, to be practiſed after the Conſultation. And yet be not all other tymes excluded, but firſte the ſtate of thinges preſente, ought to be examined, the power, aſſiſtēce, and ſubſtance to be eſtemed, ſemblably thin ges paſſed, with moche and longe delyberation, to be reuolued & toſſed in the minde, and to be conferred with them that be preſente, and beinge exactely wayed, the one agaynſte the other, than to inueſtygate or enquire exquiſitely, the fourme and reaſon of the affaire, and in that ſtudye to be holly reſolued ſo effectually, that they, which be counſaylours, maye beare with them out of the counſaylle houſe, as it were on theyr ſhulders, not onely what is to be folowed and exployted, but alſo by what meanes or wayes it ſhall be purſued, and howe the affaire may be honourable, alſo what is expedyent, and of neceſſitie, and howe moche is nedefull, and what ſpace and lengthe of tyme, and fynally howe the enterpriſe, beinge achieued and brought to effect, maye be kept and reteined. For often times, after exploitures, hapneth occaſions, eyther by

aſſaultes, or other encombrances of ennemies, or of to moche truſte in fortunes aſſuraunce, or by dyſſobedyence or preſumption of ſome perſones, whome the thynge toucheth, that this laſte parte of Conſultation is omytted, or more rather neglected: where moche ſtudy, trauaile, and coſt haue vtterly periſhed, not onely to the great detriment of infinite perſones, but alſo to the ſubuertion of moſte noble publyke weales.
               ¶ More ouer, it is to be diligently noted, Counſaile proued by thre thīgis that euery counſayle is to be approued by thre thynges principally, that it be ryghtwyſe, that it be good, & that it ſtand wt honeſtie. That which is rightwiſe, is brought in by reaſon. For nothynge is ryghte, that is not ordered by reaſon. Goodnes cometh of vertue, of vertue and reaſon procedeth honeſtie. wherefore counſaile, being compacte of theſe thre, maye be named a perfecte Capytayne, a truſtye companyon, a playne and vnfayned frende. Therfore in commendation therof TITVSLIVIVS 
                  Titus Liuius. li. xv. ſaythe, Many thynges be impeched or let by nature, whiche by counſayle be ſhortely achiued. And veryly the power of Counſayle is wonderfull, hauynge auctoritie as well ouer peace as martiall enterpriſe. And therfore with good reaſon Tulli affirmeth in his boke of offices, armes withoute the

dores be of lytell inportaunce, if counſayle be not at home. And he ſayth ſone after, In thynges moſte proſperous, the counſayle of frendes muſte be vſed. Whiche is ratified by the auctour of the noble warke, named Eccleſiaſticus, ſayinge, My ſonne, with Eccleſiaſt. xxxii. out counſayle ſee thou doo nothynge, and than after thy dede thou ſhalt neuer repent the. The ſame auctour gyueth thre noble preceptes concernynge this matter, which of euery wyſe man ought to be had in continuall memory.
               ¶ Of fooles take thou noo counſayle, for Ecleſiaſticus. viii. they can loue nothynge, but that pleaſethe them ſelfes. Diſcouer not thy counſaile before a ſtranger: for thou knoweſt not what therof may happen. Unto euery man dyſcloſe not thy hart, leſte parauenture he wyl gyue to the a feyned thanke, and after reporte rebukefully of the.
               ¶ Foles (as I ſuppoſe) be they, which be more ladde with affection than reaſon. And whome he calleth ſtraungers, be thoſe, of whoſe fidelitie and wyſedome he is not aſſured: and in the general name of euery man, maye be ſignifyed the lacke of election of counſaylours, which wolde be with a vigilaunt ſerche, and (as I mought ſaye) of all other moſte ſcrupulus.
            
            
               
               What in Conſultation is to be chiefely conſidered. Cap. XXVIII
               
                  THe ende of al doctrine & ſtudy, is good Counſayle, whervnto, Counſaile. as vnto the principall poynte, whiche Geometriciens do call the Centre (which by ſome autours be imagined in the fourme of a cerkle) all doctrynes do ſende theyr effectes lyke vnto equal lignes, as it ſhall appere to theym that wyll rede the bokes of the noble Plato, where he ſhall fynde, that the wyſe Socrates, in euery inueſtigation, whiche is in fourme of a conſultation, vſeth his perſuaſions and demonſtrations by the certayne rules and examples of ſondry ſciences, prouynge therby that the concluſion, and as (I moughte ſay) the perfection of them, is in good coū
                  ſayle, wherin vertue maye be founden, beinge (as it were) his propre mantion or palayce, where her power onely apperethe, concernynge gouernaunce, eyther of one perſone onely, and than it is called morall, or of a multitude, whiche for a dyuerſytie maye be called polityke. Sens counſayle is of ſuche an efficacie, and in thynges concernynge man hath ſuche a preemynence, It is therfore expedyente, that conſultation (wherin counſayle is expreſſed) be very ſeriouſe,

ſubſtanciall, and profitable. Whiche to brynge to effecte, requireth two thinges principally to be conſidered.
               ¶ Fyrſte, that in euery thynge, concerning Conſiderations of Counſaile a publyke weale, no good counſaylour be omytted or paſſed ouer, but that his reaſon therin, be harde to an ende. I cal him a good counſaylour, which (as Ceſar ſayth) in the coniuration of Cataline, whiles he Counſaylours. Sal. bell. Cataline. Counſaylours man conſulteth in doubtfull matters, is voyde of all hate, frendſhyppe, diſpleaſure, or pitie. Howe neceſſary to a publike weale it ſhall be, to haue in any wiſe, mens oppinions declared, it is manifeſt to them, that do remē
                  bre, that in many heades be diuers maners of wyttes, ſome inclined to ſharpenes and rigour, many to pitie & compaſſyon, dyuers to atēperance and meane betwene both extremities, ſome haue reſpect to tranquillitie onely, other, more to welthe and commoditie, dyuers to moche reuoume and eſtimation in honour. There be, that wyll ſpeke all theyr mynde ſodeynely, and perchaunce ryghte well. Dyuers requyre to haue reſpecte and ſtudy, wherin is moche more ſuertie, many wyll ſpeke warely, for feare of diſpleſure, ſome more bolder in vertue, wyll not ſpare, to ſhewe theyr myndes playnely, diuers wyl aſſent to that reaſons, wherwith they ſuppoſe, that he, whiche is

chiefe in auctoritie, wyll be beſte pleaſed. Theſe vndoughtedly be the dinerſyties of wyttes. And more ouer, where there is a greatte noumbre of counſaylours, they all beinge harde, nedes muſt the counſayle be the more perfecte. For ſomtyme perchance one of them, whiche in doctrine, wyrte, or experience is in leaſte eſtimation, may hap to expreſſe ſome ſentence more auailable to the purpoſe, wherin they conſult, than any that before came to the others remembrances. No one man is of ſuch perfection, that he can haue in an inſtant remembraunce of all thynge. Whiche I ſuppoſe was conſidered by Romulus, the fyrſt kyng of Romaines, Dioniſ. Malicarnaſſeus. in the fyrſte conſtitution of theyr publyke weale. For hauing of his owne people but thre thouſande fote men, and thre hundrede horſemen, he chaſe of the eldeſte and wiſeſte of them all, one hundrede counſaylours. But to the more aſſertyon of dyuers mens ſentences, I wyl declare a notable experience, whiche I late hapned to rede.
               ¶ Belinger Baldaſine, a man of great wit, ſynguler lernyng, and excellent wyſedome (Who was one of the counſaylours to Ferdinando, kyng of Arogon) whan any thing doubtfull, or weyghty matter was conſulted of, where he was preſent, afterwarde whan he had ſouped at home in his houſe,

he wolde call before hym all his ſeruantes: and merely purpoſynge to them ſome feyned queſtion or fable, wherin was craftely hyd, the matter, whiche remayned doubtful, wolde merely demaunde of euery man his particuler oppinion, and gyuinge good eare to theyr iudgementes, wold conferre toget her euery mannes ſentence, and with good delyberation pondering theyr value, he at the laſte perceyued, whiche was the trueſt and moſte apt to his purpoſe: and beinge in this wyſe fournyſhed, tranſlatynge iapes and thynges fained to mater ſerious & true, he amonge the kinges coūſaylours, in gyuinge good and ſubſtancial aduiſe, had alway preeminence. Howe moche commodytie than ſuppoſe ye moughte be taken of the ſentences of many wyſe and expert coū 
                  Homerus. Iliad. pr
                        •
                     . ſaylours? And lyke as Calchas, as Homere writeth, knewe by diuination thynges preſente, thynges to come, and them that were paſſed, ſo coūſaylours garniſhed with lernynge, and alſo experience, ſhall therby conſidre the places, times, and perſonages examing the ſtate of the mater, than practiſed, and expendyng the power, aſſyſtence, and ſubſtance, alſo reuoluyng longe and often tymes in theyr myndes, thinges that be paſſed, and conferrynge theym to the matters that be than in experyence, ſtudiouſly

do ſeke out the reaſon & maner, howe that, which is by thē approued, may be brought to effecte. And ſuche mens reaſons wolde be throughly herde, and at lengthe, for the wyſer that a man is, in tarienge, his wyſedome increaſeth, his reſon is more lyuely, and quycke ſentence aboundeth. And to the more parte of men, whan they be chaufed in reaſonynge, argumentes, ſolutions, exaumples, ſymilitudes, and experymentes do reſorte, and (as it were) flowe vnto their remembrances.
            
            
               ¶ The ſeconde conſyderation to be had in conſultation. Cap. xxix.
               THe ſecond conſyderation is, that the Generall thinges be fore particuler. general & vniuerſall aſtate of the publike weale, wold be preferred in cō
                  ſultation, before any particular cōmoditie: and the profite or damage, which may happen within our owne countrays, wolde be more conſidred, than that, which may happen from other regions: whiche to beleue. cōmune reaſon and experience leadeth vs. For who cōmendeth thoſe gardiners, that wyll put all their diligence in trymmyng or kepynge delicately one knotte or bedde of herbes, ſuffrynge al the remenaunt of their gardeine to be ſubuerted with a gret nombre

of molles, and to attende at noo tyme for the takynge and deſtroyenge of theym, vntyll the herbes, wherin they haue employed all their labours be alſo tourned vp and peryſhed, and the molles increaſed in ſo infinite nombres, that no induſtry or labour, may ſuffice to conſume them: wherby the labour is fruſtrate, and all the gardeyne made vnprofytable, and alſo vnpleaſant. In this ſimilitude to the gardeyn may be reſembled the publike weale, to the gardiners, the gouernours and counſaylours, to the knottes or beddes, ſondry degrees of perſonages, to the molles, vyces, & ſondry enormities, Wherfore the conſultation is but of a ſmall effecte, wherin the vniuerſall aſtate of the publyke wele doth nat occupie the more parte of the tyme, & in that generaltie euery particular aſtate, be nat diligently ordered. For as Tulli ſaith, They that conſulte for parte of the people, and Ci. Ooffia, li. i. neglecte the reſidue, they brynge into the citie or countrey a thynge mooſte pernitious, that is to ſay, ſedition and diſcorde. Wherof it hapneth, that ſome wyll ſeeme to fauoure the multitude, other be inclyned to leene to the beſte ſorte, fewe do ſtudye for all vniuerſally. Whiche hath benne the cauſe, that not onely Athenes (whiche Tulli dothe name) but alſo the Citie and

empire of Rome, with dyuers other cities and realmes, haue decayed and ben fynally brought in extreme deſolation.
               ¶ Alſo Plato, in his booke of Fortitude, Plato in 
                        •
                     achete. ſaythe in the perſone of Socrates, Whan ſo euer a man ſeketh a thynge, for cauſe of an other thynge, the conſultation ought to be alwaye of that thynge, for whoſe cauſe the other thynge is ſought for, and not of that, whiche is ſoughte for bycauſe of the other thynge. And ſurely, wyſe men do conſider, that damage often tymes hapneth, by abuſinge the due fourme of conſultation: men lyke euyl Phiſitions, ſekyng for medicines, er they perfectly knowe the ſickneſſes: and as yuel marchauntes do vtter firſte the wares and commodities of ſtrangers, whiles ſtrangers be robbing of their owne cofers.
               ¶ Therfore theſe thinges, that I haue reherſed, concernyng conſultation, ought to be of all men in auctoritie ſubſtancially pondered, and moſt vigilantly obſerued, if they intende to be to theyr publyke weale profitable: for the whiche purpoſe onely, they be called to be gouernours.
               ¶ And thus I conclude, to write any more of conſultation, whiche is the laſte parte of morall Sapience, and the begynnynge of Sapience politike.
               ¶ Nowe all ye reders, that deſyre to haue

your chyldren to be gouernours, or in any other autoritie in the publike weale of your countrey, if ye brynge them vp, and inſtructe them in ſuche fourme, as in this boke is declared, they ſhall than ſeme to all men, worthy to be in autoritie, honour, and nobleneſſe. And al that is vnder theyr gouernaunce ſhal proſpere and come to perfection, and as a precious ſtone in a riche ouche, they ſhall be beholden and wondred at, and after the deathe of theyr body, theyr ſoules for theyr endeuour, ſhal be incomprehenſibly rewarded of the gyuer of wiſedome, to whō onely be gyuen eternall glorie.
               Amen.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            Thomas Berthelet regius impreſſor excudebat. Cum priuilegio.
            Anno. 1537. menſe lulij
         
      
   