
      
         
            
            A Balad Intituled, the Dekaye of the Duke.
            
               
                  You ſee by good Triall, what coms of the Duke,
                  Turne yet to the Diall, of Gods holie Booke,
               
            
            
               
                  O
                  Ʋr people of England that hold with the Pope,
               May ſee the prefermentes that folowe the ſame,
               The higheſt and loweſt, hee bringes to the Rope,
               And ſtraungers and Tyrantes do laugh at the game.
               You ſee by good triall, what coms of the Duke
               Turne yet to the Diall of Gods holie Booke.
            
            
               ¶ Thus are we ſtill ſpoyled of honor and fame,
               By Prelats that practiſe to poyſon vs all,
               The Pope is the Peſtilence, and Roome hath the name,
               Wher with we come witleſſe to weſtminſter hall.
               You ſee by good triall, what coms of the Duke
               Turne yet to the Diall of Gods holye Booke.
            
            
               ¶ The Duke had great fauor with Juſtice attayned,
               But of an ill matter what could be decreed,
               For Lordes of great Honor where he was arayned,
               Had proofe to apparant, of manie fowle deed.
               You ſee by good triall. &c.
            
            
               ¶ Not trifles, but Treaſons, ſo manie deuiſed,
               As all the world wondred ſuch venom to heare,
               In letters, and anſwers, and writinges compriſed,
               No waye to be conſtred to ſet the Duke cleare.
               You ſe by good triall. &c.
            
            
               ¶ Put of your oppinnion, of all his proceadinge,
               Ipocriſie cloked, coms neuer to good,
               I thinke all the Lawiers were werie of readinge,
               And all the hole people in ſtormes as they ſtoode,
               You ſee by good triall. &c.
            
            
               ¶ To tell the hole treatiſe, the tale were to longe,
               Againſt the good Ladie, our Queene that now raignes
               How manie deuiſes to do her grace wronge,
               By Pope holie practiſe, were pact in his braines.
               You ſee by good triall. &c.
            
            
               ¶ And then to his countrey, what ſequell enſued,
               Alas to apparant, the perrill drewe nie,
               In blood to the elboes we had bin embrewed,
               Which God hath forbidden, that gouernes the ſkye.
               You ſee by good triall. &c.
            
            
               ¶ The Duke or his doinges what more ſhall I tell ye,
               But God of his goodnes yet giue him ſome grace,
               For in myne oppinnion you papiſtes I ſmell ye,
               You are yet to manie that hold with the caſe,
               You ſee by good triall. &c.
            
            
               ¶ Whoſe Rumors yet roaring can hardlie be ſtill,
               A Canckred condicion in kaytiffes vnkinde,
               The deuill now doubteth he is daſhed of his will,
               Yet Babylon babyes will bragge to be blind.
               You ſee by good triall. &c.
            
            
               ¶ When wantons thought worthie, once ſtand on the toppe
               Theire ſteppes are ſo fickle they cannot ſtand ſtill,
               One legge in good faſhion is better to hopp,
               Then two legges at Randon to Ronne where ye will.
               You ſee by good triall. &c.
            
            
               ¶ As pittie lamenteth the loſſe of his grace,
               That once beinge Noble myght Noblie haue done
               So triall tormentith that one in his place,
               To Rebells and Riotes ſo raſhlye woulde ronne.
               You ſee by good triall. &c.
            
            
               ¶ But ſuch as be ſeekers, to ſet all at ſquare,
               With ſtraungers, and neyghbours, of horrible name,
               Do ſhew by theyr Pitchers what Potters they are,
               What Jolie compagnions of Catholique fame.
               You ſee by good triall. &c.
            
            
               ¶ Welwillers are willinge to here and to ſee,
               The good and the Godly regarders of Rule,
               Ilwillers vnwillinge good quiet ſhould bee,
               As Scollers ware trewantes that loue not the ſcoole.
               You ſee by good triall
            
            
               ¶ But neate with our bliſſinge, the brackes of our ſeaſon,
               There haue bin great warninges as this maye be one,
               A Duke of highe honor, to fall to highe Treaſen,
               Both hee, and his honor, how ſoone they be gone.
               You ſee by good triall &c.
            
            
               ¶ Wherfore it behoueth, as God doth aduaunce vs,
               To honour, to fauor, to worſhipp, or welth,
               We are to conſider, it maye ſo bechaunce vs,
               To loſe all together, good hap, and good helthe.
               You ſee by good triall.
            
            
               ¶ Wherfore to our dueties, we are bound to applye,
               Our Queene and our countreye to honor and praiſe,
               Content to liue loe, but if ye ware hie,
               To liue within lawe, and lengthen our dayes.
               You ſee by good triall. &c.
            
            
               ¶ God proſper the Queene, her Nobles and frendes,
               Her ſubjectes aſſured, of euerie degree,
               And God of his goodnes ſhowen the endes,
               Of all her offenders, if anie more bee.
            
            ¶ Finis.
            
               
                  
                     qd.
                     quod
                   W. Elderton.
            
         
      
      
         
            ¶ Imprinted at London in Fleeteſtreate beneath the Conduit, at the ſigne ſigne of ſaynt Iohn Euangeliſt by Thomas Colwell.
            
               
            
         
      
   