
      
         
            
            ¶A new Ballad, declaring the great Treaſon conſpired againſt the young King of Scots, and how one Andrew Browne an Engliſhman, which was the Kings Chamberlaine, preuented the ſame.
            To the tune of Milfield, or els to Greeneſleeues.
            
               JEſus God what a griefe is this,
               that Princes ſubiects cannot be true:
               But ſtill the Deuill hath ſome of his,
               will play their parts whatſoeuer enſue.
               Forgetting what a greeuous thing,
               It is to offend the annointed Kinge:
               Alas for woe, why ſhould it be ſo,
               This makes a ſorowfull heigh ho.
            
            
               In Scotland is a bonie Kinge,
               as proper a youthe as néede to be:
               Well giuen to euery happy thing,
               that can be in a Kinge to ſée.
               Yet that vnluckie countrie ſtill,
               Hath people giuen to craftie will,
               Alas for woe, &c.
               On Whitſon Eue it ſo befell,
               a Poſſet was made to giue the Kinge:
               Whereof his Ladie Nurſe hard tell,
               and that it was a poyſoned thing.
               She cryed and called piteouſlie:
               Now helpe or els the King ſhall die.
               Alas for woe, &c.
            
            
               One Browne that was an Engliſh man,
               and hard the Ladies piteous crye:
               Out with his Sword, and beſturd him than,
               out of the doores in haſte to flie.
               But all the doores were made ſo faſt,
               Out of a window he got at laſt.
               Alas for woe, &c.
            
            
               He met the Biſhop comming faſt,
               hauing the Poſſet in his hande:
               The ſight of Browne made him agaſt,
               who bad him ſtoutly ſtaie and ſtand.
               With him were two that ranne away,
               For feare that Browne would make a fray.
               Alas for woe, &c.
            
            
               Biſhop quoth Browne what haſt thou there,
               nothing at all my fréend ſayde he:
               But a Poſſet to make the King good chéere,
               is it ſo ſayd Browne, that will I ſée,
               Firſt I will haue thy ſelfe begin,
               Before thou goe any further in,
               Be it weale or woe it ſhall be ſo,
               This makes a ſorrowfull heigh ho.
            
            
               The Biſhop ſaide, Browne I doo know,
               thou art a young man poore and bare:
               Liuings on thée I will beſtowe,
               let me go on take thou no care.
               No no quoth Browne I will not be
               A Traitour for all Chriſtiantie,
               Happe well or woe, it ſhall not be ſo,
               Drinke now with a ſorrowfull heigh ho▪
               
            
            
               The Biſhop dranke, and by and by,
               his belly burſt and he fell downe:
               A iuſt reward for his traytery,
               this was a Poſſet in déede quoth Browne,
               
               He ſerched the Biſhop and found the keyes,
               To come to the King when he did pleaſe,
               Alas for woe, &c.
            
            
               As ſoone as the King gat word of this,
               he humbly fell vppon his knee:
               And prayſed God that he did miſſe,
               to taſt of that extremity.
               For that he did perceaue and know,
               His Clergie would betray him ſo:
               Alas for woe, &c.
            
            
               Alas he ſaid vnhappy Realme,
               my Father and Godfather ſlaine:
               My Mother baniſhed O extreame,
               vnhappy fate and bitter bayne.
               And now like Treaſon wrought for me,
               What more vnhappy Realme can be.
               Alas for woe, &c.
            
            
               The King did call his Nurſe to his grace,
               and gaue her twentie pound a yeere:
               And truſtie Browne to in like caſe,
               he Knighted him with gallant géere▪
               
               And gaue him liuings great,
               For dooing ſuch a manly feat:
               As he did ſhoe, to the Biſhops woe,
               which made, &c.
            
            
               When all this Treaſon don and paſt,
               tooke not effect of Traytery:
               Another Treaſon at the laſt,
               they ſought againſt his Maieſtie.
               How they might make their Kinge away:
               By a priuie banket on a daye.
               Alas for woe, &c.
            
            
               Wherat they ment to ſell the King,
               beyonde the ſeas it was decreede▪
               
               Three noble Earles heard of this thing,
               and did preuent the ſame with ſpeede.
               For a Letter came, with ſuch a charme,
               That they ſhould doo theyr King no harme:
               For further woe, if they did ſo,
               Which made a ſorrowfull heigh hoe.
            
            
               The Earle Mourton, told the Douglas then,
               take héede you doo not offend the Kinge:
               But ſhew your ſelues like honeſt men,
               obediently in euery thing.
               For his Godmother will not ſee,
               Her noble Childe miſuſde to be.
               With any woe, for if it be ſo:
               She will make a ſorrowfull heigh ho.
            
            
               God graunt all ſubiects, may be true,
               in England, Scotland, and euerie where:
               That no ſuch daunger may enſue,
               to put the Prince or ſtate in feare.
               That God the higheſt King may ſée,
               Obedience as it ought to be.
               In wealth or woe, God graunt it be ſo,
               To auoide the ſorrowfull heigh ho.
            
            
               VV. Elderton.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            Imprinted at London for Yarathe Iames, dvvelling in Nevvgate Market, ouer againſt Chriſtes Church.
         
      
   