
      
         
            
            The true fourme and ſhape of a monſterous Chyld / Whiche was borne in Stony Stratforde, in North Hampton ſhire. The yeare of our Lord, M. CCCCC. LXƲ.
            ¶ This is the fore parte. 
                  depiction of conjoined twins
               
            
            ¶ This is the backe parte. 
                  depiction of conjoined twins
               
            
            
               THis Childe was borne on Fryday, being the .xxvi. daye of Ianuary, betwyxt .vi. and .vii. of the clocke in the morninge, and lyued two howres, and was chriſtened by the Mydwyfe, and are both Women Chyldren, hauing two bodies, ioyning togither With .iiii. armes, and .iiii. legges perfecte, & from the Nauell vpward one Face, two Eyes, one Noſe, and one Mouth, and three Eares, one beinge vpon the backe ſyde of the Head, a lytle aboue the nape of the Necke, hauing heare growinge vpon the Head. Whyche Chylde was borne out of Wedlocke. The Fathers name is Rychard Sotherne, who is now fled And the Mother is yet lyuyng in the ſame Towne. And this Childe was brought vp to London, wheare it was ſeene of dyuers worſhipfull men and women of the Cytie. And alſo of the Countrey. To witnes that it is a Trouth and no Fable, But a warninge of God, to moue all people to amendment of lyfe.
            
               
                  YOu that do ſee this Clilde diſfigured here,
               Two Babes in one, diſguiſed to beholde,
               Thinke with yourſelues, when ſuch thinges do appere
               All is not well, as wiſe heades may be bolde:
               But god that can in ſecretes ſhew the ſigne
               Can bringe much more to pas, by poure deuine.
            
            
               ¶ And we that lyue to ſee this wonder, howe
               The gaſe is geuen, to make this meruaile great,
               Let one by one that this beholdeth nowe,
               Be warned as the wonder giues conceate:
               To liue to mende the wonderous ſhape we ſee,
               Contrarie much, in all that ought to bee.
            
            
               ¶ For as we finde, this figure ſemeth ſtraunge,
               Becauſe it ſhowes, proporſion not in vre,
               So bare in minde. how time can choppe and chaunce,
               Diſguiſing workes, in willes that be vnſure:
               From meane to more, from more to much exceſſe,
               Where Nature willes, deſire ſhould be leſſe.
            
            
               W. Elderton.
            
            ¶ Finis.
         
      
      
         
            ¶ Imprinted at London in Fleteſtrete beneath the Conduit: at the ſigne of S. Iohn Euangeliſt, by Thomas Colwell.
         
      
   