
      
         
            
            ¶ A Decree betwene Churchyarde and Camell.
            
               
                  ¶ A decree vpon the dreame made by Dauy Dicar,
                  Wyth anſwer to Camell, whoſe taūtes be more quicker.
               
            
            
               
                  WHer Dicar hath dreamed of things out of frame,
               And Churchyard by writing affirmeth the ſame,
               And Camell contendeth, the ſame to deface,
               And therfore hath put hys doynges in place.
               Sythe both of thoſe twayne hath ſet foorth in myter
               The wordes of the Authour, the ſkyl of the wryghter
               And runne in thys race, ſtyl chaffyng the bytte
               I thynke in thys caſe much more then is fytte.
               I myndyng as much as lyeth in me
               To make them both▪ as in one to agree
               Haue taken in hande the dreame to defende
               And ſo to recite theyr race to the ende.
               Not ſo to approue my learning or ſkyll
               But onely becauſe it becommeth them yll
               From rymyng to raylyng ſo ofte to dygreſſe,
               Wheras reaſō and wyt doth wil nothing leſſe.
               As Dicar hath dreamed ſo tyme out of mynde,Dicars Dreame.
               
               Some thynges were amys, that ſome men dyd fynde,
               If al thynges were wel, as I woulde God they were,
               We ſhoulde not be plaged from yeare vnto yeare,
               If all men do ryght, what nedeth the lawe,
               What nede any iuſtice to hange and to drawe,
               If no man be wronged nor wydowe oppreſſed,
               Then needeth no care to haue it redreſſed,
               If no man wyll venter to robbe or to ſteale,
               O England thou haſt a good common weale.
               If no man do hurde nor hydeth in ſtore,
               Then England ſhal haue no dearth any more
               If no man offend by way of exceſſe.
               Then grace doth abound, the fault is the leſſe,
               If the luſtes of the fleſhe be putte oute of vre
               The world is amended the people be pure.
               If the poore and the nedye be daylye relyued,
               What man is ſo mad, therat to be greued?
               If no man do ſlaunder nor ſtyrre vp debate,
               Then Dicar I thynke hath dreamed to late.
               If no man do flatter, nor fawne for a gayne,
               Then may it appeare this dreame is but vain.
               If all thyng be well, and in the ryght waye,
               Why do they not vſe good lawes to obey.
               If no man defraude in bying nor ſellyng
               Then happy is Englande, for ther is beſt dwellyng.
               If fayth he vnfayned, and wordes do once bynde,
               The dreame is all falſe, and ſo ye may fynde.
               If truth do take place and in al thynges encreaſſe,
               Dreame no more Dicar, but lette thy dreame ceaſſe.
               If thys be not ſo then Camel to you,
               I feare me thys dreame wyll proue to be true.
               For it is not ſo geeſon wyth vs for to heare,
               But the effect of the dreame doth dayly appeare.
               And euery man is now in ſuch takynge,
               It paſſeth, a dreame, they fynde it out wakyng.
               If you be ſuche a one as neuer had peere,
               Then are you fauty in none of thys geere.
               But ſeyng your writyng doth ſeme ſomewhat quycke,
               You ſeme that ye ſmarted becauſe ye dyd kycke.
               Yet when the dreame was to pryntyng dyrected,
               I thyncke of the dreamer ye were not ſuſpected.
               And where as you contende it doth not belonge,
               For Dicar to dreame of ryght or of wronge.
               In dede you do well yf you haue done amys,
               To ſhewe hym hys faulte and ſaye thus it is.
               And if you ſo wel know what doth Dycar behoue,
               Then ought you to ſhewe the ſame to approue.
               But me thyncketh you want a frendly good wyll,
               To deface a good matter though the author wer yll.
               And certes of you both indifferently to tel
               I cannot in your raylynges commend your doyngs wel.
               And both of you twayne are yet to me vnknowen,
               yet can I ayde your doynges, as if they were myne own.
               ye paſſe from your purpoſe in ſuch vnworthy ſorte,
               ye make of your doynges a very laughyng ſporte.
               ye cloſe and ye gloſe, in ſekyng to be fyne,
               ye taunt and retaunt almoſt in euery lyne.
               ye affyrme ye haue red both Terence and Cato,
               ye count ye do but flatter, ye well reſemble Gnato.
               And looke howe much dyffers a Foxe from a foole,
               So much do you dyffer from Cato and hys ſchoole,
               For Cato doth affyrme ther is no greater ſhame,
               Then to reproue a vyce, and your ſelues to do the ſame.
               And becauſe I wyl not ſeeme your fancy to embrace,
               As touchyng your debate▪ I anſwer in thys caſe:
               Me thynketh in wrytyng ye both haue ſuch ſkyll▪
               
               ye marre a good matter and make it very yll.
               Wherby to ſay the truth it appeareth wel vnto me,
               your names and your wyttes vnnumerable be.
               Therfore do not thynke that ye can be forborne,
               But ſuch as be readers ſhall laugh you to ſcorne.
               And when that your doynges be throughly peruſed,
               Then by the ſame deedes ye ſhalbe accuſed.
               Ceaſſe nowe in ſeaſon caſt all contempt away,
               Be ſubiect vnto reaſon, and make no more delay.
               And eyther of you twayne do not refuſe to knowe,
               As Cato doth enſtructe you but ſtrayght embrace it ſo
               whych though my ſkil be ſmal, here thought I to reherſe
               The text and ſence wyth all of euery kynde of verce
            
            
               
                  Contra uerboſos noli contendere uerbis,
                  Sermo datur cunctis animii ſapiencia paucis,
                  Cum recte uiuas ne curas uerba malorum
                  Arbitrii noſtri non eſt quid quiſque loquatur.
               
            
            
               To ſtriue wyth men of many words, refrain I the aduiſe
               It is not geuen to euery man that he ſhalbe godlye wyſe
               If thou lyue wel do not regarde what wicked men do ſay
               For why? it lyeth not in vs ſuch wycked tounges to ſtaye,
               Thys is it that ye haue read whyche if you lyſt to knowe
               He wil aſwage your ſturdi ſtormes wich you haue reiſed ſo
               Take this in worth good Reder now expound it to ye beſt
               For I haue ſayd to theyr deuyce, now harken to the reſt
            
            
               ¶ The iudgement of the Authour.
               
                  Some thyng is a mys and euer ſhalbe ſo,
                  Scripture writeth thys as learned men do knowe.
                  And ſome men haue the gyft therof to ſpeake and wryte,
                  Whych fal yet at a lyfte to frayle and fonde delyte.
                  It doth behoue vs all ſo iuſtly as we canne,
                  To do ryght well in deede, and eke to wryte it thanne
                  How be it in hym I iudge much greater faulte there is,
                  Whych nought can ſaye nor do, but that whych is a mys.
                  The beſt may be amended, and that is very true
                  The more that haue offended, the more we ought to rue.
                  If any fal from grace gentelly hym aſſayle,
                  Burden hym wyth charity, no rygour can preuayle,
                  For why, if that the ſhepherde do wander from the waye,
                  No maruell if the ſhepe therafter go aſtraye
                  Some men perhappe ther be wyl take me to the wourſt
                  I pray you iudge of me, as I ſpake it at the furſt
                  For it becommeth yll in wryttyng to contende,
                  Wythout wytte or ſkyll to make a raylyng ende
                  Take me to the beſt, as one to you vnknowen
                  Whoſe worthy wyts I do cōmend & wold wt you be one.
                  Not mindyng ſo aſſuredly to ſpende and waſte the daye,
                  To make the people laugh at me, & here I make a ſtaye,
               
            
            Finis
            
                quod W. Ilderton.
            
         
      
      
         
            ¶ Imprinted at London by Rychard Haruy, dwellyng in Foſterlane.
         
      
   