
      
         
            
               
               
THE TRVE COPIE OF A LETTER FROM THE QVEENES MAIESTIE, TO THE Lord Maior of London, and his brethren: conteyning a moſt gracious acceptation of the great ioy which her Subiectes tooke vpon the apprehenſion of diuers perſons, detected of a moſt wicked conſpiracie, read openly in a great aſſemblie of the Commons in the Guildhall of that Citie, the 22. day of Auguſt. 1586. Before the reading whereof, maiſter Iames Dalton, one of the Counſellours of that Citie, in the abſence of the Recorder, made this ſpeach hereafter folowing.
            ¶ Imprinted at London by Christopher Barker, Printer to the Queenes moſt excellent Maieſtie. 1586
         
      
      
         
            
               
               
            
         
         
            
            
               BY THE QVEENE.
            
            
               ❧ To our right truſtie and welbeloued, the Lord Maior of our Citie of London, and his brethren the Aldermen of the ſame.
            
            
               RIght trustie and welbeloued, wee greete you well. Being giuen to vnderstand how greatly our good and moſt louing Subiects of that Citie did reioyce at the apprehēſiō of certaine deuiliſh and wicked minded ſubiects of ours, that through the great and ſingular goodnes of God haue bene detected, to haue moſt wickedly and vnnaturally conſpired, not onely the taking away of our owne life, but alſo to haue ſtirred vp (as much as in them lay) a generall rebellion throughout our whole Realme: we coulde not but by our owne letters witneſse vnto you the great and ſingular contentment we receiued vpon the knowledge thereof, aſsuring you, that we did not ſo much reioyce at the eſcape of the intended attempt against our owne perſon, as to ſee the great ioy our most louing Subiects tooke at the apprehenſion of the contriuers thereof, which, to make their loue more apparant, they haue (as we are to our great comfort informed) omitted no outwarde ſhewe, that by any externall acte might witneſse to the world the inwarde loue and duetifull affection they be are toward vs. And as we haue as great cauſe with all thankfulneſse to acknowledge Gods great goodneſse toward vs, through the infinite bleſsings he layeth vpon vs, as many as euer Prince had, yea rather, as euer Creature had: yet doe we not for any worldly bleſſing receiued from his diuine Maiestie, ſo greatly acknowledge

the ſame, as in that it hath pleaſed him to incline the heartes of our Subiects euen from the firſt beginning of our reigne, to carrie as great loue towards vs, as euer Subiects caried toward Prince, which ought to moue vs (as it doeth in very deede) to ſeeke with all care, and by all good meanes that appertaine to a Christian Prince, the conſeruation of ſo louing and duetifully affected Subiects: aſsuring you that we deſire no longer to liue, then while we may in the whole courſe of our gouernement carrie our ſelfe in ſuch ſort, as may not onely nouriſh and continue their loue and good will towards vs, but alſo encreaſe the ſame. Wee thinke meete, that theſe our letters ſhoulde be communicated in ſome generall aſsemblie to our most louing Subiects the Commoners of that Citie. Yeuen vnder our Signet at our Castell of Windſor, the 18. day of August 1586. in the 28. yeere of our reigne.
         
         
            
               
               RIght worſhipful, my good countreymen & Citizens of this moſt noble Citie of Londō. Since the late bruite and report of a moſt wicked and traiterous conſpiracie, not onely to take away the life of our moſt gratious Soueraigne, (whom God graunt long to liue & reigne ouer vs) but alſo to ſtirre vp a general rebellion throughout the whole Realme: the great and vniuerſall ioy of you all of this Citie, vpon the apprehenſion of diuers of that moſt wicked conſpiracie alate declared and teſtified, by many outward acts & ſhewes, hath wrought in the Queenes moſt excellent Maieſtie ſuch a gratious contentmēt, that it hath moued her Highnes, by her letters ſigned with her owne hand, to ſignifie vnto my L. Maior of this Citie and his brethren, her moſt Noble & Princely acceptation thereof, and that in ſuch ſort, as thereby may appeare, that her Highnes hath not more, no not ſo much reioyced at the moſt happie eſcape of the wicked miſchiefe intended againſt her owne perſon, as at the ioye which her louing Subiectes, and namely you of this Citie of London tooke at the apprehenſion of the practiſers of that intended Treaſon.
            By occaſion whereof, her Highnes brought to a thankefull Remembrance, and acknowledging of Gods infinite bleſſings beſtowed on hir, comparable with any Prince or creature in the worlde, no worldly thing more or like accompteth of, then of the heartie loue of her louing & faithful ſubiects

many wayes and many times before now, but eſpecially by this our great ioye in this ſort, at this time, and vpon this occaſion ſhewed.
            And that her exceeding great loue and acceptation of our Reioycing may the more appeare vnto you, it hath pleaſed her Highnes in the ſame letters to declare, that ſhe deſireth not longer to lyue among vs, then ſhe ſhal maintayne, continue, nouriſh and increaſe the loue and good will of her Subiects toward her. And this her Highnes hath willed to be made knowen vnto you all, with this, that ſhee will not faile with all care, and by all good meanes that appertaine to a Chriſtian prince, to ſeeke the cōſeruation of you all ſo louing and duetifully affected Subiects.
            This her Maieſties pleaſure in part now declared, and more to be made knowen to you by her owne letters, which you ſhall heare readde, my Lord Maior and his brethren haue required mee to declare vnto you all, that they doe heartily reioyce and thanke God for the happie day of the good acceptation of this your great ioy, and my L. himſelfe hath willed me to giue you all hearty thankes in his name, for that in the time of his ſeruice your duetifull behauiours haue gotten to the Citie ſo Noble and worthie a Teſtimonie of duetie and loyaltie, of ſo Noble and worthie a Queene.
            Now foraſmuch as Gods bleſſings wonderfully abound, and one ioye comes vpon another, let vs not be vnthankefull to God, but acknowledge his goodneſſe, and attribute the ſame (as in deede we ought) to the ſincere Religion of Almightie God, moſt godly eſtabliſhed by the Queenes moſt

excellent Maieſtie, which hath taught vs to knowe God aright, our duetie to our Soueraigne, and to loue our countrey, and hath made vs duetifull and obedient Subiects, reioycing at all good things happening to her Maieſtie, her Realme, or to any in her Noble ſeruice, the true effectes of a true and good Religion: Whereas the contemners thereof, and immoderate affectors of the Romiſh religion and ſuperſtitions, being voyde of the true knowledge of God, haue declyned from God, their allegiance to their Prince, their loue to their Countrie, and haue becomme Inuenters of miſchiefes, bruters and ſpreaders abroade of falſe and ſeditious rumors, ſuch as ioye at no good thing, but contrariwiſe reioyce at euery euill ſucceſſe, the badges and markes of their profeſſion, who haue before this, in this Realme and in other her Highnes dominions, ſtirred vp rebellion, forraine inuaſion, and many times practiſed the very death and deſtruction of the Queene her ſelfe, the Ruyne and ſubuerſion of the whole Realme, the proper effects of their Romiſh religion.
            We haue beheld all theſe things, and ſeene in our dayes the Ruyne and miſchiefes inuented againſt others, fall vpon the Inuenters themſelues: and haue knowen the wicked and violent hands of diuers of them, deuiliſhly to kill and murther themſelues, when moſt trayterouſly they woulde, and moſt happilie they could not, ſlea the Lordes annoynted.
            As we haue knowen all theſe things, ſo God be thanked, that by a better Religion, hauing bene

better taught, we haue bene no partakers of their wicked deuiſes, but haue put to our helping hands as occaſion hath ſerued, and euer ready to ouerthrowe the auctors and deuiſers thereof.
            And I haue no doubt, but we of this Noble Citie, who hitherto haue bene alwayes readie duetifully and faithfully to ſerue her Maieſtie vpon all occaſions, (her Highnes now ſo graciouſly accepting onely of our reioycing at the apprehenſion of her enemies, euē the leaſt part of the duty of a good Subiect to ſo good a Queene) will be readie euery one with all that we can make, and with the vttermoſt aduenture of all our liues, ſpeedily to be reuenged vpon all ſuch as ſhall villainouſly and traiterouſly attempt or put in vre any miſchiefe to her Noble perſon, and in the meane time will haue a better eye & eare to all ſuſpitious & miſcontented perſons, to their ſayings and doings, to their falſe bruites and reports, to the places and corners of their haunt and reſort, to their harborers, companions, ayders and mainteiners.
            God vphold and continue his Religion among vs, and increaſe our zeale therein, which hath made vs ſo louing and loyall, and ſo beloued and acceptable Subiectes to ſo worthy a Prince, and roote out that wicked and Romiſh religion, that hath made ſo many diſloyall and traiterous Subiectes: to whom is both odious and irkeſome, the long life & proſperous Reigne of our moſt noble Queene Elizabeth. God confounde all ſuch traytors, and preſerue her Highneſſe long to liue and reigne ouer vs.
            
         
      
   