
      
         
            
            
            
               ❧ A very true report of the apprehenſion and taking of that Arche Papiſt Edmond Campion the Pope his right hand, with three other lewd Ieſuite prieſts, and diuers other Laie people, moſt ſeditious perſons of like ſort. Conteining alſo a controulment of a moſt vntrue former booke ſet out by one A. M. aliâs Anthonie Munday, concerning the ſame, as is to be proued and iuſtified by George Ellyot one of the ordinary yeomen of her Maieſties Chamber. Authour of this booke, and chiefeſt cauſe of the finding of the ſayd lewde and ſeditious people, great enimies to God, their louing Prince and Countrie.
            Veritas non quaerit angulos.
            ¶ Imprinted at London, at the three Cranes in the Vintree by Thomas Dawſon. 1581.
         
         
            
            
            ¶ To the Chriſtian reader, George Elliot wiſheth all due reuerence.
            
               SOme experience (Chriſtiā Reader) that I haue gathered by keeping cō
               pany with ſuche ſeditious people as Campion and his aſſociates are, partly moueth me to write this booke, and partly I am vrged therevnto (although my wiſedome and ſkill bee very ſlender to ſet downe and penne matter of leſſe moment then this) for that I beyng one of the two in commiſſion at that time, from her highneſſe moſt honorable priuie counſell for the apprehending of the ſayd ſeditious Campion, and ſuch like, and the chiefeſt cauſe of the finding out of the ſayde lewde people, as hereafter more at large appeareth: do thinke it a greate abuſe, that the moſt parte of her Maieſties louing ſubiectes, ſhalbe ſeduced to beleeue an vntrueth, and my ſelfe, and hee which was in commisſion with me, whoſe name is Dauid Ienkins, one of the meſſengers

of her Maieſties Chamber, very vilel
                  •
                ſlaundered with a Booke ſet out by one Anthony Munday, concerning the apprehenſion of the ſayd lewde people, which for the trueth thereof, is almoſt as farre differēt from trueth, as darknes from light, and as contrary to trueth, as an egge is contrary in likenes to an oyſter.
            And therefore, conſidering, I am able to report a troth for the manner of the finding and taking of the ſaide ſeditious perſons, (although fine skil be farre from me to paint it out) hoping the wiſe will beare with my want therein, and eſteeme a true tale, bee it neuer ſo bluntly told, rather then a lye, be it neuer ſo finely handled: I haue imboldened my ſelfe to take this Treatiſe in hand wherein (God willing) I wil deſcribe nothing but truth as in brief by the ſequele ſhal appeare. Which is this: That aboutes foure yeeres paſt, (the Diuell being a craftie Foxe, and chiefe Patrone doubtles of the Popes prelacie) hauing diuers and many Officers and inferiour ſubſtitutes to the Pope his chiefe Viear, and intēding by them, to encreaſe the kingdome of this Antichriſt. Diſperſed his ſayd officers in diuers places of this Realme,

where like vagrant perſons, (refuſing to liuewithin the lawful gouernment of their coū
               trey) they lead a looſe life, wandring & running hither and thither, from ſhire to ſhire, and countrey to countrey, with ſuch ſtore of Romiſh relikes, popiſh pelfe, trifles & traſh, as were able to make any Chriſtian hearte (that hath ſeene the tryall of ſuch practifes as I haue done) eue for ſorrow to bleed, only-thereby to drawe the Queenes Maieſtres ſubiects their heartes and faithes both from God and her highneſſs, as namely by deliuering vnto them Bulles from Rome, Pardons, Indulgences, Medalls, Agnus Dei, hallowed graines and beades, Crucifixes, painted pictures, & ſuch other paltrie▪ euery part wherof they will not let to ſay to bee matters very neceſſary for ſaluation. By reaſon wherof (moſt louing Reader) I my ſelfe about that time by the ſpace of one quarter of an yeere together, was deepely be witched and drawn into their darkneſſe, as the blindeſt bayarde of them all. But at the laſt euen then, by Gods great goodneſſe, mightie prouidence, and eſpeciall grace, all their inchauntments, witcheraftes, ſorceries, diueliſhe deuiſes and practiſes we are ſo broken and vntyed in me

and the brightneſſe of Gods diuine Maieſtie ſhining ſo ſurely in my hearte and conſcience, that I perceiued all their doings to bee as they are in deede, only ſhewes without ſubſtance, manifeſt errours and deceitful iugling caſtes and none others. Notwithſtanding, I determined with my ſelf (for certain cauſes which I omit) to ſound the depth of their diueliſh drifts (if I might) & the rather therefore vſed and frequented their companies, whereby appeared vnto me not a few of their vngracious and villanous falſe harts faiths, and diſloyall mindes, ſlaunderous wordes, and moſt vile treaſons, towardes my moſt excellent and noble myſtrys the Queenes maieſtie, and towardes diuers of her moſt honourable priuie councell, in ſuch ſorte as many times did make mine eyes to guſh out with teares for very ſorrowe and feare to thinke of it. Wherefore lately I made my humble ſubmiſſion vnto the right honourable her Highneſſe priuie councell for my vnlawful liuing as aforeſaid: at whoſe handes I founde ſuch honourable dealing & by their meanes ſuch mercie from her Maieſtie, that I wiſhe with all my hearte all the papiſts which are ſubiects borne to her high

neſſe to runne the ſame courſe that I haue doone, and then ſhoulde they eaſily ſee what difference there is betweene the good and mercifull dealing of our moſt gracious louing and naturall prince: & the great trecheries of that great enimie to our Countrie the Pope. For her highneſſe freely forgiueth offenders, but the Pope pardoneth for money: her graces handes are continually full of mercie, readie to deliuer enough freely to any that will deſire and deſerue it, and the Pope his great clutches and fiſtes, are readie to deliuer nothing but diueliſh deuiſes and paltrie ſtuffe of his owne making, to ſet Countrie and Countrie together by the eares, and yet for theſe hath hee money. Truly it is a moſt lamentable caſe, that euer any Chriſtian ſhould be ſeduced and drawne from the true worſhipping of God, and their duetie to their Prince and Countrie (as many are) by the Pope and his ſatanicall crewe. I beſeech God turne their heartes, and graunt vs all amendment, which can neither be too timely (if it were preſently) nor neuer too late, whenſoeuer it ſhall happen, vnleſſe wilfully they proceede in their dealings, which God forbid: for humanum eſt errare, perſeuerare
               
               belluinum.
            
            Shortly after my ſubmiſſion and reconciliation as aforeſaide. It pleaſed my Lords of her Highneſse moſte honourable priuie councell to graunt the commiſsion that I before ſpake of, to my ſelfe, and to the ſaide Dauid Ienkins, for the apprehenſion of certaine lewde Ieſuite Prieſtes, and other ſeditious perſons of like ſort, whereſoeuer wee ſhoulde happen to finde them within Englande. Whereupon wee determined a certaine voyage, in which Edmond Campion the aforeſaide Ieſuite and others were by vs taken and brought to the Towre of London in manner as heereafter followeth▪
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               The true maner of taking of Edmond Campion and his aſsotiates.
            
            
               IT happenēd that after the receipt of our commiſſion aforeſaide, we conſulted betweene our ſelues, what way were beſt to take firſt, for we were vtterly ignorāt, where or in what place certainely to find out ye ſaid Campion, or his compéeres. And our conſultation was ſhortly determined, for the greateſt part of our trauell and dealings in this ſeruice, did lie chiefly vpon mine owne determination, by reaſon of mine acquaintance and knowledge of diuers of like ſect. It then preſently came to my remembrance of certains acquaintan
                  •
               e whiche I once had with one Thomas Cowper a Cooke, who in Nouember was 
                  •
               wo yéeres, ſerued M. Thomas Roope
                     •
                  
                of Kent, where at that time I in like maner ſerued, and both of vs aboute the ſame moneth departed

the ſaide▪ Maiſter Rooper his ſeruice, I into Eſſex, and the ſaide Cowper to Lyforde in Barkeſhire, to one maiſter Yates, from whence within one halfe yéere after, I was aduertiſed in Eſſex that the ſaide Cooke was placed in ſeruice, and that the ſaide maiſter Yates was a very earneſt Papiſt, & one that gaue great entertainement to any of that ſect: which tale being tolde mee in Eſſex two yéeres before wée entred this iourney, by Gods great goodneſſe came to my memory, but euen the day before wée ſet foorth. Héereof I enformed the ſaide Dauid Jenckins being my fellow in Commiſſion, & tolde him it would bée our beſt way to go thythee firſt, for that it was not meant that wée ſhoulde goe to any place, but where in déede I either had▪ acquaintance, or by ſome meanes poſſible in our iourney, coulde get acquaintance, and tolde him wée woulde diſpoſe of our iourney in ſuch ſort as wée might come to the ſaide maiſter-Yates vpon the Sunday about eight of the clocke in the morning, where, ſaide I, if wée finde the ſaide Cooke, and that there

bée any Maſſe to bée ſaide there that day or any maſſing Prieſt in the houſe, the Cooke for olde acquaintance, & for that hée ſuppoſeth mée to bée a Papiſte will bring mée to the ſight thereof. And vpon this determination, wée ſet front London the xiiii. day of July laſt, and came to the ſaide Maiſter Yates houſe the xvi. of the ſame moneth being Sunday, aboutes the houre aforeſaid, where without the gates of the ſame houſe we eſpied one of the ſeruants of the houſe, who moſt likely ſéemed by reaſon of his lying aloofe, to bée as it were a ſcout watcher, that they within might accompliſhe their ſecrete matters more ſafely. I called the ſaide ſeruant, and inquired of him for the ſaide Thomas Cowper the Cooke, who anſwered that hée could not well tell, whether he were within or not. I prayed him that hée woulde friende mée ſo muche as to ſée, and tolde him my name, the ſaide ſeruant did ſo (it ſéemed) for the Cooke came foorth preſently vnto vs, wher we ſate ſtill vpon Horſebacke, and after a fewe ſuche ſpéeches as betwixt friende

and friende when they haue béene long aſ under were paſſed, ſtill ſitting vppon our Horſes, I tolde him that I had longed to ſée him, and that I was then trauelling into Darbieſheire to ſee my friendes, and came ſo farre out of my way to ſée him, and ſaid I, Now I haue ſéene you, my mind is well ſatiſfied, and ſo fare, you well, No, ſaith he, yt ſhal you not doe before dinner. I made ye matter very earneſt to bée gone, & he more earneſt & importune to ſtay mée. (But in truth I was as willing to ſtay as hée to haue me.) And ſo perforce there was no remedie but ſtay wée muſt, and hauing lighted from Horſebacke, and being by him brought▪ into the houſe, and ſo into the Buttery, and there cauſed to drink: preſently after, the ſaid Cooke came and whiſpered with mée, and aſked whether my friende (meaning the ſaid Jenckins) were within the Church or not, therein meaning whether he were a papiſt or no, to which I anſwered, he was not, but yet (ſaide I) hée is a verie honeſt man and one that wiſheth well that way. Then ſaide the Cooke to mée will you goe vp, by which ſpeeche, I knewe hée woulde

bring mée to a Maſſe, and I anſwered him, and ſaide, yea for Gods ſake, that let mée doe, for ſéeing I muſt néedes tarry,Some men blame me for diſſembling the matter as I did but to doe my Prince & countrie ſeruice, I hold it lawfull to vſe any reaſonable pollicie. For the field is not alwayes woone by ſtrength. let mée take ſome thing with mée, that is good. And ſo wée left Jenckins in the Buttery, and I was brought by the Cooke through the hall, the dinening Parlour, and two or thrée other odde roomes, and then into a faire large chamber, where there was at ye ſame inſtant one Prieſt called▪ 
               Satwell ſaying Maſſe; two other Prieſtes knéeling by, whereof one was Campion, and the other called Peters alias Collington, thrée Nunnes, and xxxvii. other people. When Satwell had finiſhed his Maſſe, then Campion hée inueſted himſelfe to ſay Maſſe, and ſo hée did, and at the ende thereof, made holy breade and deliuered it to the people there, to euery one ſome, togeather with holy water, whereof hée gaue to mée parte alſo. And then was there a chayre ſet in the chamber ſome thing beneath the Aulter, wherein the ſaide Campion did ſit downe, and there made a Sermon very nigh an houre long, the effect of his text being as I remember,

               That Chriſte wept ouer Ieruſalem, &c. And ſo applied the ſame to this ourI had once my commiſſion in my hād to haue delt with them my ſelf alone in the chamber. If I had, I pray you iudge what had happened vnto mee. Countrie of England, for that the Pope his authoritie and doctrine did not ſo flooriſhe héere as the ſaide Campion deſired. At the ende of which Sermon I gat downe vnto the ſaide Jenckins ſo ſoone as I coulde. (For during the time that the maſſes & Sermon was made, Jenckins remained ſtill beneath in the Butterie or Hall, not knowing of any ſuch matter, vntill I gaue him ſome intelligence▪ what I had ſéene) and ſo wée departed with as conuenient expedition as we might, and came to one Maiſter Fettiplace a Juſtice of peace in the ſaide Countrie, whome we made priuie of our doings therein, and required him, that according to the tenour of our commiſſion, hée woulde take ſufficient power, and goe with vs thither. Wherevpon the ſaide Juſtice of peace, within one quarter of an houre put himſelfe in a readineſſe with fortie or fiftie men very well weaponed, who went in great haſt together, with the ſaide Maiſter Fettyplace and vs to the ſaide M. Yates
               
his houſe. Where at our comming vpon the ſodeine, being aboutes one of the clocke in the afternoone of the ſame day, before wée knocked at the gates (which was then) as before it was continually accuſtomed to bée faſt ſhut, the houſe being moted rounde about, within which Mete was great ſtore of fruite-trées and other trées, with thicke hedge rowes, ſo that the danger for feare of looſing of the ſaide Campion and his aſſociates was the more doubted). Wée beſet the houſe with our men rounde about without the Mote in the beſt ſorte wée coulde deuiſe, and then knocked at the gates, and were preſently heard and eſpied, but kept out by the ſpace of halfe an houre (In which time as it ſeemeth, they had hidden Campion▪
                and the other two prieſts in a very ſecrete place with: in the ſaide houſe, and had made reaſonable purueiance for him as héereafter is mentioned) and then they let vs into the houſe, where came preſently to our ſightes myſtrys Yates▪
                the goodwife of the houſe, fiue Gentlemen, one Gentlewoman, & thrée Nunnes, (the Nunnes

being then diſguiſed in GentlewomansOne Nunne got away in country maides apparrell. apparrell not like vnto that they hearde Maſſe in) All which I well remembred to haue ſéene the ſame morning at the Maſſes and Sermō aforeſaid, yet euery one of thē a great while denied it, & eſpecially the ſaid Myſtrys Yates, who couldMyſtris Yates proffered vs a good ſome of money to haue giuen ouer our ſearch. not be content only to make a plaine deniall of the ſaid Maſſes, and the prieſts, but with great and horrible othes forſware the ſame, betaking herſelfe to the Diuell if any ſuch were there, in ſuche ſorte, as if I had not ſéene them with mine owne eyes, I ſhoulde haue beléeuedMaiſter Yates was then as he is ſtill in priſon in Reading for papiſtrie. her. But knowing certenly that theſe were but bare excuſes, and that we ſhoulde finde the ſaide Campion and his compéeres if wée made narrowe ſearch, I eſtſoones put Maiſter Fettyplace in remembrance of our Commiſſion, and ſo hée, my ſelfe, and the ſaide Jenckins her Maieſties meſſenger, went to ſearching the houſe where wée founde many ſecrete corners, continuing the ſearch (although with no ſmall toyle) in the Orchardes, hedges, and ditches, within the Mote and diuers other places, & at the

laſt founde out Maiſter Edward Yates, brother to the goodman of the houſe, and two Countriemen called Weblin and Maunſfielde, faſt locked togeather in a pidgeon houſe, but wée coulde not finde at that time Campion and the other two Prieſtes, whome wée ſpecially ſoughte for. It drewe then ſomething towards euening, and doubting leaſt wée were not ſtrong enough, wee ſent our Commiſſion to one maiſter Foſter high ſheiriffe of Barkeſhiere, and to one maiſter Wiſemen a Juſtice of peace within the ſame Countie, for ſome further ayde at their handes. The ſaide maiſter Wiſeman came with very good ſpéed vnto vs the ſame euening with ten or twelue of his owne men, very able men and well appointed. But the ſaide maiſter Foſter coulde not bée founde as the meſſenger that went for him returned vs anſwere. And ſo the ſaide houſe was beſet the ſame night with (at the leaſte) threeſcore men well weaponed, who watched the ſame very diligently. And the next day being Munday, in the morning very early, came one Maiſter

               Chriſtopher Lydcot & Juſtice of Peace of the ſame ſheire, with a great 
                  〈◊〉
               ? his owne men all very well appointed, whō togeather with his m
                  •
               n, ſhewed ſuche earneſt, loyall, and forwarde ſeruice in thoſe affaires, as was no ſmall comfort and encouragement to all thoſe, which were preſent, and did beare true hearts and good willes to her Maieſtie. The ſame morning began a freſhe ſearch for the ſaide Prieſts which continues with very great labour, vntill aboutes ten of the clocke in the forenoone of the ſame day, but the ſaide Prieſtes could not bee founde, and euery man almoſt perſuaded that they were not there. Yet ſtill ſearching (although in 
                  〈…〉
                void of any hope for finding of them) the ſaid Dauid Jenckins by Gods great goodneſſe, eſpied a certaine ſecrete place, which hée quickly founde to bée hollow, and with a p
                  •••
               e of yron which hée had in his hande, much like vnto an harro
                  •
               
               tine, hée foorthwith did breake a hole intoMaiſter Lydcot was then hard by. the ſaide place, where then preſently hée perceiued the ſaide Prieſts, lying all cloſe togeather vpon a bed, of purpoſe

there▪ laide for them, where they had breade, meate, and drinke, ſufficient to haue relieued them, thrée or foure dayes togeather. The ſaide Jenckins then called very lowdly, and ſaide, I haue founde the Traitours, and preſently companie enough was with him, who there ſawe the ſaide Prieſtes, (when there was no remedie for them, but no: lens volens) courteouſly yéelde themſelues. Shortly after came one maiſterFirſt my ſelfe rode poſt to the court. And after me the ſaid meſſenger. Reade an other Juſtice of peace of the ſaide ſheire to bée aſſiſtaunt in theſe affayres. Of all which matters newes was immediately carried in great haſte to the Lordes of the Priuie Councell, who gaue further Commiſſion, that the ſaide Prieſtes and certaine other their aſſociates, ſhoulde bée brought to the Court vnder the conduction of my ſelfe and the ſaide Jenckins, with commandement to the ſheirife to deliuer vs ſufficient ayde foorth of his ſheire, for the ſafe bringing vp of the ſaide people. After that the rumor and noyſe for the finding out of the ſaide Campion, Satwell & Peters alias Collington, was in the ſaide

houſe ſome thing aſſuaged, and that the ſight of them was to the people ther no great noueltie. Then was the ſaid high ſheirife ſent for once again, who all that while had not been ſéene in this ſeruice, and but then came and receiued into his charge the ſaide Prieſtes & certaine
                  Anthonie Manday ſaith, the ſherife and his men gaue him inſtructions for the ſetting out of the ſaid vntrue booke. others from that day vntill Thurſday following. The fourth Prieſte whiche was by vs brought vp to the Tower, whoſe name is William Fylbye was not taken with the ſaide Campion & the reſt in the ſaide houſe, but was apprehended & taken in our watch by chaunce in comming to the ſaide houſe to ſpeake with the ſaide Peters as hée ſaide, and thereupon deliuered likewiſe in charge to the ſheirife with the reſt. Uppon Thurſday the xx. day of July laſt, wée ſet forwardes from the ſaide Maiſter Yates his houſe towards the court, with our ſaide charge, being aſſiſted by the ſaide Maiſter Lydcot and Maiſter Wiſeman, and a great ſort of their men, who neuer left vs vntill wée came to the Tower of London. There were beſides that guarded vs thither fiftie or thréeſcore

               
                  •
               orſemen, very able men and wel appointed, which wée receiued by the ſaide sheirife his appointment. Wée went that day to Henly vpon Thames, where wée lodged yt night, & about midnight wée were put into great feare by reaſon of a very great crie and noyſe that the ſaide Fylbye made in his ſleepe, which wakenēd the moſte that were that night in the houſe, and that in ſuch ſorte that euery man almoſt, thought yt ſome of the priſoners had béene broken from vs and eſcaped, although there was in and abouts the ſame houſe a very ſtrong watch appointed and charged for ye ſame. The foreſaid Maiſter Lydcot was the firſt that came vnto them, and whē the matter was examined, it was founde no more, but that the ſaide Fylbye was in a dreame, and as hée ſaide, he verity thought one to be a ripping downe his bodie, and taking out his bowels.
            The next day being Friday, wée ſet forwarde from Henly, and by the way receiued commaundement by a purſe
               
                  ••
               unt from the Lordes of the priuie Councell, that wée ſhoulde ſtay that

night at Colbrooke, and the next day after being▪ Saterday to bring them through the Citie of London vnto the Towre, and there to deliuer them vnto the charge of ſir▪ O win Hopton, Knight, her Maieſties Leyuetenant of the ſame, which accordingly wée did. And this in effect is the true diſcourſe▪ that was vſed in the apprehenſion of the ſayde Campion▪
                and his aſſociates.
            Some men may maruaile that I woulde bee ſilent ſo long for the ſetting out of the manner of their takinges, conſidering I finde my ſelfe agréeued with the ſame vntrue reporte ſet out before by the ſaide A. M. In good faith I meante nothing leſſe, then to take any ſuche matter in hande, if ſo great an vutruth had not béen publiſhed againſt vs, that were doers in thoſe affayres, and beſides hytherto diuers other waightier buſines haue partly hindered mée therein.
            But now at the laſt, although very late, I haue rudely ſet downe the veritie

in this matter, thinking it, better to tell a true tale by leaſure, then a lye in haſhe, as the ſayde A. M. by his former booke hath doone to his owne diſcredite, the deluding of her Maieſties liege people, and the ſlander of ſome which haue intermedled in the ſaide cauſe.
            
               
               ¶ The names of thoſe that were taken and brought vp to the Tower of London as aforeſaide.
               
               1 Edmond Campion Ieſuite and Prieſte.
               
                  
                     Prieſtes.
                     2 Thomas Satwell.
                     3 Iohn Peters alias Collingtō
                     
                     4 William Fylbye.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Gentlemen.
                     5 Edwarde Yates.
                     6 Edward Keynes.
                     7 Humfrey Keynes.
                     8 Iohn Co
                           ••
                        o
                           •
                        .
                     9 William Ilſley.
                     10 Iohn Iacob.
                  
               
               
                  
                     Husbandmen and neighbors therby.
                     11 Iohn Manuſfielde.
                     12 William Weblyn.
                  
               
            
            
               Since the committing of the perſons before named to the Tower as aforeſaide, there hath béene for my ſeruice doone in thoſe and ſuch like affayres, no ſmall nor fewe bragges, threatninges,
                  Campion when he firſt ſaw mee after his apprehenſion, ſaid vn to me, that my ſeruice done in the taking of him would bee vnfortunate to me. And in our iourney towardes the Tower, hee aduiſed me to get me out of England for the fafetie of my body. curſes & euill wiſhes giuen out againſt mée by ſuch as (if they were knowne) deſerue both little libertie and ſmall fauour. Some of my friendes haue doubted leaſt that ſorte of lewde people woulde doe their good willes to hurte mée, by ſome ſecrete deuiſe, as coniuration▪ witchcraft, or ſuch like, the whiche I rather thinke to bée true, for that ſhorly after the foreſaide buſineſſe ended, it pleaſed GOD to viſite mée with ſome ſicknes after I was gone to bed at night which in déede for two or thrée houres handeled mée ſomething hardly. But God I take to witneſſe I neuer was of that opinion, that it came to mée by any other meanes, but onely by ryding poſt two or thrée iournies about the buſines aforeſaide, yet within one day or two after my ſicknes, there came to a neighbours houſe where I lodged in Southwarke one Myſtrys Beyſaunt a widow,

whoſe abode is moſt about Saint Mary Oueries, and at the leaſt by reporte ſmelleth of Papiſtrie, & aſked the good wife of the houſe for mée, and what ſhée had lately hearde of mée, ſhée anſwered ſhée knew mée not, nor nothing ſhée had hearde of mée. Then ſaide myſtris Beyſaunt, the very truth is, it is hée that tooke Campion and the reſt of the company that are in the Tower, and was the cauſe that maiſter Roper and diuers other good men are troubled, and the laſte day (ſaith ſhée) hée did fall madde in theIt ſeemeth ſhe was priuie to ſome ſecrete practiſe againſt mee. ſtréete, and was carried ſo into his lodging, and is not like to eſcape with life. I pray you inquire further of him, and let mée haue knowledge thereof. So that héereby I may plainely ſée, that the Papiſtes take greate care for mee, but whether it be for my weale or woe, and what her meaning was let the worlde iudge. But let the Diuell, the Pope, and them doe what they can, my faith ſtandeth ſo ſure on Chriſt Jeſu my ſauiour, that through him I defie them all.
            There hath béene great murmuring

and grudging againſt mée, about the committing of the foreſaid maiſter Thomas Roper, and many faults haue been found for the ſame. What I did therin I meane not héere to recite, but my dealinges in thoſe cauſes are knowne to ſuch as before whome I thinke the fault finders dare not ſhew their faces. But whatſoeuer I did againſt him I would haue doone againſt mine owne Father, the caſe ſtanding as it did, yet ſuch finde faultes to make the matter ſéeme more odious to the world againſt mée, doe not ſticke to report and ſay that the ſaide maiſter Roper hath brought mée vp from my childehood, to this day, at his onely charges, which is is ſo falſe as God is true. For although I was his ſeruaunt, I continued with him in all, not paſt one yéere.
            But to conclude, a great number of ſuche like vntruthes haue béene publyſhed againſt mée, and no fewe bolde bragges as reporte goeth. I coulde name ſome if I woulde, but I let them paſſe, vnleſſe I bée commaunded to the

contrary by ſuche as haue authoritie to deale with mée therein. God graunte them amendmēt (I meane not towards my ſelfe) or els make their doinges knowne in ſuche ſort as they may haue their deſeruings, or at leaſte bée put to the mercie of her Maieſtie, to whoſe highneſſe Jeſus ſende long life, a proſperous raigne, with all ioy and felicitie.
            Amen.
            
               George Elliot.
            
         
      
      
         
            
               Imprinted at London at three Cranes in the Vintree, by Thomas Dawſon▪
                1581
            
         
      
   