
      
         
            
            A New merry Newes,
As merry as can bee,
From Italy, Barbary,
Turkie, and Candee. 
            
            LONDON,
Printed by Hugh Iackeſon.
1606.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            New merry newes,
As merry as can bee,
From Italy, Barbary,
Turkie, and Candee.
            AS many of wonders reioyce for to heare,
            And many good fellows do ioy in good cheare
            So Poets for pleaſure haue pretily fained,
            That gods in old time a great many raigned:
            As Ioue for the higheſt and chéefeſt in ſeate,
            And Mars for his courage and maieſty great:
            Apollo for wiſedome, and Pluto for hell,
            And a god for each matter maruelous well.
            And ſo of like goddeſſes many ſtrange fables,
            As Painters with properties, ſet out ſtrange tables:
            Where minds be adicted to honor & praiſe,
            Some this way, ſome that waies, ſome contrary wais:
            It pleaſed the Pagans this curteſie to vſe,
            To worſhip god Bacchus and this is the newes:
            Becauſe that in Ethiop nigheſt the ſunne,
            Bacchus beſtoweth the wine by the tunne:
            Whereto all Chriſtendome ſéekes to repaire,
            The grapes be ſo goodly, the vines be ſo faire:
            And glad is the Marchant can vtter his ware,
            To buy the good malmzey and muſkadell there:
            The ſacke, the hollocke, the iuberall tare,
            The romny, Robdauy, and wine of Canare.
            
               
The gods perceyuing this cluſtring thither,
            They fell a ſhriuing there heads togither.
            Perceiuing chiefly by many mens faces,
            They got commdoities great in thoſe places.
            And they that came thither as pale as a clout,
            Come liuelier hither, then they went out,
            They agreéd to haue a Parliament day,
            To ſet the decrees at an excellent ſtay.
            Wherevpon the vintners that had the firſt view,
            Stept to the gods and began to ſue,
            That bleſſed ſaint Martin Lieutenant might be,
            Of the Vine preſſes in euery degrée,
            That they being vintners, and liue by the wines,
            might haue the preheminence firſt for their coyns.
            And they that would hold or claime any right,
            Vnder ſaint Martins Banner ſhould fight.
            This ſute was granted, the gods did agrée,
            And home came the vintners ſo franke and ſo frée.
            Such potſale and hotſale, was made in all places,
            That vpſtart the Ale in noſes and faces.
            This being long vſed, ſet men at ſuch ods,
            That other new Marchants did ſue to the gods,
            As Iewellers, Brotherers, and ſuch occupations,
            Which ſaid that the vintners vſurped their faſhiōs.
            And there was hard hold, and chiefly at Candie,
            For there they inrold the matter in Malmzey.
            Then was there commiſſion ſent into Spaine,
            To know what condition ſo troubled the braine.
            
               
Some ſaid it was Hollock, ſome ſaid it was Sack,
            But at laſt Robdauy was caught by the backe.
            After this done there fell ſuch a chance,
            Some laid the occaſion commenced in France.
            The gods ſent to Gaſcoin, commiſſion with ſpéed,
            And they ſent to Burdeaux the letters to reed.
            And there it was found the white wine of Aniou,
            To Bachides bellies would neuer be true.
            Then went they to Orleance, and ſo to the Kaine,
            There was the whole troth returned againe.
            The gods then perceiuing ſo many great ſuters,
            Ann in euery countrey ſo many promoters.
            And ſuch a brabling kept in all places,
            About the colouring of noſes and faces,
            They told the Vintners as they did all the reſt,
            We aſſure you ſirs, we thinke you were beſt,
            And moſt expedient for you citizens all,
            to be vnder the gouernment of copperſmiths hall,
            Wherevpon the Vintners made ſupplication,
            As here ye may reade the maner and faſhion.
            
               The Vintners Supplication.
               IN moſt humble wiſe beſéech and ſhow,
               Vnto your Godheads all in a row,
               The Vintners remaining in all kinds of places,
               That where by maintaining of noſes and faces:
               There hath béene great ſale and vtterance of wine
               Beſides Béere and Ale, and Ipocraſſe fine.
               
                  
In euery countrey, Region, and nation,
               But chiefly in London at the Salutation.
               And at the Bores head, hard by London ſtone,
               And the ſwan at Dowgat a tauerne well knowne
               The Myter in Cheape, and then the Bull head,
               And many like places to make Noſes red,
               The caſtal in Fiſhſtréet, thrée Cranes in the Vintry,
               And now of late at S, Martins in the Sentry,
               And ſo in generall in many a good towne,
               Where gallants be gaging the cups vp & downe.
               Till that of late for lacke of good order,
               The colours decay in euery good border.
               By ſuch as intrude, and ſéeme to oppreſſe,
               Foreſtalling the markets with drinks that be leſſe
               And many be dealers in vtterance of Wine,
               That are but Aleſtealers and neuer plant Vine.
               May it therfore pleaſe your godheads of mercy & pitie,
               To appoynt ſome officers in euery citie,
               To apprehend, arreſt, and attach in all places,
               All ſuch as haue any mettall in their faces,
               And that euery man areſted in ſuch manner,
               Shall carry the kan vnder the Vintners banner.
               And if any man denay,
               thls Commiſſion to obay:
               Then while his noſe is hot,
               ye ſhall plie with him the pot,
               And baniſh him his ale,
               and ſet his coate to ſale,
               
                  
Till that he haue profeſt,
               good fellowſhip with the reſt.
            
            
               The end of this Supplication.
               THis Supplication being red,
               Bacchus remembring in his head,
               The Vintners bare him great good will,
               to kéepe him in his honour ſtill,
               And yet he did conſider then,
               The Chalenge made by other men.
               How ſome did claime by Sockage hold,
               and ſome did claime by déede inrold.
               And ſome did claime by Parentage,
               and ſome did claime by mariage.
               And ſome did claime by Comminaltie,
               and ſuch a maruellous companie,
               Of tytles ſtrange in many caſes,
               as touching change of many faces.
               God Bacchus thought it good forthwith,
               To elect and chuſe the Copperſmith,
               Imperiall Prince of high and low,
               Of all the Vines and Grapes that grow.
               And yet vnto the Vintners bill,
               He gaue and bare a great will,
               and made Commiſſion out of hand,
               To the Copperſmiths in euery land,
               that they ſhould be the Vintners ayd:
               And therewithall God Bacchus ſayd.
               We will decrée that we thinke méete,
               
                  
And that ſhall be in all things fit:
               And therewithall did counſell take,
               Good orders in this caſe to make,
               Which orders héere all men may ſée,
               That ſubiect vnder Bacchus bée.
            
            
               Heere followeth the Commiſſion ſent
to the Copper-ſmiths.
               BAcchides the goddeſſe of wines,
               With the conſents of their concubines,
               Incenſing firie faces,
               Sends greeting forthwith,
               To Towlie the Copper-ſmith:
               From their almighty Graces,
               That where there doth remaine,
               In England, France, and Spaine,
               Italy, Barbary, Turky, and Candy,
               As goodly red noſes and faces as can be.
               With pimple and pumple to furniſh the place,
               To ſet forth the glory of the noſe and the face,
               With colours moſt liuely and luſty of hew,
               As crimſen in graine, purple and blew.
               Be it therefore enacted and made,
               That ſuch as doe vſe the Vintners trade,
               And ſhall héereafter ſée any one paſſe,
               Hard by his doore with copper or braſſe,
               In any part of his noſe or his face,
               
                  
He ſhall fill a quart, and hie him apace,
               Strait for to gréete him,
               As ſoone as they méete him,
               With a cup of good wine,
               To kéepe his colour fine,
               Vpon paine for to loſe,
               The cuſtome of a copper noſe.
               This alſo inacted by the toritie aforeſaid,
               That good inquiry and héede ſhall be made,
               By all manner of perſon or perſons,
               that for our honour doe occupie wine tunnes,
               that they ſearch among their gueſſe,
               that ſit at euery meſſe,
               that they that haue the richeſt faces,
               May be ſet in the higheſt places,
               And haue contribution,
               By the Copperſmiths Commiſſion.
               For we perceiue and ſée,
               For déedes of charitie,
               Red noſes be a very great reléefe:
               For to giue, they néede not to care,
               they haue enough to ſpare,
               Without any gréefe.
               And if néede requier,
               Such a noſe may ſerue a Dier,
               to die a liuely hew,
               A crimſen in graine,
               that will neuer ſtaine,
               
                  
A purple or a blew.
               Theſe gifts and many mo,
               The very truth is ſo,
               Are giuen to goodly faces,
               Beſides a merry heart,
               And a truth that will not ſtart,
               From friends in friendly places.
            
            
               The Armes.
               BE it alſo enacted by the toritie aforenamed,
               That there ſhall be an Armes framed,
               That ſhall be warranted by this our Commiſſion,
               And let Heralds deuiſe that haue erudition:
               Thrée copper funnells ſtanding on a tunne,
               Thrée vine branches riping in the ſunne,
               Thrée tall fellowes filling copper kettles,
               And Towles the Copperſmith trying out of mettles
               And on the left ſide, three brazen faces,
               To ſet out the Armes according as the grace is:
               Blazed in a gréene field among goodly vines,
               Becauſe red noſes are nouriſhed with wines:
               Alſo it is enacted and made,
               By the toritie aforeſaid,
               That the Copperſmiths of euery Nation,
               May take prentizes to this occupation,
               To carry wine-pots for yeares two or thrée,
               And as they waxe able, to make them all frée.
               Prouided alwaies that none come in cleare,
               But ſhew a red noſe once in a yeare.
               
                  
Prouided further, if any doe chance,
               To claime the fréedome of the Old Hance:
               His noſe muſt be as ragged as a rocke,
               Full of blew veines, of an antient ſtocke,
               And euery ſuch one muſt pay at his entry,
               A quart of red wine, at St. Martins in the Centry.
               and at their admittance to continue their troth,
               A brother of the company muſt giue them their oath,
               Holding their fingers faſt on the pot,
               Taking good héede they forget it not:
               Or at leaſt waies lay hold on the cup,
               and when they haue doue, drinke the drinke vp:
               And what euery ſuch ſhal be charged to ſweare,
               The gods haue decréed the oath ready to heare.
            
            
               Heere followeth the Oath.
               YE ſhal ſweare to be true to the kan & the cup,
               and if it be a full pot ye ſhall drinke it vp:
               And if you do chance to drinke with your brother,
               that hath a red noſe, and you haue another,
               Part, and part like you muſt equally pay:
               And if any one ſtep in by the way,
               that hath any mettle fluſh in his face,
               Make him to ſettle, and ſay you a grace.
               And in any wiſe looke to your daily drinke,
               That your own colours be not ſuffered to ſhrink.
               
                  
And ſée ye performe M. Towles Commiſſion,
               And ſhew your ſelues ready in euery condition.
               Ye ſhall to theſe things ſubſtancially looke,
               So help ye god Bacchus, now ſweare by the book.
            
            
               The end of the Oath.
               ANd becauſe this company ſhall not decay,
               But to the gods and goddeſſes pray:
               And doing their duty ſolemnly appeare,
               Be it enacted that once in a yeare,
               they haue a great dinner with great diſcretion,
               And afore dinner a generall proceſſion,
               And afore the proceſſion, looke wel to your loſſe,
               And ſée that Noſe autem doe carry the croſſe,
               And Noſe Gloriare ſhall kéepe the whole quier,
               And Libra Noſe, ſet Sencers afire:
               And Ne Noſe ſhall be the holy water Clarke,
               Let Salua Noſe light lamps in the darke:
               Iuſtifica Noſe, ſhall ſay, Deprofundis,
               
                  
                     •
                  etifica Noſe ſhall pray for Iocundis:
               O Beata Noſe ſhall begin to ſay grace,
               While thy noſe & my noſe ſet coūtenance in place.
               and euery one that mis.
               to goe on proceſſion this,
               Shall forfet to the place,
               all the mettell in his face.
               
                  
And this Commiſſion ſhall be at all times,
               A warrant to the copperſmith and his aſſignes,
               Any prouiſo, couenant, clauſe,
               Order, matter, or other cauſe,
               To the contrary notwithſtanding,
               But to be executed with good handling.
            
            
               Giuen at Candie:
Among the good Malmeſey.
               VNder the ſhadow and ſhape of the Vines,
               And ſealed wc the ſignet of our copper coines,
               In the day of birth of the man in the Moone,
               When Bacchus and Venus was ſet ouer ſhoone.
            
            
               Here followeth a ſong.
               GOd be with Alſinadon,
               That made the Tankards long agone,
               For ſure he was a merry man,
               And liued many a day:
               And Ienkin was his iourney man,
               A verie good companion,
               For he would drinke with euery man,
               And thus was woont to ſay:
               To whom drinke you, Sir knaue to you,
               with hey ioly Ienkin, I ſée a knaue a drinking
               And trole the bole to me.
               
                  
                  
                     •
                  nd Ienkin would be married than,
               
                  
                     •
                  o Good-ales daughter of the Swan,
               
                  
                     •
                  is Noſe was like a Copper pan,
               and that very gay:
               When Ienkin and his wife was wed,
               
                  
                     •
                  ey had no light to go to bed,
               But as God would Ienkins noſe was red,
               
                  
                     ••
                  d led them both the way.
               To whom drinke you, &c.
               When Ienkin did awake at night,
               
                  
                     •
                  e ſaw his Chamber very light,
               
                  
                     •
                  e told his wife there was a Sp
                     •
                  ight,
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   Made all his chamber ſhine:
               
                  
                     •
                  nd I was in a dreame, quoth ſhée,
               
                  
                     •…
                  e Sprite was in the Buttrie,
               But I beléeue the light you ſée,
               
                  
                     •
                  ommeth from your noſe and mine.
               to whom drinke-you, &c.
               
                  
                     •
                  he good wife made no more delay,
               
                  
                     •
                  ut coniured ſtraight the ſprite away,
               
                  
                     •…
                  d Ienkin got a goodly boy,
               
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   Of Copper-noſe his wife:
               
                  
                     •…
                  d hauing money ynough wherewith,
               
                  
                     •
                  e put him to the Copper-ſmith,
               
                  
                     •
                  o bring him vp into the pith,
               
                  
                     •
                  ho loued him as his life.
               To whom drinke you, &c.
               
                  
                     •
                  he Copper-ſmith like an honeſt man,
               
                  
Sent Ienkins ſonne to Candy than,
               To buy ſome malmſey if he can,
               Where Ienkin was wel knowne.
               He neuer came in any place,
               But men did maruaile at his face,
               So reſted with the Copper mace,
               And ſet with pearle and ſtone,
               To whom drinke you, &c.
               And Ienkin went to ſée his ſonne,
               Woe worth the time that he begunne,
               He was drowned in a malmzey tunne,
               alacke and well away:
               Now Gentlemen with the copper Nole,
               I pray you drinke to Ienkins ſoule,
               and gentle Drawer fill the bowle,
               And tell vs what to pay.
               To whom drinke you, &c.
               
                  W. Elderton.
               
               Finis.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
               
            
         
      
   