
      
         
            
            
               ¶A ballat intituled Northomberland newes / 
               VVherin you maye ſee what Rebelles do vſe.
            
            
               ¶Come tomblinge downe come tomblinge downe.
               That will not yet be trewe to the Crowne.
            
            
               
                  YOƲ Northcountrie nodies whie be ye ſo bragge
               To riſe and raiſe honor to Romiſh renowne
               You know ye at Tiborne there ſtandeth a Nagge
               For ſuche as will neuer be trew to the crowne.
               Come tomblinge. &c.
            
            
               What meane ye to followe the man in the Moone,
               With battz bowes and arrowes and billes verye browne.
               His ſhyninge with ſhame wilbe ſhadowed ſo ſoone,
               It will greue him that euer he troubled the Crowne.
               Come tomblinge. &c.
            
            
               Thowghe Poperie wrought a greate while a goe,
               That Percie prouoked Kinge Harry to frowne.
               Yet who wolde haue thought there were any moe,
               That wold not yet be trew to the Crowne.
               Come tomblinge. &c.
            
            
               Our Queene is the daughter of Henry theight,
               Who brought euery Alter and Imagerie downe.
               He lefte her and tawght her a remedie ſtreight,
               For anye that wold not be trew to the Crowne.
               Come tombling. &c.
            
            
               And though you do greete her like Traytours with treaſon
               To whom you owe honour with cappe and knee downe.
               I am ſuer that ſainct Peter will ſaye it is reaſon,
               To rule ye that will not be trew to the Crowne.
               Come tombling. &c.
            
            
               And thoughe you do ſaye that is matter amis,
               Whiche you wold redreſſe by noble Renowme.
               What any waye wurſe then Rebellion is,
               Of any that will not be true to the Crowne.
               Come tomblinge. &c.
            
            
               What Strangers can be, more ſtraunger then ye,
               That gather together bothe carter and clowne.
               And ſtudie to ſturre to ſeeke and to ſee,
               Whiche waie to deuiſe to trouble the Crowne.
               Come tomblinge. &c.
            
            
               Syr Ihon Sborne your morowe Maſſe Prieſt,
               Saythe to Lobbe looke aboute will ye knele downe?
               We will haue a Maſſe before Ieſus Chriſt,
               And that is the waye to trouble the Crowne.
               Come tomblinge. &c.
            
            
               The Knightes to theyr knaues ſaye ſticke and be ſtowt,
               Our banners and ſtaues ſhall bringe vs Renowne.
               We haue Nobles and others that be as deuowt,
               To helpe vs at this time to trouble the Crowne.
               Come tomblinge. &c.
            
            
               The Rebelles come flinginge but what cometh after,
               A ſonge worthe the ſinginge hey downe a downe downe.
               A Tyborne Typpett a roope or a halter,
               For anye that will not be trew to the Crowne.
               Come tomblinge. &c.
            
            
               For thoughe ye ſpoile Churches and burne vp the Bible,
               And worſhippe gaie Croſſes in euery towne.
               Your Idolles you aſſes are neuer poſſible,
               To ſaue ye that will not be trew to the Crowne.
               Come tomblinge. &c.
            
            
               And thoughe ye do carie the banner of force,
               And Iolie rounde Robyn vnder your gowne.
               You know that ſainct George hath a praunſinge horſe,
               Canne make enie Rebell to ſtoope to the Crowne.
               Come tomblinge. &c.
            
            
               The Weſtmerland Bull muſt come to the ſtake,
               The Lyon will rore ſtill till he be downe.
               Northumberland then will tremble and quake,
               For woe that he was ſo falſe to the Crowne.
               Come tomblinge. &c.
            
            
               And Catholiques old that hold with the Pope,
               And carie dead Images vppe and downe.
               To take better holde they ſhall haue a Roope,
               To teache them once to be trew to the Crowne.
               Come tomblinge. &c.
            
            
               Let euery Prieſt that ſayethe anye Maſſe,
               Either chuſe to take the Crucifixe downe.
               Or hange as highe as the Crucifixe was,
               Except he will be trew to the Crowne.
               Come tomblinge. &c.
            
            
               For God is a God of Ieloſie ſuche,
               He lokes to haue his holye Renowne.
               Or elles he will miſlyke verye muche,
               To gyue anye one his excellente Crowne.
               Come tomblinge. &c.
            
            
               God proſper the Quene as I truſte that he ſhall,
               And graunt of his mercie with bleſſed Renowne.
               The Northe, and Weſt, countrie, the ſowth, eaſt, and all,
               The people of Englande maye cleaue to the Crowne.
               Come tomblinge.
            
            
               And I wiſhe that Good Preachers & other trewe teachers,
               Wolde viſite the vynearde whoſe branches be downe.
               That all the Northe Countrie yet noſſeld in Popeerie,
               Might knowe theyr duetie to God and the Crowne.
               Come tomblinge. &c.
            
            Finis
            
               quothe. W. E.
            
         
      
      
         
            ¶Imprinted at London in Paules Churcheyarde, at the ſigne of the
Lucrece by Thomas Purfoote.
         
      
   