
      
         
            
            
            THE Queenes Maiesties Entertainement AT WOODSTOCK
            AT LONDON, Printed for Thomas Cadman. 1585.
         
         
            
               〈1 page missing〉
            
            
            
               
               followeth brought no lesse like to the Queenes maiestie: and al the rest that were present: for at his comming hee caused them to dismount themselues and said:
               You must fight no more, most valiant Knightes: vyolenee must giue place to vertue, and the Doubtfull hazzard you be in, by a most noble helpe must be ended. Therefore ceasse your fighte and followe me, so shall you heare that you would least beleeue, and shall haue with me that shal most behooue you. And you fayre Lady, fal into this fellowship, where it shall appeare Sibilla said trewe, and your infortunes shall haue ende.
            
            
               This said, he bringeth them al to ye place where the Quenes Maiestie stood (in a fine Bower made of purpose couered with greene Iuie, and seates made of earthe with sweete smelling hearbes, (euen suche a place as you shall coniecture) and after some reuerence beginning his tale, hee shewed a great proofe of his audacity, in which tale if you marke the woords wt this present world, or were acquainted with the state of the deuises, you shoulde finde no lesse hidden then vttered, and no lesse vttered then shoulde deserue a double reading ouer, euen of those (with whom I finde you a companion) that haue disposed their houres to the study of great matters.
            
            
               
                  
                     
                        Heere followeth Hemetes tale.
                        Moste excellent Princes, forepoynted from aboue with youre presence and your vertue to profite more then you are aware of, howe much you are bound to the immortall Goddes, and mortall men are bound to you, our present case will partely prooue: But before you vnderstand the woorth of your vertue, maye it please you to heare the variablenesse of our aduentures. Not long since in the Countrie of Cambia which is situate neere the mouth of the riche Riuer Indus, a mightie Duke bare dominion called Occanon: who had heire to his estate but one onely Daughter named Caudina:
                           
this Lady then more fayrer then fortunate, liued most deere to her father and best beloued of his people: But to prooue that Beautie is not always a benifit, nor highest states be euer the happiest, it chā
                           ced within a while that Caudina being sought vnto by sundry that were great, and serued by many that were worthie, had more competitors of her beautie then did either well content her, or proued commodious vnto them: for loue, which is not led by order nor chosen by appoyntemente, had limed her affections vnreasonably with the liking of a knight, of estate but meane, but of value very greate called Contarenus who as he exceedinglie loued her, so the desires of diuers others was somewhat for his glorye, but nothing for his gain. In smal proces of time the seecret fires of their fācies discouered by the smoake of their desires, bewrayed this matter vnto her father long time before they woulde. The Duke dissembling what he sawe, but determined to disapoynt that he most missliked, neither made challenge to the Knighte, nor charged his Daughter for any loue was betwixt them, but deuised a way as he thought more sure, (but as it proued moste sorrowfull) to set these louers asunder by the worke of an inchantresse most cunning in her kind: he caused Contarenus, to be conueyed vp and carried in the ayre frō the cost of Cambia to the very boūds of the Occean sea: whiche cost Occanon twentye thousande Crownes (a deere price for repentāce:) but it is no nouelty for Princes to make their wils verie costly, and sometime to pay deere for their own displeasures. Contarenus thus strangely deuided from his ioye and perplexed aboue measure was charged by the inchantresse to weare this punishment with patience, which necessitie did put on, and destiny would put off: and ere seuen yeeres came about, she truely assured him, he should haue for his reward the height of his desire: but first he should fight with the hardiest knight, and see the worthiest Lady of the world. The whilst shee told him, hee must there take the gard of a blinde Hermit, who shoulde recouer his sight, and he his satisfaction, both at one time, so shee lefte him on the earth, and tooke her way again into the ayre. Caudina now lacking log that she looked for, the sight & seruice of her knight, fel soon

in those diseases that accompany such desires as to be acombred with mistrust, curiositye, and exceeding vnrest. At last as Princes doe fewe thinges priuily, but they haue partakers of their Councel: & heires to crowns lack neuer seruants of hope, which be curious to please thē: The deuise and dealing of Occanon came to the eares of his daughter, which beeing told her: And is it euen so, quoth Candina? care kings for no right? then right cares for no kingdomes. It is neither the court of Occanon, nor the coūtrey of Camb. that I can account of, if Contarenus be gone: Farewel most vnhappy coūtrey, and most cruel Father, that turnes me to this fortune, to follow my fates, which neyther greatnes of estate nor hazard of mine aduenture shal make mee forsake: but if I lose not my life, I wil finde Contarenus, if he be in the world. This said, she pursueth her most hard determinations, and taking onely two Damsels with her in simple habit, with such things as were necessary, she straightwaies conueyed her selfe most closely from the borders of Camb. & with toyle too long to tell, passed perils past beliefe, til at last she arri
                              •
                           ed at the grate of Sibilla, where, by chaunce she met with a most noble knight eclipped Loricus, by loue likewyse drawen thither, to learn what should betyde him. This Loricus loued a Lady that was matchlesse, in such maner as is strange, for after much deuise to attaine but the fauour that she would be pleased, hee myght but loue her without looking froward: and seeing no glaunce of her lyking (his vttermost deuotion) to find surely out her fancie (whiche she carried most closely,) he made a straunge assay with all the semblance that might be. He shewed to set by her but lightly, that was so sought for of all, and the better to couler the passion, hee was not able to conquer, hee made shew of choise of a new mistris, that liued euery day in her eye: A peece sure of pri
                              ••
                            but farre from such a pearle, as his heart onely esteemed. And to this Idoll he seemed to offer all hys loue and seruice, leauing no manner of obseruaunce vndone, that to loue appertayned: As wearing her colours on his backe, her pictures in his bosome, keeping her company aboue all others, and continuing most at her commandement: which espyed by this Lady (that indeed was liked no more) for whatsoeuer man may thinke might become or content though she cared not for his choyse, yet he shewed scorne of

his change: and by iealousie disclosed that which loue could not discouer. Which Loricus perceiuing, he fel by & by to consider, that the want of his worth made his seruice vnaccepted, and no impossibility in her will to receiue one too serue her, that merited the honour of such fauour. Therefore hee left his owne countrey, and betooke himselfe altogether to trauel, and to armes, desiring with most indeuour but to deserue that reputation as this great and noble mistris woulde but thinke him worthy to be hers, though she would neuer bee none of his; so thinking no toyle too tough, nor no attempt too hard to attayne to renown, he wandred through the world till he came by painfull wayes to Sibillas grate, where he met with Caudina. Where these two louers hauing occasion to vnfold al their fortunes: the Lady seeking to know the end of her trauel, and the knight aduise for the ease of his hope, they both receiued this answeare of Sibilla: That as they were nowe coupled by this fortune, so they should neuer depart fellowship, till they had found out a place, where men were most strōg, womē most fayre, the countrey most fertile, the people most wealthy, the gouernment most iust, and the Princes most worthy: so shoulde the Lady see that would content her, so shoulde the knight heare that might comfort him. Now most deere and best deseruing Lady, it falles to my purpose, and your praise, to say somewhat of my selfe. Olde though you see me here, & wrinckled and cast into a corner, yet once haue I been otherwise: A knight knowne and accounted of, with the best of the world: and liuing in court of most fame amongst a swarm of knights and Ladies of great woorth and vertue, where beauty bade the basse & desire sought the gole. It chaunced me to loue a Lady, to be beloued of Loue himselfe, if he could but haue seene her: but as she was such as did excell, so was she of woonderfull condition, wythout disdaine to be desired, but most dainty to bee dealt with: for touch her, & she wil turne to 20. diuers shapes, yet to none but to content, as me thought, that thought stil to touch her, was a heauen: & so it seemed by my hold that was so loth to let her go. Till (alas) it liked her at last to put on the shape of a Tigris so terrible to behold, as I durst hold her no longer, and being so escaped, I could neuer more sette eie on her. Madam, thus began my paine, but you heare not yet my punishment:

beeing shifted from the sighte of that I sought aboue the world, and then little delighting to looke on any thing els, I tooke by & by a Pilgrimage to Paphos in Cyprus, trusting to heare of my mistris there, where Venus was most honoured. Whither when I came, as I began to step in at the doore of her temple, I was sodainly stroken blind
                              ••••
                           stonied at my mischaunce, and vnderstanding not the cause thereo
                              •••
                           fell downe on my knees and said: O fairest of the Goddesses and farthest from cruelty, what hath been my fault, that thou art thus offended? Thy folly & presumption (quoth Venus Chaplen as I gesse) from my youth vp quoth I, haue I euer been an honourer of vertue, a delighter in learning, and a seruaunt of Loue. But it is no parted affection quoth he, that Venus wilbe honoured with. Books and beauty make no match, and it is an whole man or no man, that this Goddesse wil haue to serue her, and therwithal taking me by the shoulders, he thrust me out of the Temple. So with sighes and sorrow I sate down in the porch, making intercessiō to Apollo (the peculiar God I honored) to haue compassion on my estate: Now faithfull prayers beyng hard ere they be ended: Mercury comes vnto me, and bid me be of good comfort, the goddesses be alfound to haue this fault: Diana with Acteō: Pallas with Arachne: Iuno with Tirecias, were angry aboue measure: so is Venus now with thee, the cause with the remedy shall be told thee at Delphos, whither straight I must carry thee. Which he had no sooner spoken, but by & by I was set in the temple of Apollo. Where first demanding my fault, the Oracle made answere: Thy feare and not thy faith: and what quoth I, may be my remedy? The best besides the beautifullest, the Oracle straight answered. And with this Apollo his priest tooke me by the hand, recounting vnto me the whole course of my life, whom I loued, and how I lost her. And when I told him of the faithfulnes of my seruice. & the faithfulnes of my meaning, of the variablenes of her conditiō, and at the last of the fearefulnes of her apperāce: Ah, good Hemetes quoth he, it is not the kind of womē to be cruell, it is but their countenance, & touching their variablenes, who wil not apply himselfe thereto, shall not muche please them, nor long hold them, neither is it to be found fault with. Nature her selfe loues variety, so it be done without deceit. Nowe for thy faithfulnes it

sufficeth not, the seruants of Venus must not onely haue faith, but also lacke feare, feare lost thee thy mistris, and thy boldnes to enter into Venus Temple, being vnacceptable, made her strike thee blind. But Apollo bid me tell thee, the Gods wil receiue, whom women for sake, thy eyes shut vp from delight, shall geue thy minde more open vnderstanding: this punishment shall be thy profite, Venus can barre thee but from her felicity of loue: but for the deuotion thou bearest to Apollo, hee giues thee this gift, to be able to discipher the destinie of euery one in loue, and better to aduise them, then the best of her Darlings. And furthermore, doth promise thee, that in reuolution of yeres thou shalt recouer thy sight: but this shall not betide thee till at one time, and in one place, in a countrie of most peace, two of the most valiant knights shal fight, two of the most constant louers shal meet, and the most vertuous Lady of the world shall be there to looke on. And when thy eyes shal beholde what thy heart delighteth in, euen a Lady in whom inhabiteth the most vertue, Learning, and beauty, that euer yet was in creature, then shal they be opened, and that shall bee thy warrant.
                        Al Apollo sayeth is sooth: the while, it is determined that thou shalte dwell in an Hermitage, where nothing that longes vntoo Natures vse, shall bee lackinge vntoo thee: so sodainelye I was shifted vnto this hill harde by, where I haue wintered manye a yeere farre from the woes and wronges, the worlde besides is full of. And nowe beste Ladye and moste beautifull, so tearmed of the Oracle, and so thought of in the world: what the Inchantresse tolde Contarenus: Sibilla shewed Caudina, and Loricus: and Apollo said to me, by your most happy comming is veryfied, The most hardy knights Cont. and Lori. haue here fought, the most constant Louers Cont and Caudina here be met, and I poore Hemetes (as the knight knowes ful lōg blind) haue receiued my sight. Al which happened by vertue of your grace, which the best so much honor, & we most boūd vnto you: and so I present these noble persos to please you with their seruice, & my self to serue you euer with my prayers, & leauing these Louers to their delights, must leaue Loric. to this aduise. Knight, prosecute thy purpose, it is noble, learning by me not to feare of thy self to

take paine: remembring, nothing notable is woon without difficulty, Hercules had by his laboures his renowne, and his end by his Loue: Loricus, thy end wilbe reward, at least most reputation, with noblest women most esteemed. But I feare I haue too lōg tyred your most noble eares, & therfore only now I beseech your Ma. with your happye presence to honor my poore home, whither straight I mean to guide you.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               This Learned or long tale being brought to his end: the poore Hermit loden as it were with beades and other such ornaments of his professiō, begins to tread the way before the Queen, which her Maiestie espying, refused her steed, and betook her self in like sort to the use of her feet, & accompanying the Hermit (her self waited on of the rest) fel into some discourse & praise of his good tale, which not ended, or rather scarce fully begun, the Q. Ma. had in sight the house, which indeede was a place by art so reared from the ground, as neuer before, nor hereafter, shal I see ye like. First it was incōpassed the number of 200. paces round with lattise, the place of the princes entrance bedect with Iuy & spanges of gold plate, the glimering wherof was such, that men of great iudgement might haue held themselues at stay. The ground frō thence reared litle & litle to the altitude of forty foot or more, the path in mounting couered with fresh turues, with such art, that a great many made question of his skil, which was ye Layer. The way was railed with lattice, beset with sweet flowres & Iuy, as before: aboue in the house was a Table made in order of a halfe moon or more, couered wt green turues (& so replenished wt sorts of dainty, & those diuers dishes belōging to banquet, that the beholders might wel haue though, Iupit. had hoped the connuing, & trusted the pleasing by banquet of his faire Europa.) At one ende therof somwhat distāt, frō ye other, was placed another table (but round) with a chayre costly made of Crymson veluet, imbrodred with branches & pictures of wild beasts & trees, as it had beene a peece of woorke made in the desartes. But leaste I hold you too longe, this mounte made, as I haue sayde, aboute an Oake, the toppe whereof was inforced by strength too bende

downe her branches to couer the house, whiche was done wyth such art, that ye praise of the beholders comming wold haue sufficed the woorker for his trauel: although hee was not so satisfied for his skil, by more then 40. pounds. A number of fine Pictures with posies of the Noble or men of great credite, was in like sort hanging there, where with many were in loue, and aboue the rest the French Embassadour, whiche was present at these sightes, made great suite to haue some of them. The whiche posies, with some perfect note of their pictures, I would haue presented vnto you: but because the Allegories are hard to be vnderstood, without some knowledge of the inuentors, I haue chosen my tyme rather when my selfe shall be present, & more the sooner, because I woulde leaue nothing vnfulfilled of my firste determination. Now Hemetes hauing brought her Maiesty to the entraunce of this place sayde:
               Here most Noble Lady, hauing now brought you to this most simple Hermitage, where you shal see smal cunning, but of nature, & no cost, but of good wil, my houre approching for my orrisones (which according to my vow I must neuer breake) I must here leaue your maiestie, promising to pray, as for my selfe, that whosoeuer wish you best, may neuer wish in vayne.
            
            
               Thus the Hermite departes, & the Queenes Maiesty addresseth her selfe with merry cheere to banqueting, which to encrease a diuine sound of vnacquainted instruments in the hollow roome vnder the house, made such stroakes of pleasure, & moued such delights, that if Apollo himselfe had byn there, I thinke hee would haue intreated the learning of their skill, or at the leaste forgotten the pleasant remembrance of his sweete Daphnes. Her Maiesty thus in the middest of this mirth might espy the Queen of the Fayry drawen with 6. children in a waggon of state: the Boies bravely attired, & her selfe very costly apparrelled, whose present shew might wel argue her immortality, and presenting her selfe to the Queens Maiesty, she spake as followeth.
               
                  
                     As I did roame abroade in wooddy range,
                     In shade to shun the heate of Sunny day:
                     
                        
I met a sorrowing knight in passion strange.
                     by whom I learned, that coasting on this way
                     I should ere long your highnesse here espie,
                     to whom who beares a greatar loue then I?
                  
                  
                     Which then tooke roote still mounting vp on height,
                     when I behelde you last nigh to this place,
                     with gratious speech appeasing cruell fighte.
                     This loue hath caused me transforme my face,
                     and in your hue to come before your eyne,
                     now white, then blacke, your frende the fayery Queene.
                  
                  
                     Which marking all, as all to me is knowen,
                     your face, your grace, your gouerment of state,
                     your passing sprite whereby your same is blowen:
                     doe knowe by certein skill you haue no mate:
                     and that no man throughout the worlde hath seene
                     a prince that may compare with th' English Queene.
                  
                  
                     This knowledge kends in me so hot desire
                     to see your highnesse here in this my walke
                     as since your parting hence I flam'de in fire
                     till your returne that I might heare you talke,
                     that none to you a better harte doth beare
                     my selfe in speech to you might make it cleare.
                  
                  
                     In signe whereof accept most sacred Queene,
                     this simple token wrought within this woode,
                     which as but base so better should haue beene
                     If I had not at suddaine vnderstoode
                     of your arriuall here, which made me take
                     what came to hande, and no great choyse to make.
                  
               
            
            
               Her speache thus ended shee deliuered her gifte, whiche was a goune for her Maiestie of greate price, whereon the imbroderer

had bestowed the summe of his conning, which she receiued with yelding thanks: to whom the fayry Dueene replied:
               
                  
                     The thing is farre beneth both your desert,
                     and my desire, yet am I glad to heare
                     your highnesse take it thus in so good parte,
                     which for my selfe, if it like you to weare:
                     then shall I reape the frute of happie minde,
                     as honored by you the honor of your kinde.
                  
               
            
            
               To gratifie the rest of the Ladies present, there was deuised many excellente and fine smelling Nosegayes made of all cullers to euery one whereof was annexed a posy of two verses, giuen by a handmayde of the fayry Queene, and one aboue the rest of greatest price for the Queenes Maiestie with her posie in Italian, which because I neither understoode it, nor scarce canne write it to be understood: I leaue also till my next cōmig to visite you: for the rest as they weare giuen, I haue sette downe: euery seuerall posie was fayre written and bordered about conningly with seuerall branches excellent to beholde.
            
            
               
                  
                     
                        
                           L. Darby.
                           The vertues foure went wandring once and harbarlesse astray,
                           Till Darby gaue them roome to rest whereas they now may stay.
                        
                        
                           L. Warwicke.
                           If your desertes surpassed not my silly pen and speache,
                           Some other mē shuld view them then, which now do passe my reach.
                        
                        
                           L. Hunsdon.
                           For husbande, children, and your selfe, or ornaments of fame,
                           You are aboue comparison, a right thrice happie dame,
                        
                        
                           L. Haward.
                           The meanes that make a mother bleste, you haue a frutefull race,
                           A noble dame, a patient wife, whats this but blessed case.
                        
                        
                           L. Susan.
                           Take heede least in a moode, dame Venus worke your wooe,
                           For spight of right must worke in her, you passe her beautie so.
                        
                        
                           L. Mary Uere.
                           Where vertue, birth, and beauty to, are thus in one mould cast,
                           This place to simple' is for her seate with gods let her be plast.
                        
                        
                           
                              
Mistris Skidmore.
                           Trustie and true, secrete and sage in place where you do serue.
                           With wise foresight these prayses loe your worthinesse deserue.
                        
                        
                           M. Parry.
                           For longe and faithfull seruice sake which hath abidden tuche,
                           good Parry is a paragon, shew me a nother suche.
                        
                        
                           M. Abbington.
                           Good liking vppon choise made way, to bring you first in place,
                           Which you mainteine by modest meane still in your Princes grace.
                        
                        
                           M. Sidney
                           Tho yonge in yeares yet olde in wit, a gest dew to your race,
                           If you holde on as you begine who ist youle not deface?
                        
                        
                           M. Hoptō
                           
                           Whē 
                              Phebus saw fayre Hopton come to Court & leaue the towre,
                           He spread his beames with merry lookes that erst before did lower.
                        
                        
                           M. Kath
                                 •
                              
                              rin Howarde.
                           For noble race, and vertues giftes, compare you with the best,
                           Who list to seeke, in you shall finde, no lesse then in the rest.
                        
                        
                           M. Garret.
                           Whie doe men set their sights to feede on Pictures set in goulde?
                           sith Garret giues the very vewe of natures modest moulde.
                        
                        
                           M. Bridges.
                           In guesse is guile, coniectures fayle, your graces be well knowen:
                           Which who denies, fame saith he lies, by whom the brute is blowen.
                        
                        
                           M. Burrough.
                           
                              Apollo seeing his Burroughes browes his Daphne did forgette,
                           so stald in stay, so rapped in loue as he standes musing yet.
                        
                        
                           Mistris Knowles.
                           You gallants giue the roome a Dame of price doth come,
                           Coniecture what your bragges may be whē she hath cast the summe
                        
                        
                           M. Frances Howarde:
                           Somme say dame nature tooke in care, to keepe Cornelias moulde,
                           But Howardes 'tis about her neecke eframed in finest goulde.
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               I think (good sir) I haue within little repeated the names of those that were Ladies and maides of Honor, at these sightes, wherein you shall see the vaine, that runneth to the liking of such kinds. Now her Maiestie being risen: with good cheere, accompanied with the Queene of the fay r ye and the Ladye Caudina; she commeth from her banquite, and at her departure the Lady Caudina sayth:
               
                  
                     Let thankes suffice in worde where strength in pow're doth faynte.
                     lette pith in prayer from Heauen to craue requite,
                     
                        
stande for reward to such a sacred Saint.
                     in whom on earth the goddes in Heauen delighte,
                     whose moulde when nature made she gan to stande,
                     in wonder of the worke she had in hande.
                  
                  
                     The goddes for all their good bestowed on man,
                     accept our speeche, as fruite of thankfull hearte:
                     which sith it is the vtmost that we can,
                     let humble thankes be price for your deserte.
                     Contente your selfe with that contentes the gods,
                     twixt whome and you I see such little oddes.
                  
               
            
            
               The daye thus spente, her Maiestie tooke her coach with ioy in remembring what had passed, recounting with her selfe and others how well she had spente the after noone, and as it fell of necessitie in her waye homewarde, closelie in an Oke she hearde ye sound both of voice and instrument of ye excelentest now liuing whose pleasantnesse therin bred a great liking wt a willing eare to ye purport which I haue hardly gotton to present you withal: assuredlie I see greate inuention therein, and yet no more then the iust fame of the deuiser doth both deserue and carrie.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           The songe in the Oke
                           
                              The man whose thoughts against him doe conspire,
                              in whome mishap her story did depante:
                              The man of woo, the matter of desire,
                              free of the dead that liues in endlesse plainte:
                              His sprite am I within this desart wonne,
                              to rewe his case whose cause I cannot shune.
                           
                           
                              Dispaire my name who neuer seeke releife,
                              frended of none, vnto my selfe my foe,
                              An idle care mayntayned by firme beleife,
                              that prayse of faith shall through my tormentes growe.
                              And count the hopes that other hartes doe ease,
                              but base conceates the common sorte to please.
                           
                           
                              
                                 
I am most sure that I shall not attaine,
                              the onely good wherein the ioy doth lye.
                              I haue no power my passions to refraine,
                              but wayle the want which nought els may supply.
                              Whereby my life the shape of death, must beare
                              that death, which feeles the worst that life doth feare.
                           
                           
                              But what auailes with Tragical complaint,
                              not hoping helpe, the furies to awake?
                              Or why should I the happie mindes acquaint
                              with dolefull tunes, their setled peace to shake?
                              O yee that here behold infortunes fare,
                              there is no griefe that may with mine compare.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               Now was it darke nighte, and her Maiestie filled with conceites, returneth home, leauing earnest command that the whole in order as it fell, should be brought her in writing, which being done, as I heare, she vsed, besides her owne skill, the helpe of the deuisors, & how thinges were made I know not, but sure I am her Maiesty hath often in speech some part hereof with mirth at the remembrance.
            
            
               But to keepe my promise for the rest, I will begin in order to make you priuy of the sequele: which indeed followeth, as an apt consequent to what is past. Therefore shal you vnderstande, that vpon the 20. day of the same moneth, the Queene being disposed to spend her time with some delightes, this Comedy was presented, acted before her Maiesty.
            
            
               And the more to egge you forward with desire of the end, assure your selfe, it was as well thought of, as anye thinge euer done before her Maiestie, not onely of her, but of the rest: in such sort, that her Graces passions, and other the Ladies could not but shew it selfe in open place more then euer hath beene seene.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            The Actors names.
            
               1 Roxane Caudinas maide.
               2 Occanon the Duke.
               3 Achates his Counseller.
               4 Queen of the fairy.
               5 Caudina the Dukes daughter.
               6 Contarenus Caudinas Louer.
               7 Niphe Caudinas other mayde.
               8 Alexandro and
               9 Guilfrido, Pages.
            
         
         
            
               Roxane.
               
                  I Thinke as yet all here hath fresh in minde,
                  a strange aduenture past in act of late,
                  How that a Lady borne nigh to the Inde,
                  arriued here in quest of louing mate:
                  Whom she did finde by such aduentrous sort,
                  as erst the Hermite shewed by large report.
               
               
                  Which Hermit then if you remember well,
                  requirde the Prince and Lady of this land,
                  That she with her would let the Lady dwell:
                  and wayting still on her, attend at hande:
                  And that the Knight in Court there might remayne,
                  till that they both returned home agayne.
               
               
                  Which thing consented too by Princes voyce,
                  they haue pursude and wayted on the trayne,
                  Tillate desire hath made them alter choyse:
                  
                     
the Ladies heart stil longing home agayne,
                  And glad to winne the Duke her Fathers will:
                  for mouing whom she knoweth she hath done yll.
               
               
                  For though at first in heat she set him light,
                  and forst by fathers wrong, went wandring so,
                  Yet doth she stil suspect strong Natures might,
                  who checking chaffe sure workes the chafer woe:
                  Which to appeare, is now her chiefe desire,
                  and therefore home she meaneth to retire.
               
               
                  Which thing to compasse well, and leaue no part
                  of dutie vnfulfulfilde both here and there,
                  She with the fairy Queene is gone apart,
                  of whom she hopes the rediest way to heare:
                  How to returne with loue from whence she came,
                  as she for loue departed from the same.
               
               
                  Now wil'd she me (as loth to moue offence)
                  if she were cald for ere she could come backe,
                  To be in place, and not to part from hence,
                  that for excuse in me might be no lack:
                  Til whose returne faire Ladies if I may,
                  among you with your leaue I meane to stay.
               
            
            Achates. Occanon.
            
               Now good my Lord let mourning moane haue end,
               the harme is yours, your selfe this still to wracke,
               The Heauens I trust some better newes will send,
               the Gods which suffered you these paynes to take,
               Intend you to behold with cheerefull eye:
               your helpe is neere, it must of force so be.
            
            
               Occan.
               
                  In seeking hope, hap flieth stil away,
                  my weary corpes is ready for to faynt,
                  Then death, that debt which I at length must pay,
                  by yeelding life receiue, and end my plaint.
                  Now is the time most for to pleasure me,
                  when I in griefe, doe craue it thus of thee.
               
               
                  
                  Who hath not heretofore beheld on stage.
                  the hard conflict which breach of duety breedes,
                  With natures might in way to vanquish rage,
                  let him behold me and my daughters deedes:
                  Twixt whom, as strange contempt hath caused flame,
                  so nature seekes againe to quench the same.
               
               
                  She set her loue where she her selfe likt best,
                  I much mislikt because her choise did light,
                  Beneath her birth, though I might like the rest:
                  to stay this streame I did all that I might.
                  First with perswasions sweete I did beginne,
                  to trye if so my daughter I could winne.
               
               
                  The more I chargde, the sorer she repeld,
                  wherefore my labour lost, I changde my way,
                  And from my Court her Louer I expeld,
                  thereby in hope to worke my daughters stay.
                  But while I sought to wring her from her loue,
                  loue wrought her cleane from me, as then de did proue.
               
               
                  No sooner did she finde her selfe alone,
                  bereft of him whom she a loue did chuse.
                  But secretly her selfe must needes be gone:
                  her state, her traine, her wealth, she did refuse:
                  And held that happe to be her onely blisse,
                  him to inioy whom she in Court did misse.
               
               
                  Her parting first, because it did proceede,
                  from vilde contempt of duety to her Syre,
                  Did stirre my choler much, for that her deed,
                  till nature did arrest, and wrought desire
                  To haue my child restorde to me againe,
                  whose absence then had wrought my woe and paine.
               
               
                  Then I began such parentes to accuse,
                  as be too sowre to those they haue begot,
                  And found of al, them farthest from excuse,
                  
                     
whose noble state doth make them more of note,
                  On them and theirs Loue hath the greatest power,
                  therefore on Loue they ought the least to lower,
               
               
                  A quiet life where neede no labour willes,
                  A seemely face whereon all eyes be cast,
                  A diet where desire the heart fulfils,
                  A world of sport while day, while night doth last,
                  How can these things but make Loue open a way,
                  and fancy force with her delights to play?
               
               
                  Here did I fayle in seeking to withstand,
                  where I confesse the power of loue is most,
                  Hence did proceed the leauing of my land
                  to finde her out which I so lewdly lost.
                  This is the cause why in such simple case,
                  I wander seeking her from place to place.
               
               
                  So as I feele my weery bones to shrinke,
                  not able long my fainting corpes to beare,
                  Sleepe doth oppresse my limmes which gin to sinke,
                  while slumbring ease relieues my toylesome cheare.
                  I pray you Sir, depart not hence from me.
                  your faithful helpe mainteynes my hope I see.
               
            
            
               Acha.
               I wil my Lord not once part from your side,
               take you your rest, your trauels doe it craue,
               Here fast by you I am resolued to byde,
               to gard you so, as naught your rest depraue.
               The griefe of minde I see works wondrous things,
               commanding al estates both Lords and kings.
            
            
               Roxa.
               
                  O Goddes what haue I heard, O cruel fates,
                  must that needs fal which you wil needs fulfill:
                  My Lord the Duke to leaue his Princely states,
                  and wandring thus to yeeld to Fortunes will?
                  Then doe I see that euen as you please,
                  men reape their rest and feele their most disease.
               
               
                  
                  This haughty Duke which set so light by loue,
                  as though he could commaund him to obey,
                  Doth now himselfe by strange aduentures proue:
                  that gainst Loues force no power beareth sway:
                  For where Loue liues at will, he soonest dies,
                  and where he flaunts at ful thence soonest flies.
               
               
                  But yet to learne more certainly whats past,
                  ere that to him my selfe I doe bewray,
                  At this good man I meane to haue a cast,
                  of whom I will learne out if that I may:
                  By way of glaunce who t'is that lyeth heere,
                  and what might cause this his so ruthful cheere.
               
               
                  If't be not he, then is my labour lost,
                  and being but few words the cost is small,
                  If it be he, then hence straight will I post,
                  and to my Ladies eares reporte it all:
                  That she therby may presently aduise,
                  what good therin may to her state arise.
               
               
                  Good Sir I see you sad which greeueth me,
                  whom curchy makes partaker of your woe,
                  To ryp your griefe vnpleasant it wil be,
                  as to all pained soules it is I know:
                  Yet if I may finde such grace in your eie,
                  tell me what man this is that here doth lie.
               
            
            
               Ach.
               Faire Lady this your curteous speech doth craue,
               disclose of all that careful brest doth hide,
               In him that lyeth here the world may haue,
               wherein with maze to let their minds abide.
               A Prince he is, whom fortune doth constraine,
               with fruitlesse toyle to trauel stil in vaine.
            
            
               Rox.
               A Prince? I pray you where, and of what land?
            
            
               Ach.
               An Asian Lord the great Cambaian Duke.
            
            
               Rox.
               What fate might force him take this toyle in hand?
            
            
               
               Acha.
               To find his daughter out these paines he took.
            
            
               Rox.
               Why where is she, how hapt he her to leese?
            
            
               Ach.
               Because in loue her minde he did displease.
            
            
               Rox.
               Perhaps he did not like where she had lou'd,
            
            
               Ach.
               Euen so it was: for hee from court remou'd
               her friend, for whom her countrey she forsooke,
               As not of force her Louers lacke to beare:
               which knowen, the Duke to trauel him betooke:
               To find her out whom Nature made so deare,
               With mynde resolu'd if he her met againe,
               to thinke such hap sweet pay for all his payne.
            
            
               Rox.
               And hath he not as yet heard where she is?
            
            
               Ach.
               Not yet, but that Sibilla bade him goe,
               to such a soyle as I suppose is this,
               and there to haue his hope and end his woe,
            
            
               Rox.
               These things be strāge, yet stranger things haue been
               accomplisht here, as I my selfe haue seen.
               Well Sir, I am to thinke my selfe much bound,
               for this your curchy shew'd at my request,
               And if your ease may grow within this ground,
               by meanes of me, sure I wil doe my best.
               But Sir, may I desire your Princes daughters name?
            
            
               Ach.
               
                  Gaudina she is called of worthy fame.
            
            
               Rox.
               I thank you Sir, I can no longer stay,
               but for requite commaund me any way.
            
            
               Ach.
               I thanke you for your curtesie.
            
            
               Rox.
               Now to my L. Ile goe with speed,
               that hearing this she may accordingly proceed.
               Exit.
               Occanon from sleepe.
               Ah, ah, it is but vaine to hope in sleepe,
               to purchase ease, where waking fils with care:
               In sleepe I felt my slumbering eies did weepe,
               my heart did pant for griefe in minde I bare.
               Now let vs passe vnto our iourneyes end,
               til we find out what chance the Gods will send.
            
            
               
               Ach.
               
                  My Lord, if words that passe from faithfull heart
                  may stay your mynd, my hope here bids me stay,
                  For marking all that's here in euery part,
                  and minding that which Sibil once did say:
                  Me thinke this place should be the happy land,
                  where we should rest, as she bare vs in hand.
               
               
                  Besides while you tooke rest, a Lady came
                  with shew of griefe, that your mishaps were such,
                  And learning both yours and your daughters name,
                  did passe away: all which perswade me much:
                  That if you stay til she agayne returne,
                  your heauy heart with ioyful newes shal burne.
               
            
            
               Occa.
               
                  The neerer hope to haue that I desire,
                  to see my child whom I so farre haue sought,
                  The more I burne, the greater is my fire,
                  for feare to faile of that to winne I thought,
                  The wished end requites the toile that's past,
                  and ioy for griefe is recompense at last.
               
               
                  What is the force of fathers care I see,
                  though I my selfe am father to my care,
                  To this effect the same hath wrought in me,
                  that though it be among examples rare:
                  My selfe I haue disrobed of my state,
                  to find my child which I did lose of late.
               
            
            
               Acha.
               
                  For great offence my Lord the paiment great,
                  the meanest man feeles not the greatest fall,
                  You rew with time that you did worke in heat,
                  and yet you find to comfort you withal:
                  This cost to Sibilles words so doth agree.
                  But sir behold what Ladyes do I see?
               
               The Fairy Queene and Roxane entreth.
               
                  A royall blood her vertue wil bew ray,
                  though Fortune seek her neere so to oppresse,
                  And noble race wil not run farre astray.
                  
                     
but of her selfe wil worke her owne redresse:
                  As I my selfe euen now haue found most true,
                  in this your Ladies case whom I so rue.
               
               
                  She fearing fathers wrath for her offence,
                  though by constraint vnkindly causd to stray,
                  As she intends with speed departure hence,
                  so wil she not but wisely part away,
                  And for aduise resorted vnto me,
                  to learne what way her best returne might be.
               
               
                  My Councel was, since fates had found the meane,
                  the English Queene to make for her defence,
                  To whose assured stay she might welleane
                  to swage her fathers wrath, so wrought for her offence:
                  For none could helpe her more nor so as she,
                  if with such sute her grace content might be.
               
               
                  Her credit is so good her fame so flies,
                  her Honour such, her wisedome so in note,
                  Her name so knowne to all mens eares and eies,
                  as better mean could no where els be gotte,
                  Then if he might at her hands vnderstand,
                  what she hath heard and seen within her land.
               
               
                  Whereon when we resolu'd by ioynt assent,
                  and I at her request was drawing neere,
                  To moue the suit according as we ment,
                  I met you by the way which had byn heere:
                  By whom I learned a very speedy meane,
                  to worke her weale and voyde al terrour cleane.
               
               
                  But mayde where is the Duke of whom you spake,
                  which tooke this toyle for your good Ladies sake?
               
            
            
               Rox.
               Yon same is he whose strange attire,
               descries his griefe and points at his desire.
            
            
               Queen.
               Wel: Ile feele his pulse. Sir knight I heare,
               you are inquest your daughter here to find.
               
                  
In weed disguisd because behaps you feare,
               least being known contrary to your mynd.
               Your seerch might grow too long, yet may it be,
               your state descride you may find helpe of me.
            
            
               Occa.
               
                  Alas Madam, and must it needs be so?
                  must griefe burst out? and must my careful thought,
                  Make you by speech partaker of my woe?
                  wherein the wrong that I haue iustly wrought
                  vnto my selfe, shal lead me on along,
                  til her I find whose wandring is my wrong.
               
               
                  My natiue Countrey is, where Indies streame,
                  doth enter Sea, nigh to th' Cambaian coste,
                  From whence I rome into this famous realme,
                  to seeke my child which by mischance I lost,
                  There Duke I am, a Lord of fruitful soyle,
                  though Fortunes force now taxe me with this toyle.
               
            
            
               Queen.
               How hap your child did leaue you so alone?
               was there no helpe but she must needes be gone?
            
            
               Occa.
               She would needs loue where I misliked much,
               a man of meane estate of base degree,
               She is my only care and his case such,
               as, though wel borne, a subiect yet to me.
               Whom I in heate remou'd from her: but she
               in greater heat remou'd her self from me.
            
            
               Queen.
               
                  Me thinks these words in such high state bewray
                  more egar minde then gift of great conceate,
                  A Princesse peere a Duke should seeke to stay,
                  and not gainst fume with wit to worke debate.
                  Are you so farre misledde for want of skill,
                  as you know not that loue wil haue his will?
               
               
                  He knowes no peere: al states stoupe to his checke,
                  he spares no prince no more then meane estate,
                  But makes ech one obey him at a becke:
                  He takes great scorne to heare tell of a mate,
                  
                     
But where he findes such match as he doth like,
                  without gainsay he bends his bow to strike.
               
               
                  Because you are a Prince of high degree,
                  in Countrey where you dwell, you hold it light
                  That Loue should should wound your only heire I see,
                  but were you of farre more puissant might,
                  And she of price as peerelesse as may be,
                  loue hath subdu'de farre brauer Dames then she.
               
            
            
               Occa.
               Madam I must confesse the force of loue,
               to be a thing in vaine against to bend,
               Which blind reason first did after proue,
               to set vs so as we can not defend,
               And so triumphing when we cannot see,
               we must confesse, who is the God but he?
            
            
               Queen.
               
                  As who should say, Loue neuer hits aright,
                  but beetle like bereau'd of sight doth runne,
                  Not waying worth, nor marking where to light,
                  But loue oft times by due desart is wonne,
                  And most prest on in Dames of highest prise,
                  wherfore iudge right, for loue oft times is wise.
               
               
                  Perhaps your daughters Loue sprang from desart,
                  perhaps the persons worth procur'de her choise,
                  Perhaps he was so tyed he could not start
                  from her, commaunding him by vertues voyce:
                  And would you seeme at such linke to repine,
                  which vertue did with her owne fingers twyne?
               
               
                  Therefore make your account this griefe you feele,
                  proceeds from offence gainst such a power,
                  And neuer hope to winne your better weale,
                  till that his wrath appear'd, he leaue to lower.
                  Loue is a Lord, who lothes, hym him he shames,
                  not sparing Lordes, not sparing princely Dames.
               
               
                  And chiefly where with vertue he doth linke,
                  for vertues sake, where loue doth like to light.
                  
                     
There can no force enforce his force to shrinke,
                  he trusts so much to his confederates might.
                  Wherefore your daughters loue for vertues sake,
                  worke what you could, no ouerthrow would take.
               
            
            
               Occan.
               I neuer did repine where vertues loue did link,
               but where there seem'd Disperagement to rise,
               As in her match I did and do stil think,
               his birth to hers in no point did suffice,
               A Princes child inheritour to state,
               too good I thought so farre to vndermate.
            
            
               Queen.
               
                  Alas good Sir, know you not at these yeeres,
                  that Loue doth alwaies fight on equal ground,
                  And where he mindeth match, he makes them peeres:
                  if mynds agree the ground of states is found.
                  A Princely heart in meaner man may dwel,
                  where, if a Princesse like, she doth but well.
               
               
                  For when the eare is fed with worthes report,
                  when eie beholds what rauisheth the sight,
                  The heart straight to desire yeelds vp the fort:
                  where if againe like liking hap to light,
                  When vertues ioyne and like with like is knit,
                  what match is made more excellent then it?
               
               
                  This match should you mainteine where loue crept in.
                  not of himself but gesse-waies led by hand,
                  For vertue was the first that did begin,
                  against whose force whilest you thought to withstand,
                  In single termes as not allowing loue,
                  the compound strength of vertue you do proue.
               
               
                  You blame not him for mounting vp so hie,
                  she beares the blame for bending down so low,
                  Whom fortune bids looke vp, too blame were he,
                  if he should quaile, and worthy ouerthrow.
                  And she too blame, of neere so high degree,
                  not casting Loue where vertues doth agree.
               
               
                  
                  Alas whats birth though borne so much in eye,
                  the onely meane to blind who so is borne,
                  Who looking bigge with countenance on hye,
                  with vaine conceites holdes vertues giftes in scorne,
                  Vnhappy he that bragges in that behalfe,
                  where vertue lacks he proues himself a calfe.
               
            
            
               Occa.
               You force me sore, yet this youle not deny,
               that though Loues powre be not to be withstood,
               And that the match of minds be beyond cry.
               and they best linkt where liking thinks it good,
               Yet should my child of me make so smal store,
               as match her selfe and not moue me before?
            
            
               Queen.
               If match were made by onely meane of man,
               you had byn first, as whom the cause concernd,
               But what the Gods first moue doe what you can,
               they wil passe on though parents be not warnd,
               It is but vayne to say loue shal not winne,
               vnlesse at your consent he first beginne.
            
            
               Occa.
               But was not that vnkindly done of her,
               vnknown to me to stray from Countries soyle?
               Therby her Fathers blood so sore to stirre,
               which for her sake doe take this yrksome toyle?
               In kinde a child, vnkind to such a Syre,
               deseruing iust reuenge of fathers yre.
            
            
               Queen.
               Nay was not that vnkindly done of you,
               vnknowen to her, to send her loue away,
               To worke you both such woe as you feele now,
               you for her sake, she for her Loue to stray:
               In kynd a Syre, vnkind to such a child,
               whose only fault hath child and Sire exilde.
            
            
               Occa.
               But nature should haue borne with parents heat,
               sith what was meant was meant but for her good,
               The Loue of kind, such fancy loue should beat,
               and though she found me for a time in mood.
               Tyme would haue turnd and causd me to relent,
               
                  
in that for which from me she slily went.
            
            
               Queen.
               
                  Where nature doth but warme loue sets on fire,
                  and greater force of lesser is obayde,
                  For loue by choyce doth drawe more deep desire,
                  the loue of kind, by kind loue's ouer wayde,
                  Which maister like giues not time to relent,
                  but on he wil or make the man repent.
               
               
                  How could your Tigrish heart by sundring them,
                  which liu'd in heauen before you sought their hell,
                  Defeate the hold where Cupid held his claime?
                  but in these termes no longer for to dwell:
                  What if your child were offered to your face,
                  should she, or should she not obteine your grace?
               
               
                  And if her Loue for whom her toyle hath beene,
                  should come with her resolu'd to be her owne,
                  Should not this angry mood of yours void cleane?
                  answere me that, for that thing being known,
                  Perhaps I would in part procure your ease,
                  so that their match your mynd might not displease.
               
            
            
               Occa.
               This compound case doth cause a fight in mind:
               to gaine my child my griefe would soone relent,
               Though in her flight she followed not her kind,
               but with her match I cannot be content.
               But who are you Madam if I may craue,
               to know your name which seekes them thus to saue.
            
            
               Queen.
               I am the Fairy Queene.
            
            
               Occan.
               O noble Dame,
               whose skil is such, as nought is hid from you,
               Nothing so darke but you doe know the same,
               I know you know where both they be, and how
               I may obteine the thing I haue so sought,
               whose want I wrought and deerely haue it bought.
            
            
               
               Queen.
               Wel Sir, I doe perceiue you are content,
               to take your child into your grace againe,
               In hope wherof she shal straight be present,
               to please her fathers sight, to stay his paine:
               For other things discourse you when you meet,
               all wil be wel since you are wonne from heat.
               Goe mayd, goe, cal your Lady here.
               Rox. exit.
            
            
               Occa.
               I thanke you noble Dame for pitying me,
               and tendring this my silly daughters state,
               Whom if it be my hap againe to see,
               no such like heat shal set vs at debate,
               And yet I hope by reason so to deale,
               as that her match shal stand to Countries weale.
            
            
               Acha.
               It wil be hard her setled loue to shake,
               which grounded once is not light to remoue,
               Yet for your loue and for her Countries sake,
               it may fall out she wil forget her loue:
               Which being new and young did rauish so,
               now being old hath better leaue to go,
               But yonder comes the maiden which was sent,
               Gaudina & Roxa. entreth.
               and lo my Ladie there for whom she went.
            
            
               Qu.
               T'is true my L. your daughter is in place.
               performe your speech and let her find some grace.
               Gaudi. espying her father, falleth on her knees, saying:
            
            
               Gaudi.
               
                  I must deere father craue here at your feet,
                  for mine offence your pardon to obtaine,
                  From whom to fly, I yeeld it was not meet,
                  yet Loue (my Lord) in me so sore did rayne:
                  As victor once repulse he would not beare,
                  but bade me seek my loue in place ech where.
               
               
                  You vnderstand my Lord the course I kept,
                  you see the gods haue brought this geare to end,
                  These fatal liftes could not be ouer lept,
                  but needs my wil to their great might must bend:
                  
                     
For fault to you their force I must oppose,
                  I am your child of me you may dispose.
               
            
            
               Occa.
               
                  Small pardon needs where grace is ready found,
                  vpon some better hope you haue discharge,
                  Affection heales where folly made the wound,
                  but these things are to be discourst at large.
                  But now the meane to mend your present case,
                  is that you yeeld and gaine your fathers grace.
               
               
                  This Lady here the Fairy Queene hath laide,
                  for your defence in so forsaking me,
                  As much as may in your behalfe be sayd,
                  to whom we both are bound exceedingly:
                  One point remaines, wherein if you relent,
                  to take you home to grace I am content.
               
            
            
               Queen.
               I dare my selfe for her part vndertake,
               that on her side resistance wilbe small,
               To what request her father here shal make,
               the cause once knowen, and circumstance withall;
               To compasse your good will is her desire,
               wherefore demaund the thing that you require.
            
            
               Occa.
               
                  
                     Gaudina this long time you haue giuen raine,
                  to serue your choise and feed your fancy still,
                  Wherin as you haue suffered part of payne,
                  so I became partaker of your yll,
                  Now is the time to come to reasons schoole,
                  which can alone these hot affections coole.
               
               
                  For loue to leaue the land where you were borne,
                  to tread your Fathers teares quite vnder feet.
                  To stray you wote not where as one forlorne,
                  to wander stranger like in such a heat:
                  Doth ill beseem a person of your port,
                  which being done, to reason now resort.
               
               
                  
                  You are mine only child, heire to my state,
                  the wealth wherof doth rest vpon your choyce,
                  Which wilbe wel if you in taking mate,
                  do vse aduise of Fathers careful voyce,
                  Mark wel, hereon doth hang your Fathers loue,
                  besides the good by you my state may proue.
               
               
                  I wil (considering both birth and your degree,
                  wherto at first I cast my chiefe respect)
                  To Countries good you chiefly haue an eie,
                  which calles you home, and wils you to neglect,
                  The Loue of him which led you so astray,
                  and for her sake to take a better way.
               
            
            
               Gaudin.
               
                  A dainty choyse my Lord you offer me,
                  old rooted loue stil wedded to conceit,
                  With rufull looke appearing in mine eye,
                  and to your suit presenting stil debate,
                  Whom Countries good and nature bids obay,
                  wherby my tongue knowes not whats best to say.
               
               
                  But good my Lord sith you which may command,
                  doe giue me leaue for my defence to plead,
                  May it please you in short to vnderstand,
                  how things haue past twixt him and me indeed,
                  Which being heard, if you be not content,
                  my wil to yours shal presently be bent:
               
               
                  How worth in him did worke loue first in me,
                  in Princely state while I did liue at home,
                  Your selfe therewith displeasd did right wel see,
                  which banishing him inforced me to rome,
                  Because the baite which loue for vs had layde,
                  held vs so fast as it could not be stayde.
               
               
                  
                  By land and Sea I wandred farre and neere,
                  not finding rest til Sibil told me plaine,
                  het hap of that I hop'd remained here,
                  where I should rest and finish al my payne:
                  Successe confirm'd her speech, and here I found,
                  to whom by chained linke loue hath me bound.
               
               
                  For farther linke in marriage to proceed,
                  because therein I had not your consent,
                  I followed stil Apollos holy reed,
                  whose priest in that restrained myne intent,
                  And wild me not to marriage to giue place,
                  til he should like of whom I tooke my race.
               
               
                  Our state is thus, our loue which thus did grow,
                  stands in these termes, in other termes yet free,
                  I loued where I likt which reft me froe,
                  I hasted on the thing I likt to see:
                  I sought, I found, our loue remayneth stil,
                  so to passe forth, if it be your good will.
               
            
            
               Occa.
               If you stand free saue only that it pleasd
               the mighty Cupid this to cause you rome,
               Therein I find my heart wel easd,
               and trust to match you wel when I come home:
               With loue more fit for you then this can be,
               where both estate and wealth shal wel agree.
            
            
               Gaud.
               Alas my Lord, it is but fortunes gift,
               to haue discent brought down from Princes traine,
               The persons worth is vertues worthy drift,
               which by desart the highest place should gaine.
               Care not for birth though it be neuer so base,
               but vertue reke which craues the highest place.
            
            
               Occa.
               
                  As t'is a chance to be a Princes child,
                  so if you thinke that vertue is restraind,
                  To one alone, therin you are beguild,
                  
                     
she doth refuse of none to be obtaind:
                  And where that royall blood with vertues meet,
                  doth not such one best seem a Princely seate.
               
               
                  Such one I know in place where you were borne,
                  more fit for you then this to whom you cleaue,
                  Whefore giue your consent, and thinke no scorne,
                  at Fathers suit your former loue to leaue:
                  For duty so despisde for al my payne,
                  to find you out, I craue this only gaine.
               
            
            
               Gaudi.
               
                  But yet my Lord consider al the toile,
                  which I haue past to compasse this my loue?
                  Shal old conceit at length receiue the foyle,
                  whose force I feele not minding to remoue?
                  VVhen Loue forsaken shal reuiue agayne,
                  alas my Lord how sore wil be my payne:
               
               
                  To be constraind not once to cast a looke,
                  where I tofore did pitch my whole delight?
                  To leaue him thus, for whom I all forsooke,
                  how can true loue abide such poysoned spight?
                  VVhats to be said in this vnequall fight,
                  where loue denies what nature claimes of right?
               
               
                  O Cupid be content with that is past,
                  thus long to thee I haue my seruice vowd,
                  Let nature now preuaile at last,
                  what she demands hold it not disalowd:
                  And shal I then forsake my former ioy?
                  nay my Gaudina death were lesse annoy.
               
               
                  Plaint hath found meane, and loue hath won his right,
                  from whom but death no force shal seuer me,
                  Dame Nature be content, here in thy sight
                  my Loue I doe release and yeeld to thee,
                  
                     
Yet neither loue nor nature may possesse,
                  but only death the mother to redresse.
               
            
            
               Occa.
               
                  See how this heate doth burst to extreame flame,
                  see what deuise extreame desire hath founde,
                  She loues and cannot leaue yet to voyd blame,
                  she hath found out another helples grounde,
                  By death to disappoint both our desires:
                  see reasons checke when senslesse loue aspires.
               
               
                  Yet this I may not leaue that is begonne,
                  Madam of you I must craue farther ayde,
                  By whom I trust this fort shal yet be wonne:
                  you haue perceiu'd by both what hath byn said,
                  You see the ground whereon my reasons leane,
                  to work my daughters weale be you the meane.
               
            
            
               Queen.
               
                  I see affection arm'd and loth to yeeld,
                  whom length of time and strength of loue support,
                  I see whereon perswasions right doth build,
                  which hath me thinks possest the stronger fort:
                  If loue had sight and reason could be hold,
                  or fiery flame could be subdu'de with cold.
               
               
                  But Lady, geue me leaue whose friendship tride,
                  doth bid you bend your eare to that I say,
                  The trueth whereof cannot be wel denide,
                  though flaming loue in heate seeme to say nay:
                  Immortal states as you know mine to be,
                  from passions blind affects are quite and free.
               
               
                  If you may so consent to Parentes minde,
                  (wherwith is ioyn'd the wealth of countries soyle)
                  As loue cannot accuse you for vnkinde,
                  ne yet complaine himselfe to haue the foyle:
                  Considering he whereon your Loue is bent,
                  may haue your loue though you herein relent.
               
               
                  
                  If you forsake, not forst by greater cause,
                  loue then of some vnkindnes might you blame.
                  But weight of greater worth forbidding pause
                  if you withstand, you blemish much your name.
                  It were no loue that stood so in your sight:
                  but might be tearm'd meere madnes out of right.
               
               
                  Returne againe with parent whence you came,
                  regard the state which birth hath brought you to,
                  Relent to loue that wil augment your fame,
                  and yet this knight cannot, if you so do,
                  Condemne you much although you him forsake,
                  sith of two gods the greater you doe take.
               
               
                  Your Fathers reason springs from such a ground,
                  as cannot wel by reason be deny'de:
                  If he for you so fit a match haue found,
                  as for your birth no fitter may be spi'de,
                  What haue you then against him to withstand,
                  since nought but good can come from parents hand.
               
               
                  Set al aside, and onely this obserue,
                  to seeke you out, your knight he tooke no paine,
                  Yours was the toile, you did from countrey swerue,
                  you trauail'de stil, in rest he did remaine:
                  So that of you if loue craue further ayde,
                  you answere may, he hath his wages payde.
               
               
                  But though you may thus checke his loue you'le say,
                  how shal I choake the loue which flames in me,
                  That, do my best, so keepes me at the bay,
                  as ties me fast when loose I faine would be:
                  So that I find, the goale must there be woon,
                  where fancy fights, and loue the broyle begun?
               
               
                  
                  Your countenance seemes to yeeld, debarre al dout,
                  let meaner loue to greater quickly yeeld,
                  Your good it is these reasons goe about,
                  let common care giue priuate wil the field,
                  Why stand you stil as one in sodain traunce,
                  giue place to that your honour may aduaunce.
               
            
            
               Gaudina.
               
                  Th'assault is great, yet loue bids keep the field,
                  what al this time hath my long trauel won?
                  If now by light attempt I hap to yeeld:
                  these reasons helte before my flight begon:
                  What is now said but then the same was true?
                  the ground is old though floures be fresh and new.
               
               
                  When he by slight was so withdrawen from me,
                  then did my loue condemne these reasons all,
                  And shall I now sith nothing els I see,
                  by yeelding thus procure both present thral?
                  I rather choose to wander with him stil,
                  then so to change and countermaund my wil.
               
               
                  I feele a false alarme as though there were,
                  a fitter match to be found out for mee;
                  No Contarenus no, I smel this geare,
                  to try if so I would relent from thee:
                  No our consents haue ioynd this faithfull linke,
                  til thou saiest nay I wil not from thee shrinke.
               
               
                  And yet in thee if slender shewes take place,
                  Ile neuer yeeld for honor of my kind,
                  Let men remoue and slightly turne their face,
                  in womans brest more stay they stil shal find:
                  My parents pardon me my countrey stay,
                  for what is said from Loue I wil not stray.
               
            
            
               Occan.
               You see how sore my headstrong daughter's bent,
               she wil not yeeld for ought that can be said,
               
                  
VVere it not good that to the knight we went,
               to see if his desire might be delaide:
               I see by him the meane must first begin,
               to quench the flame my daughter frieth in.
            
            
               Queen.
               If it seeme good to you as't doth to me,
               to him where as he is, we wil repaire,
               For at his hand this must be wrought I see,
               if he himselfe wil yeeld to countries care:
               Com Sir, and you Madam, let vs retire,
               we haue to deale with him whom you desire.
            
            
               Gaudi.
               You may so with perswasions deale I think,
               as he to your demaund may seeme to yeeld,
               But inwardly that he from me wil shrink,
               no reason can such ground bring for her shield:
               Yet to doe that which both you do desire,
               apart with you my selfe I wil retire.
               Exeunt.
               Heere the Pages abiding, vse a prety act of sport, but because the matter wilbe full without it, I haue thought good not to trouble you with suche Parenthesis, but making their speeches ended I wil only recite the introduction to their comming in.
            
            
               Alexandro.
               But yonder comes the Fairy Queene,
               and brings with her in trayne,
               My Lord the Duke with merry looke,
               I hope weis home againe.
               Occa. the Duke, Eambia the Fairy Queene, Contarenus, Gaudina, Roxa. Niphe.
            
            
               Queen.
               You heare Sir Knight the parents iust request,
               you see the force whereon his reasons stand,
               Affections staies what wisedome thinks for best,
               the matter rests al onely in your hand.
               By nature you are farther to forsee,
               you are therefore to strike the stroke, not she.
            
            
               
               Occa.
               You know of old what led me so to let
               the great desire wherwith you both so brent,
               Against your worth my wil was neuer set,
               to further Countries good was mine intent:
               Which sith in me so constantly doth dwell,
               to yeeld therto me thinks you might do wel.
            
            
               Gaudi
               
                  Yet Contarenus think what is in you,
                  if vertues worth and waight in you be great,
                  And such as none but blind can disallow,
                  why should perswasions then vs two defeate,
                  As who say, any els might better seeme.
                  then you and I to rule so great a realme,
               
               
                  Birth beares me out, and vertue beares vp you,
                  and why should any then therof mislike?
                  As certaine proofe shal stil preuaile I trow,
                  before that is vncertein how to like.
                  You are to choose my friend, make answere so
                  as you do not procure vs endles wo.
               
            
            
               Conta.
               
                  The choise is hard in midst of such extreames,
                  my Lord and Prince pretending Countries good,
                  On th'other side affections dazeling beames,
                  which stil wil shine though clypsed with a cloude,
                  Layeth in myne eye my Ladies due desart,
                  which nought but death can seuer from my heart.
               
               
                  What flashing flames did she at first abide,
                  when as on me her loue she did bestow?
                  What constance stil in her wrought on my side,
                  to keepe that loue whereto my life I owe?
                  What griefe did then consume her careful heart,
                  when as my Lord wil'd me from Court depart?
               
               
                  What was the zeale that made her so forsake,
                  the blisse which princely Court to her could bring,
                  
                     
And for my Loue such passing paines to take,
                  to find me out where bruite of me shoulde ring.
                  Now should I swerue whom she so long hath sought?
                  death were too smal did I but fault in thought.
               
               
                  How can I leaue her thus and not deserue,
                  to be enrould with those infamous men,
                  Whom Loue, because they did from him so swerue,
                  hath painted out by Poets publike pen:
                  In hel to haue their wel deseruing hire,
                  for so defrauding loue of iust desire?
               
               
                  Yet pardon me Madam for waighing both,
                  if any harme do rise, the griefe is mine,
                  You to displease the god, knowe I am loth,
                  for whom my heart disdaines not any pine.
                  Set loue aside til reason hath found out,
                  what is the best in that we goe about.
               
               
                  Against our Loue our Countries good is laid,
                  for whose auaile we ought not death refuse,
                  Then death for loue in Countries cause bewraid,
                  ought to reioyce and seeke no other scuce:
                  Yet leauing Loue for countries cause I die,
                  who wil not weep such happe on me to lie.
               
               
                  Because my Lord your father may well know
                  that vertue is the linke of this our Loue,
                  And not affection blind which leades vs so,
                  as being bent we cannot once remoue:
                  Marke Madam what I say, and yeeld consent,
                  it is your loue that causeth me relent.
               
               
                  Without my Lord your parents free good wil,
                  at home with him what can his child enioy?
                  
                     
And thus to liue in state a wanderer stil,
                  as you do now, what more may breed annoy?
                  Good Madam though I loue as no man more,
                  yeeld yet to him, withstand him not so sore.
               
               
                  You shal obteine such one by his foresight,
                  as he shal like, and countries weale shal craue,
                  You mustregard the common weales good plight,
                  and seeke the whole not onely one to saue.
                  If you doe well, I cannot doe amisse,
                  though loosing you I lose mine onely blisse.
               
               
                  I doe foresee the griefe that wil insue,
                  when I shal find my selfe of you bereft,
                  VVhen careful mind my late mishap shal rue,
                  that voyd of you and of your sight am left.
                  A double death my doleful dayes shal feele,
                  yet I resigne my right to countries weale.
               
            
            
               Qu.
               A noble speech confirming what was said,
               that vertues worth was causer of your loue,
               For sure my Lord it cannot be denaide,
               but that this minde a stony heart myght moue,
               Which to his praise doth yeeld to Countries good,
               the thing which to possesse so neere he stood.
            
            
               Occa.
               
                  Wel Conta. I must needs esteeme,
                  you of such worth as your estate doth beare,
                  And if it might so to all others seem,
                  you best deserue the garland for to weare.
                  But sith the fates against your vertues bend,
                  your vertue wils you this to condiscend.
               
               
                  Whereto this farre I yeeld if that you please
                  with me againe to Countrey to resort,
                  You shal in noble state there liue at ease,
                  and spend your daies in most delightful sport.
                  
                     
And as for loue I banish't you my lande,
                  euen so for loue in grace stil shal you stand.
               
            
            
               Cont.
               My Lord, what you haue done, your state maintains,
               exiling me that did offend your eye,
               My life must be in course of restlesse paines,
               for her whom care of countrey doth denye.
               Good hap light on the land where I was borne,
               though I doe liue in wretched state forlorne.
            
            
               Gaudin.
               Alas that such a spirit cannot perswade,
               Alas that state and vertue sunder so,
               Alas of worth no more account is made,
               but thus from thee my loue must I needes goe.
               Well sith he yeelds which hath most right in me,
               Ah Countries good I yeeld my selfe to thee.
            
            
               Occa.
               Now haue I that which though I bought with pain,
               I think it light, the gain thereof so great,
               Now I receiue you to my grace againe,
               whereof before Loue sought you to defeat.
               The second mends the former fault doth heale,
               since you giue place to care of Countries weale.
            
            
               Queen.
               
                  Wel now the force wherto your fate made way
                  is wel expired, you haue the heauens to friend,
                  Who though they saw you runne so long astray,
                  yet haue they giuen your care a ioyful end.
                  Thinke on and thanke, it is a special grace,
                  first so to stray, then so to end your race.
               
               
                  Your peace is wrought Madam, retire with me,
                  to place where I do dwel from whence you may
                  To Countrey make repaire when time shalbe.
                  til when my Lord if you with me wil stay,
                  What things shal need for that your home retire,
                  I wil supply your want to your desire.
               
            
            
               Occa.
               Your goodnes hath so bound both her and me,
               as while we liue we be yours to command,
               
                  
By you is wrought this wished worke I see,
               by power diuine, and by no mortal hand.
               Passe on Madam let vs be of your trayne,
               the causer of our ioy the healer of our payne.
            
            
               Queen.
               And you sir knight whose honest yeelding made
               the good consent which past to help this yll.
               You may remaine as I before haue said,
               where I do dwel with hearty great good will.
               And euer haue the Fairy Queene to friend,
               for vertues sake which I in you do finde.
            
            
               Conta.
               
                  Madam I am your owne stil to command,
                  as one you see of hap bereaued quite,
                  Resolu'd not to returne to countries land,
                  sith I haue lost what was my whole delight:
                  When resting pawse hath stay'd my troubled heart,
                  I will retire and draw my selfe apart.
               
               
                  And now sith cause of such importaunce moues,
                  my woful heart thus to forgo his loue,
                  Most worthy Dame sith chaunce so parts our loues,
                  that from my sight your presence must remoue,
                  Graunt me herein, sith now the last I see,
                  let not your loue all whole depart from mee.
               
               
                  Waigh wel the cause that mou'd me to relent,
                  which may perhaps imprint more deep conceite,
                  What man as I, his loue so firmly bent,
                  would yeeld the hold once maister of the baite?
                  The gods preserue your honour stil in health,
                  my priuate good, my common countries wealth.
               
               
                  And if your mind were set that home you will,
                  it were but labour lost, if I gainsaide,
                  And absent if your loue continue still,
                  my gayne is great who stil this ground haue laide,
                  
                     
That honest loue might thinke it no disgrace,
                  though they that loue do hap to sunder place.
               
            
            
               Gaudi.
               Wel, Contarenus wel, what shal ensue?
               you are the cause whose yeelding makes me yeeld,
               Yet of my word for euer hold this true,
               wheron you may assured comfort build:
               Til death my soule and body shal depart,
               your loue shal lodge in some part of my heart.
               Griefe calles me hence.
               Exit.
            
            
               Conta.
               
                  Such is my recompence.
                  Nowe doe I feele the pangs the Sea men bide,
                  which hauing harbour nigh in hope to land
                  By turning winde are driuen to try the tide,
                  and trust the Seas thereby to voyd the sand.
                  Now doe I feele the depth of mothers paine,
                  for death of child she hop'd to see againe.
               
               
                  Was euer man more neere his hauen of blisse?
                  his ship driuen forth with wind that fill'd the sayle,
                  Had euer man such cause of hopelesse misse,
                  as I which at the fal so soon did faile?
                  Did Fortune ere so sodain shew her power
                  as in her mirth so soon againe to lower?
               
               
                  When I had liu'd so long in strange exile,
                  in desart wastes commaunded stil to dwel,
                  Disfauored of my prince (alas the while)
                  and bard my Ladies sight my heauiest hel:
                  Againe at last though to her paine we met,
                  so Loue in her surmounted lucklesse let,
               
               
                  Which loue as it did worke in her to ease,
                  so Fathers search which sought to salue his losse,
                  Hath bred vs both more cause of great displease,
                  and tied vs thus to trie more bitter crosse:
                  
                     
By duety she is forced to relent,
                  and leaues to loue a leasure to repent.
               
               
                  Yet can I not Gaudina blame therefore,
                  her hearty loue, her toyling tractes bewayles,
                  She is the lodge where vertue makes her store,
                  it was her syre that bred my doleful daies:
                  Most happy he that on her ioue can hit,
                  most haplesse I for so forgoing it.
               
               
                  And so farre went I yet as one that spied,
                  her whole estate depend vpon my graunt,
                  Though my mishap herein be not denied,
                  yet of her spide my selfe may iustly vaunt.
                  To worke her good my life I would forgoe,
                  as I haue done though to my endlesse woe.
               
               Niphe and Roxane entreth.
            
            
               Rox.
               Friend Niphe could we two haue euer once surmised,
               that such euent would fall to this exceeding loue,
               Or that blind Cupid could so quickly be suppressed,
               which to all reason first so strongly gaue the gloue?
            
            
               Ni.
               I neuer thought but that there might fal out some turn,
               the streame did run so strong, it threatned stil to stay,
               The flame so flashing hot could not so alwaies burn,
               but being closely kept would burst some other way.
            
            
               Contar.
               What Niphe, art thou here, and heard'st my plaint?
               with silent voyce couldst thou such griefe abide?
               Which heretofore when fortune gaue the taint,
               from sounding shril couldst not thine anguish hide?
               Oh helpe in sound to shew my sorrowing state,
               which seem'd to thee most happy but of late.
            
            
               Niphe.
               
                  I wil good sir doe al that lieth in me,
                  to ease your care whose case doth touch me neere,
                  
                     
To finde you out by lande, and eke by Sea,
                  my selfe did toyle twixt hope and trembling feare,
                  Whose shaking off in sort as now we see,
                  is sowre to you, and nothing sweet to mee.
               
               
                  But sith you may with licence of my Lord,
                  returne againe from whence you were exilde,
                  Why wil you not with him therein accord?
                  me thinks refusing that, you are beguilde,
                  There whom you loue, you may haue still in sight,
                  which step in loue was neuer holden light.
               
            
            
               Conta.
               Can I beholde another to embrace,
               where I my selfe my Loue haue alwayes cast,
               Would not my griefe bewray it selfe in place,
               to see my Loue so cleerely from me past.
               Good Niphe helpe, this is my last request,
               to shew my griefe good Niphe doe thy best.
            
            
               
                  
                     
                        Niphes song.
                        
                           O silly Bird what feeles thy heauy brest,
                           which seeking foode to feed thy young withall,
                           At thy returne doest find thy empty nest,
                           and none therein to answere at thy call?
                           How can thy heart but melt away for griefe,
                           forgoing them to thee of late so liefe?
                        
                        
                           How could'st thou Thisby stay, by trembling hand,
                           from reauing thee thy then so lothsome life,
                           When dead on ground thy Pyrramus gan stand,
                           who hop'd forthwith to haue thee to his wife?
                           The neerer hope the fuller fraught with gall,
                           when trust in hope to rest hath sodaine fall.
                        
                        
                           
                           Poore Contarenus how hath Fortune fickle dame,
                           procur'd thy griefe in offring thee her hand?
                           VVhich in thy cause doth now deserue most blame,
                           when she would seem thy special friend to stand,
                           O ye that trust the whirling of her wheele,
                           beware the wrench at turning of her heele.
                        
                        
                           And you that looke aloft beyond degree,
                           when fayrest wind doth fill your flying sayle,
                           Hold fast for feare your footing ficklest bee,
                           when hope wil seeme to helpe you to preuayle.
                           So did she here with Contarenus play,
                           from whom she fled when she made shew of stay.
                        
                     
                  
               
            
            
               Conta.
               
                  I thank thee Niphe for thy mournful song,
                  the tune whereof delights the doleful eares
                  Of such as iustly may complaine the wrong,
                  whose griefe dammes vp the floud of trickling teares.
                  Farewell to both, sith I must needs depart,
                  beare witnes of my woe and careful heart.
               
               
                  And tel my Lady deere that I intend,
                  henceforth to seeke if I may meet her friend,
                  
                     Loricus whom the Hermit did commend,
                  Ile bid him thinke and hope one day to find
                  Reward for that his faithful seruice long,
                  til when we both may plaine of fortunes wrong.
               
               
                  Yet say, I wil abide hers to command,
                  where so aduentures hard shal carry me,
                  Not leauing loue by Sea nor yet by land,
                  though that I loue, I neuer hap to see.
                  Oh careful heart opprest with such desires,
                  as lacks the ioyes that lyking aye requires.
               
               
                  
                  Yet this I am assur'de her Princely heart,
                  where she hath lou'd wil neuer quite forget,
                  I know in her I shal haue stil apart,
                  in honest sort I know she loues me yet.
                  These thoughts in me mainteine the hope of life,
                  which other waies by death should end the strife.
               
               Exit Contar.
            
            
               Rox.
               
                  Wel then I see our fortune must deuide,
                  we must againe to Countries land retire,
                  This knight delights in sorrowing to abide,
                  For missing her which was his whole desire.
                  My selfe haue felt such trauel on their traine,
                  as I am glad home to returne agayne.
               
               
                  The Gods send al good speed that tarry here,
                  and chiefly her which gouernes al the rest,
                  As for my selfe I wil spread farre and neere,
                  for princely prayse that she deserueth best:
                  And that God loued vs which made vs stay,
                  where vertuous Queene doth stately scepter sway.
               
            
            Finis.
         
      
      
         
            
            Imprinted at London for Thomas Cadman. 1585.
            
         
      
   