
      
         
            
            
            ¶THE PASSAGE
of our most drad Soueraigne Lady
Quene Elyzabeth through the
citie of London to westminster
the daye before her
coronacion.
            Anno. 1558.
            Cum priuilegio
         
      
      
         
            
            
            The receiuing of the Quenes maiestie
            
               VPon Saturday, whiche was the
xiiii. day of Ianuarye in the yere
of our Lord God .1558. about .ii.
of the clocke at after noone, the
moste noble and Christian princesse,
oure mooste dradde soueraigne Ladye Elyzabeth by the
grace of god Quene of Englande Fraunce & Irelande,
defendour of the faith. &c. marched from the
towre to passe through the citie of London towarde
Westminster, richely furnished, & most honorably
accompanied, as well with gentilmen, Barons, &
other the nobilite of this realme, as also with a notable
trayne of goodly and beawtifull ladies, richly
appoynted. And entryng the citie was of the people
receiued marueylous entierly, as appeared by thassemblie,
prayers, wishes, welcomminges, cryes, tender
woordes, and all other signes, whiche argue a
wonderfull earnest loue of most obedient subiectes
towarde theyr soueraigne. And on thother syde her
grace by holding vp her handes, and merie countenaunce
to such as stode farre of, and most tender &
gentle lāguage to those that stode nigh to her grace,
did declare her selfe no lesse thankefullye to receiue
her peoples good wyll, than they louingly offred it
vnto her. To al that wyshed her grace wel, she gaue
heartie thankes, and to such as bade God saue her
grace, she sayde agayne god saue them all, and thanked
them with all her heart. So that on eyther syde
ther was nothing but gladnes, nothing but prayer:

nothing but comfort. The Quenes maiestie reioysed
marueilously to see, yt, so exceadingly shewed towarde
her grace, which all good princes haue euer
desyred, I meane so earnest loue of subiectes, so euidently
declared euen to her graces owne person being
caried in the middest of them. The people again
wer wonderfully rauished with the louing answers
and gestures of theyr princesse, like to the which they
had before tryed at her first comming to the towre
from Hatfield. This her graces louing behauiour
preconceiued in the peoples heades vpon these consideracions
was then throughly confirmed, and in
dede emplanted a wonderfull hope in them touchyng
her woorthy gouernement in the reste of her
reygne. For in all her passage she did not only shew
her most gracious loue toward the people in generall,
but also priuately if the baser personages had
either offred her grace any flowres or such like, as a
signification of their good wyll, or moued to her any
sute, she most gently, to the common reioysing of all
the lookers on, & priuate comfort of the partie, staid
her chariot, and heard theyr requestes. So that if a
man shoulde say well, he could not better tearme the
citie of London that time, than a stage wherin was
shewed the wonderfull spectacle, of a noble hearted
princesse toward her most louing people, & the peoples
exceding comfort in beholding so worthy a soueraigne,
& hearing so princelike a voice which could
not but haue set thenemie on fyre, since the vertue is
in thenemie alway cōmended, much more could not

but enflame her naturall, obedient, and moste louyng
people, whose wea
                  •
               e leaneth onely vppon her
grace, and her gouernement. Thus therefore
the Queenes maiestie passed from the Towre,
tyll she came to Fanchurche, the people on eche side
ioyously beholdyng the viewe of so gracious a Ladye
theyr queene, and her grace no lesse gladly notyng
and obseruing the same. Nere vnto Fanchurch
was erected a scaffolde richely furnished, wheron
stode a noyes of instrumentes, and a chylde in costly
apparell, whiche was appoynted to welcome the
queenes maiestie in the hole cities behalfe. Agaynst
which place when her grace came, of her owne wyll
she cōmaunded the chariot to be stayde, and that the
noyes might be appeased tyll the childe had vttered
his welcomming oration, which hespake in English
meter as here foloweth.

                  
                     O pereles soueraygne quene, behold what this thy town
                     Hath thee presented with at thy fyrst entraunce here:
                     Behold with how riche hope she ledeth thee to thy crown
                     Beholde with what two gyftes she comforteth thy chere.
                  
                  
                     The first is blessing tonges, which many a welcome say
                     Which pray thou maist do wel, which praise the to the sky
                     Which wish to the long lyfe, which blesse this happy day
                     Which to thy kingdome heapes, al that in tonges can lye.
                  
                  
                     The second is true hertes, which loue thee frō their roote
                     Whose sute is tryumphe now, and ruleth all the game.
                     Which faithfulnes haue wōne, & al vntruthe driuen out,
                     Which skip for ioy, when as they heare thy happy name.
                  
                  
                     Welcome therfore O quene, as much as herte can thinke,
                     Welcome agayn O quene, as much as tong can tell:
                     Welcome to ioyous tonges, & hartes that wil not shrink,
                     God the preserue we praye, & wishe thee euer well.
                  
               
               
At which wordes of the last line the hole people gaue
a great shout, wishing with one assent as the chylde
had said. And the Quenes maiestie thāked most hartely
both the citie for this her gentle receiuing at the
first, & also the people for confirming the same. Here
was noted in the Queenes maiesties countenance,
during the time that the childe spake, besides a perpetuall
atte
                  •
               tiuenes in her face, a meruelous chāge
in loke, as the childes wordes touched either her person
or the peoples tonges and hertes. So that she
with reioysyng visage did euidently declare that the
woordes tooke no lesse place in her minde, than they
were moste heartely pronounced by the chylde, as frō
all the heartes of her moste heartie citizeins. The
same verses wer fastned vp in a table vpon the scaffolde,
and the latine therof likewise in latine verses
in another table as hereafter ensueth.
            Vrbs tua quae ingressu dederit tibi munera primo,
            O Regina parem non habitura, vide.
            Ad diadema tuum, te spe quám diuite mittat,
            Quae duo letitiae det tibi dona, vide.
            Munus habes primū, linguas bona multa precātes,
            Quae te quum laudant, tum 
                  •
               ia vota sonant,
            Foelicem
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                diem hunc dicunt, tibi secula longa
            Optant, et quicquid deni
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                lingua potest.
            Altera dona feres, vera, et tui amantia corda,
            
               Quorum gens ludum iam regit vna tuum:
            In quibus est infracta fides, falsum
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                perosa,
            Quae
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                tuo audito nomine laeta salit
            Grata venis igitur, quantum cor concipit vllum,
            Quantum lingua potest dicere, grata venis.
            Cordibus infractis, linguis
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                per omnia laetis
            Grata venis: saluam te velit esse deus.
            Now when the childe had pronounced his oration,
and the Quenes highnes so thankefully had receiued
it, she marched forwarde towarde gracious
streate, where at the vpper ende, before the signe of
the Egle, the citie had erected a gorgeous and sumptuous
arke as here foloweth.
            A stage was made whiche extended from thone
syde of the streate to thother, rychely vawted with
batlementes conteining three portes, and ouer the
middlemost was auaunced .iii. seuerall stages in degrees.
Upon the lowest stage was made one seate
royall, wherin wer placed two personages representyng
kyng Henrie the seuenth and Elyzabeth his
wyfe doughter of kyng Edward the fourth, eyther
of these two princes sitting vnder one cloth of estate
in their seates, no otherwyse diuided, but that tho
                  •
               e
of them whiche was kyng Henrie the seuenth proceding
out of the house of Lancastre, was enclosed in
a read rose, and thother which was Queene Elizabeth
being heire to the house of Yorke enclosed with

a whyte rose, eche of them royally crowned, and decently
apparailled as apperteineth to princes, with
Sceptours in their hādes, & one vawt surmoūting
their heades, wherin aptly wer placed two tables,
eche cōteining ye title of those two princes. And these
personages wer so set, yt the one of thē ioyned handes
with thother, with ye ring of matrimonie perceiued
on ye finger. Out of the which two roses sprang
two braūches gathered into one, which wer directed
vpward to the second stage or degree, wherin was
placed one, representing the valiant & noble prynce
king Henry theight which sprong out of the former
stock, crowned with a crown imperial, & by him sate
one represēting ye right worthy ladie quene Anne,
wife to the said king Henry the
                  •
               ght, & mother to our
most soueraign ladie quene Elizabeth that now is,
both apparelled with Sceptours & diademes, and
other furniture due to the state of a king & Queene, &
ii. tables surmounting their heades, wherein were
writtē their names & titles. Frō their 
                  •
               eate also proceaded
vpwardes one braūche directed to the thirde
and vppermost stage or degree, wherein lykewyse
was planted a seate royall, in the whiche was sette
one representyng the Queenes most excellent maiestie
Elizabeth nowe our moste dradde soueraigne
Ladie, crowned and apparelled as thother prynces
were. Out of the foreparte of this pageaunt
was made a standyng for a chylde, whiche at the
Quenes maiesties cōming declared vnto her y• hole
meaning of the said pageaunt. The two sides of the

same were filled with loude noyses of musicke.
            And all emptie places thereof were furnished
with sententces concerning vnitie. And the hole
pageant garnished with redde roses and white
and in the forefront of the same pageant in a faire
wreathe was written the name, and title of the
same, which was. The vniting of the two howses
of Lancastre and Yorke. Thys pageant was
grounded vpon the Queenes maiesties name.
For like as the long warre betwene the two houses
of Yorke and Lancastre then ended, when
Elizabeth doughter to Edward the fourth matched
in mariage with Henrye the seuenthe heyre
to the howse of Lancastre: so since that the
Queenes maiesti
                  •
               s name was Elizabeth, and
forsomuch as she is the onelye heire of Henrye
the eight, which came of bothe the howses
as the k
                  •
               itting vp of concorde, it was deuised
that like as Elizabeth was the first occasion of
concorde, so she another Elizabeth myght maintaine
thesame among her sub
                  •
               ectes, so that vnitie
was the ende wherat the whole deuise shotte, as
the Queenes maiesties names moued the first
grounde. Thys pageant nowe agaynste the
Quenes maiesties comming was addressed with
children representing the forenamed personages,
with all furniture dewe vnto the setting forth of
such a matter well ment, as the argument declared,
costly and sumptuouslye set forth as the beholders
can beare witnes. Now the Quenes maiestie

drewe neare vnto the sayde pageaunt, and
forsomuche as the noyse was greate by reason of
the prease of people, so that she coulde skarce heare
the childe whyche did enterprete y• said pageaunt,
and her chariot was passed so farre forwarde that
she could not well v
                  •
               ew the personages representing
the kynges and Queen
                  •
               s abouenamed: she
required to haue the mater opened vnto her, & what
they signified, with the ende of vnitie, and gro
                  •
               id of
her name, according as is before expressed. For the
fight wherof, her grace caused her chariot to be remoued
back, and yet hardly could she see, because y•
children wer set somewhat with the farthest in.
            But after that her grace had vnderstode y• meaning
therof, she thanked the citie, praised y• fairenes
of the worke, and promised that she woulde doe her
whole endeuour for the continuall preseruacion of
concorde, as the pageant did emport.
            The childe appointed in the standing abouenamed
to open the meaning of the said pageant, spake these
wordes vnto her grace.
            
               The two princes that sit vnder one cloth of state,
               The man in the redd rose, the woman in the white:
               Henry the .vii. And Queene Elizabeth his mate,
               By ring of mariage as man and wife vnite.
            
            
               Both heires to both their bloodes, to Lācastre the kyng
               The Queene to Yorke, in one the two howses did knit,
               Of whom as heire to both, Henry the eyght did spring,
               In whose seat his true heire thou quene Elsabeth dost sit
            
            
               
               Therfore as ciuill warre, and shede of blood did cease
               When these two houses were vnited into one
               So now that 
                     •
                  arre shall sti
                     •
                  t, and quietne
                     •
                   encrease,
               We trust, O noble Queene, thou wilt be cause alone.
            
            The which also wer written in latin verses, and
both 
                  •
               rawen in two tables vpon the forefront of
the saide pageant as hereafter foloweth.
            Hii quos iungit idem solium quos annulus idem:
            Haec albente nitens, ille rubente Rosa:
            Septimus Henricus Rex, Regina Elizabetha,
            Scilicet Haeredes genti: vter
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                suae.
            Haec Eboracensis, Lancastrius ille dederunt
            Connubio e, geminis quo foret vna domus
            Excipit 
                  •
               os haeres Henricus copula regum
            Octauus, magni Regis imago potens
            Regibus hinc succedis auis Regi
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                parenti
            Patris iusta haeres Elizabetha tui.
            
               ¶Sentences placed therin concerning
vnitie.
               Nullae concordes animos vires domant.
               Qui iuncti terrent, deiuncti timent.
               Discordes animi soluunt, concordes ligant.
               Augentur parua pace, magna bello cadunt.
               
                  Coniunctae manus fortius tollunt onus.
               Regno pro moenibus aeneis ciuium concordia.
               Qui diu pugnant diutius lugent.
               Discidentes principes subditorum lues.
               Princeps ad pacem natus non ad arma datur
               Filia concordiae copia, neptis quies.
               Dissentiens respublica hostibus patet.
               Qui idem tenent, diutius tenent.
               Regnum diuisum facile dissoluitur.
               Ciuitas concors armis frustra tentatur.
               Omnium gentium consensus firmat fidem &c.
            
            These verses and other pretie sentences were drawen
in voide places of thys pageant, all tending
to one ende that quietnes might be mainteyned,
and all dissention displaced, and that by the
Quenes maiestie, heire to agrement, and agreing
in name with her, which tofore had ioyned those
houses, which had ben thoccasyon of much debate
and ciuill warre within thys realme, as may appere
to such as will searche cronicles, but be not
to be touched in thys treatise only declaring her
graces passage through the citie, and what prouisyon
the citie made therfore. And ere the Quenes
maiestie came wythin hearing of thys pageaunt,
she sent certaine as also at all the other pageauntes
to require the people to be silent. For her maiestie

was disposed to heare all that shoulde be sayde vnto
her.
            When the Queenes maiestie had hearde the
chyldes oration, and vnderstoode the meanyng of
the pageant at large, she marched forward toward
Cornehill, alway receiued with lyke reioysing of the
people, and there as her grace passed by the conduit
which was curiously trimmed agaynst that tyme
with ryche banners adourned, and a noyse of loude
instrumentes vpon the top therof, she espyed the seconde
pageant, and because shee feared for the
peoples noyse, that she should not heare the child
which dyd expounde thesame, she enquired what
that pageant was ere that she came to it. And
there vnderstoode, that there was a chylde representing
her maiesties person, placed in a seate o
                  •
               
gouernement, supported by certayne vertues,
which suppressed their contrarie vyces vnder their
feete. and so forthe, as in the description of the sayd
pageant shall herafter appeare.
            This pageant standynge in the nether ende of
Cornehill, was extended from thone syde of the
streate to the other, and in the same pageant was
deuysed three gates all open, and ouer the middle
parte thereof was erected one chayre, or seate royal
with clothe of estate to the same apperteynyng,
wherein was placed a chylde representinge the
Queenes highnesse, with consideracion had for
place conuenient for a table whiche conteyned her
name and tytle. And in a comely wreathe artificially

and wel deuised with perfite sight and vnderstāding
to the people. In the frōt of the same page at
was written the name and title thereof, whych is
The seate of worthie gouernance, whych seate was
made in such artificiall maner, as to the apperance
of the lookers on, the forparte semed to haue no
staye, and therfore of force was stayed by liuely
personages, which personages were in numbre
foure, standing and staieng the forefronte of the
same seate royall, eche hauing his face to the Quene
and people, wherof euery one had a table to expresse
their effectes, which are vertues namely. Pure religion,
Loue of subiectes, VVisdome and Iustice, which
did treade their contrarie vices vnder their feete,
that is to witte, Pure religion, did treade vppon
Superstition and Ignoraunce, Loue of subiectes, dyd
treade vpon Rebellion and insolencie, VVisdome
did treade vpon Follie and Vaine glorie, Iustice did
treade vpon Adulacion and Bribery. Eche of these
personages according to their proper names and
properties had not onely their names in plaine and
perfit writing set vpon their breastes easely to be
read of all, but also euery of them was aptly and
properly apparelled, so that hys apparell and name
did agre to expresse thesame person, that in 
                  ••
               tie he
represented. This part of the pageant was thus
appointed and furnished. The two sydes ouer the
two side portes had in them placed a noyse of instrumentes,
whych immediatlye, after the chyldes
speache gaue an heauenly melodie. Upon the top or

vppermost part of y• said pageāt stode the armes of
England ro
                  •
               ally portratured with y• proper beastes
to vpholde thesame. One representing the Quenes
highnes, sate in this seate crowned with an Imperiall
crowne, and before her seate, was a conuenient
place appointed for one childe which did interprete
and applye the said pageant as hereafter shalbe declared.
Euerye voyde place was furnyshed with
proper sentences commendyng the seate supported
by vertues, and defacing the vyces, to the vtterextirpacion
of rebellion, and to euerlastyng continuaunce
of quyetnes and peace. The Quenes maiestie
approching nyghe vnto this pageaunt thus
beawtifyed and furnyshed in all poyntes, caused
her chariot to bee drawen nyghe thereunto, that
her grace myght heare the chyldes oration, whiche
was this.
            
               Whyle that religion true, shall ignorance suppresse,
               And with her weightye foote, breake superstitions head,
               Whyle loue of subiectes, shall rebellion distresse
               And with zeale to the prince, insolency down treade.
            
            
               While iustice, can flattering tonges & bribery deface,
               While follie & vayngtorie to wisdome yeld their handes:
               So long shal gouernment, not swar
                     •
                  e frō her right race
               But wrong decayeth still, and rightwisenes vp standes.
            
            
               Now all thy subiectes hertes, O prince of pereles fame
               Do trust these vertues shall maintayn vp thy throne,
               And vyce be kept down still, the wicked put to shame,
               that good wt good may ioy, & naught wt naught may mone
            
            
               Which verses were painted vpon the right syde
of the same pageant, and the latin therof on the left
side in an other table, which were these.
            Quae subnixa alte solio regina superbo est,
            Effigiam sanc
                  •
               t
                  •
               e principis alma refert,.
            Quam ciuilis amor fulcit, sapientia firmat,
            Iustitia illustrat, Relligio
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                beat
            V
                  •
               na superstitio 
                  •
                crassae ignorantia frontis
            Pressae sub pura relligione iacent.
            Regis amor domat effraenos, arimos
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                rebelles
            Iustus adulantes, Doniuoros
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                
               
                  •
               erit.
            Cum regit imperium sapiens, sine luce sedebunt
            Stultitia at
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                
               
                  •
               uius numen manis honor.
            Beside these verses there wer placed in euery voide rome of the pageant both in Englishe and latin such sentences as aduannced the seate of gouernaunce vpholden by vertue. The grounde of thys pageant was, that like as by vertues (whych doe aboundantly appere in her grace) the Queenes maiestie was established in the seate of gouernement: so she should sitte fast in the same so long, as she embraced vertue and helde vice vnder foote.  For if vice once gotte vp the head, it would put the seate of gouernement in peryll of 
                  •
               alli
                  •
               g.
            The Queenes maiestie when she had heard the
childe and vnderstode the pageant at full, gaue

the citie also thankes there, and most graciouslie
promised her good endeuour for the maintenaunce
of the sayde vertues, and suppression of vyces, and
so marched on till she came againste the great conduite
in cheape, which was bewtified with pictures
and sentences accordinglye against her graces coming
thether▪
            
            Against Soper la
                  •
               es ende was extended from
thone side of the streate to thother, a pageant which
had three gates all open. Ouer the middlemoste
wherof wer erected three seuerall stages, whereon
sate eight children, as hereafter foloweth. On the
vppermost one childe, on the middle three, on the
lowest .iiii. eche hauing the proper name of the blessing,
that they did represent, written in a Table and
placed abouetheir heades. In the forefront of this
pageant before the children which did represent the
blessinges, was a conuenient standing cast out for
a chylde to stande, which did expownd the sayd pageant
vnto the Quenes maiestie, as was done in
thother tofore. Euerie of these children wer appointed
& apparelled according vnto the blessing which
he did represent. And on the forepart of the sayde
pageant was written in fayre letters the name of
the said pageant in this maner folowing.
            The eight beatitudes expressed in the .v. chapter of
the gospel of .S, Mathew, applyed to our soueraigne
Ladie Quene Elizabeth.
            Ouer the two syde portes was placed a noyes of
instrumentes. And all voyde places in the pagea
                  •
               t

wer furnished with prety sayinges, cōmending and
touching y• meaning of the said pageant, which was
the promises & blessinges of almightie god made to
his people. Before yt the quenes highnes came vnto
this pageant, she required y• matter somewhat to be
opened vnto her, yt her grace might the better vnderstād,
what should afterward by the child be sayd
vnto her. Which so was, yt the citie had there erected
the pageant with .vi
                  •
               i. children, representing theyght
blessinges touched in the .v. Chapiter of S. Mathew.
Wherof, euery one vpon iust consideracions
was applyed vnto her high
                  •
               es, a
                  •
               d that the people
therby put her grace in mind, yt as her good doinges
before had geuen iust occasion, why that these blessinges
might fall vpon her, yt so if her grace did continue
in her goodnes as she had entred, she shoulde
hope for the fruit of these promises due vnto them,
y• doe exercise themselues in the blessinges, whiche
her grace heard merueilous graciously, and required
that the chariot myght be remoued towardes
the pageaunt, that she might perceyue the chyldes
woordes, which were these, the Quenes maiestie
geuing most attentiue eare, and requiring that the
peoples noyse might be stayde.
            
               Thou hast b
                     •
                  en .viii. times blest, 
                     •
                   quene of worthy fame
               By me
                     •
                  enes of thy spirite, when care did thee besette
               By mourning in thy griefe, by mildnes in thy blame
               By hunger and by thyrst, and iustice couldst none gette.
            
            
               By mercy shewed, not felt, by cleanes of thyne harte
               By seking peace alwayes, by persecucion wrong.
               Therfore trust thou in god, since he hath helpt thy smart
               That as his promis is, so he will make thee strong.
            
            
               When these woordes were spoken, all the people
wished, that as the child had spoken, so god woulde
strengthen her grace against all her aduersaries,
whom ye Quenes maiestie did most gently thanke
for their so louing wishe. These verses wer painted
on the left syde of the said pageant, and other in laten
on thother syde, which wer these.
            Qui lugent hilares fient, qui mitia gestant
            Pectora, multa soli iugera culta metent
            Iustitiam esuriens sitiensue replebitur, ipsum.
            Fas homini puro corde videre deum
            Quē alterius miseret, dominus miserebitur huius,
            Pacificus quisquis, filius ille Dei est.
            Propter iustitiam quisquis patietur habet
                  
                     
                  
                  que
               
            
            Demissam mentem, caelica regna capit.
            Huic hominum generi terram, mare, sidera vouit
            Omnipotens, horum quisque beatus erit.
            Besides these, euery voide place in ye pageant was
furnished with sentences touching the matter and
ground of the said pageant. When all yt was to be
said in this pageant was ended, the Quenes maiestie
passed on forward in Chepe syde.
            At the standarde in Cheape which was dressed
fayre agaynste the tyme, was placed a noyse of
Trumpettes, with banners and other furniture.
The Crosse lykewyse was also made fayre and

well trimmed. And neare vnto thesame, vppon
the porthe of Saint Peters church dore, stode the
waites of the citie, which did geue a pleasant noyse
with their instrumentes as the Quenes maiestie
did passe by, whiche on euery syde cast her countenaunce,
and wished well to all her most louing people.
Sone after that her grace passed the crosse, she
had espyed the pageant erected at the little conduit
in cheape, and incontinent required to know what
it might signifye. And it was tolde her grace, that
there was placed Tyme. Tyme
                  •
               ꝙ she, and Tyme
hath brought me hether. And so furth the hole matter
was opened to her grace, as hereafter shalbe declared
in the descripcion of the pageaunt. But in
the opening, when her grace vnderstode that the
Byble in Englyshe shoulde be deliuered vnto her
by Trueth, whiche was therein represented by a
chylde: she thanked the citie for that gyft, and sayde
that she woulde oftentymes reade ouer that booke,
cōmaunding sir Iohn Parrat, one of the knightes
which helde vp her canapy▪ to goe before and to receiue
the booke. But learning that it should be deliuered
vnto her grace downe by a silken lace, she
caused hym to staye, and so passed forward till she
came agaynste the Aldermen in the hyghe ende of
Cheape tofore the little conduite, where the companies
of the citie ended, whiche beganne at Fanchurche,
and stoode along the streates, one by another
enclosed with rayles, hanged with clothes,
and themselues well opparelled with manye ryche

furres, and their liuery whodes vppon their shoulders
in comely and semely maner, hauing before thē
sondry persones wellapparelled in silkes & 
                  •
               haines
of golde, as wyflers and garders of the sayd companies,
beside a number of riche hanginges, aswell
of Tapistrie, Arras, clothes of golde, siluer veluet,
damaske, Sattin, and other silkes plentifullye
hanged all the way as the Queenes highnes passed
from the Towre through the citie. Out at the
windowes & penthouses of euery house, did hang a
number of ryche and costlye banners and streamers,
tyll her grace came to the vpper ende of
Cheape. And there by appoyntment, the right worshipfull
maister Ranulph Cholmeley Recorder of
the citie, presented to the Quenes maiestie a purse
of crimeson satti
                  •
                richely wrought with gold, wherin
the citie gaue vnto the Quenes maiestie a thousand
markes in gold, as maister Recorder did declare
brieflie vnto the Queenes maiestie, whose
woordes tended to this ende, that the Lorde maior
his brethren, and comminaltie of the citie, to declare
their gladnes and good wille towardes the
Quenes maiestie, dyd present her grace with that
golde, desyering her grace to continue theyr good
and gracious Quene, and not to esteme the value
of the gift, but the mynd of the geuers. The Quenes
maiestie with both her handes tooke the purse,
and aunswered to hym againe merueylous pithilie,
and so pithilie, that the standers by, as they embraced
entierly her gracious aunswer, so they meruailed

at y• cowching therof, which was in wordes
truely reported these. I thanke my lord maior,
his brethren, & you all. And wheras your request is
that I should continue your good ladie & quene, be
ye ensured, that I wil be as good vnto you, as euer
quene was to her people. No wille in me can lacke,
neither doe I trust shall ther lacke any power. And
perswade your selues, that for the safetie and quietnes
of you all, I will not spare, if nede be to spend
my blood, God thanke you all. Whiche aunswere
of so noble an hearted pryncesse, if it moued a meruaylous
showte and reioysing, it is nothyng to be
meruayled at, since both the heartines thereof was
so woonderfull, and the woordes so ioyntly knytte.
When her grace hadde thus aunswered the Recorder,
she marched toward the little conduit, where
was erected a pageaunt with square proporcion,
standynge directlye before thesame conduite, with
battlementes accordynglye. And in thesame pageaunt
was aduaunced two hylles or mountaynes
of conuenient heyghte. The one of them beyng
on the North syde of thesame pageaunt, was
made cragged, barreyn, and stonye, in the whiche
was erected one tree, artificiallye made, all withered
and dea
                  ••
               e, with braunches accordinglye.
And vnder thesame tree at the foote thereof, sate
one in homely and rude apparell crokedlye, and
in mournyng maner, hauynge ouer hys headde
in a table, written in Laten and Englyshe, hys
name, whiche was Ruinosa Respublica, A decayed

common weale. And vppon thesame withered
tree ware fixed certayne Tables, wherein
were written proper sentences, expressing the causes
of the decaye of a commonweale. The other
hylle on the South syde was made fayre, freshe,
grene, and beawtifull, the grounde thereof full
of flowres and beawtie, and on thesame was erected
also one tree very freshe and fayre, vnder
the whiche, stoode vprighte one freshe personage
well apparaylled and appoynted, whose name
also was written bothe in Englyshe and in Laten,
whiche was, Respublica bene instituta. A florishyng
commonweale. And vppon thesame tree
also, were fi
                  •
               ed certayne Tables conteyning sentences,
which expressed the causes of a flourishing
common weale. In the middle betwene the sayde
hylles, was made artificiallye one hollowe place
or caue, with doore and locke enclosed, oute of
the whiche, a lyttle before the Queenes hyghnes
commynge thither, issued one personage whose
name was Tyme, apparaylled as an olde man
with a Sythe in his hande, hauynge wynges artificiallye
made, leadinge a personage of lesser
stature then himselfe, whiche was fynely and well
apparaylled, all cladde in whyte silke, and directlye
ouer her head was set her name and tytle in latin
and Englyshe, Temporis filia, the daughter of
Tyme. Which two so appoynted, went forwarde,
toward the South syde of the pageant. And on her
brest was written her propre name, whiche was

               Veritas. Trueth who helde a booke in her hande
vpon the which was writen, verbum veritatis, the
woorde of trueth. And out of the South syde of
the pageaunt▪ was cast a standynge for a childe
which should enterprete thesame pageant. Against
whom, when the Quenes maiestie came, he spake
vnto her grace these woordes.
            
               This olde man with the sythe, olde father tyme they call,
               And her his daughter Truth, which holdeth yonder boke
               Whom he out of his rocke hath brought furth to vs all,
               Frō whence this many yeres she durst not once out loke.
            
            
               The ruthfull wight that sitteth vnder the barren tree,
               Resembleth to vs the fourme, when cōmon weales decay
               But when they be in state tryumphant, you may see
               By him in freshe attyre that sitteth vnder the baye.
            
            
               Now sīce y• Time agaī his daughter truth hath brought,
               We trust O worthy quene, thou wilt this truth embrace
               And since thou vnderstandste the good estate and nought
               We trust welth thou wilt plant, and barrennes displace.
            
            
               But for to heale the sore, and cure that is not seene,
               which thing ye boke of truth doth teache in writīg playn:
               She doth present to thee thesame, O worthy Quene,
               For that, that wordes do flye, but wryting doth remayn.
            
            When the childe had thus ended his speache, he
reached his booke towardes the Quenes maiestie,
whiche a little before, Trueth had let downe vnto
him from the hill, whiche by sir Iohn Parrat was
receiued, and deliuered vnto the Quene. But she
as soone as she had receyued the booke, kissed it,
and with both her handes held vp thesame, and so
laid it vpon her brest, with great thankes to the citie

therfore. A
                  •
               d so wēt forward towar
                  •
               s Paules
churchyard. The former matter whych was rehersed
vnto the Queenes maiestie was written
in two tables, on either side the pageant eight verses,
and in the middest, these in laten.
            Ille, vides falcem laeua qui sustinet vncam,
            Tempus is est, cui stat filia vera comes
            Hanc pater exesa deductam rupe repo
                  •
               it
            In lucem, quam non viderat ante di
                  •
               
            
            Qui sedet a laeua cultu male tristis inepto
            Quem duris crescens cautibus orbis obit
            Nos monet effigie, qua sit respublica quand
                  •
               
            
            Corruit, at contra quando beata viget
            Ille docet iuuenis forma spectandus amictu
            Scitus, et aeterna laurea fronde virens.
            The sentences written in latin and englishe vpon
both the trees, declaring the causes of both estates,
were these.
            
               ¶Causes of a ruinous common weale
are these.
               VVāt of the feare of god
               Disobedience to rulers.
               Blindnes of guides.
               Briberie in maiestrats
               Rebellion in subiectes.
               Ciuill disagrement.
               Flattring of princes.
               Vnmercifulnes in rulers
               Vnthākfulnes in subiects
            
            
               
               ¶Causes of a florishing common weale.
               Feare of god.
               A wise prince.
               Learned rulers.
               Obedience to officers
               Obedient subiectes.
               Louers of the cōmon weale
               Vertue rewarded
               Vice chastened.
            
            The mater of this pageāt depēdeth of them y• went
before. For as the first declared her grace to cōe out
of y• house of vnitie, y• second y• she is placed in y• seat
of gouernment staied with vertue to the suppressiō
of vice, and therfore in the third the eight blessinges
of almighty god might well be applyed vnto her: so
this fourth now is, to put her grace in remembrāce
of the state of the common weale, which Time with
Truth his doughter doth reuele, which Truth also
her grace hath receiued, and therfore cannot but be
mercifull and caref
                  •
               l for y• good gouernmēt therof.
From thence the Quenes maiestie passed towarde
Paules churchyard, and whē she came ouer agaīst
Paules scole, a childe appointed by the scolemaster
therof pronoūced a certein oratiō in latin, & certein
verses which also wer there written as foloweth.
            Philosophus ille diuinus Plato inter multa preclare
ac sapienter dicta, hoc posteris proditū reliquit,
Rempub
                  •
                illā faelicissimāfore, cui prīceps sophiae
studiosa, virtutibus
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                ornata cōtigerit▪ Quem
si vere dixisse censeamus (vt quidē verissime) cur
non terra Britannica plauderet? cur non populus

gaudium at
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                laetitiam agitaret? immo, cur nō hunc
diem albo (quod aiunt) lapillo notaret? quo princeps
talis nobis adest, qualem priores non viderūt,
qualem
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                posteritas haud facile cernere poterit, dotibus
quū animi, tum corporis vndi
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                faelicissima.
Castiquidem corporis dotes ita apertae sunt, vt oratione
non egeant. Animi vero tot tantae
                  
                     
                  
                  que
               , vt ne
verbis quidem exprimi possint. Haec nempe Regibus
summis orta, morum at
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                animi nobilitate
genus exuperat. Huius pectus Christi religionis
amore flagrat. Haec gentem Britannicam virtutibus
illustrabit, clipeo
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                iustitiae teget. Haec literis
graecis etlati
                  •
               is eximia, ingenio
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                prepollēs est. Hac
imperante pietas vigebit, Anglia florebit, aurea
secula redibunt. Vos igitur Angli tot commoda accepturi
Elizabetham Reginam nostram celeberrimā
ab ipso Christo huius regni imperio destinatam,
honore debito prosequimini. Huius imperiis aīo
libentissimo subditiestote, vos
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                tali prīcipe dignos
prebete. Et quoniam pueri non viribus sed precibꝰ.
officiū prestare possūt, nos Alumni huius scholae ab
ipso Coleto olim Templi Paulini Decano, extructae
teneras palmas ad caelum tendentes Christum Opt:
Maxi: precaturi sumus vt tuam cel
                  •
               itudinē annos
Nestoreos summo cū honore Anglis imperitare faciat,
matrem
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                pignoribꝰ charis beatā reddat. Amē.
            
               Anglia nunc tandem plaudas, laetare, resulta,
            Presto iam vita est, praesidium
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                tibi
            En tua spes venit tua gloria, lux, decus omne
            Venit iam solidam quae tibi prestat opem.
            Succurret
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                tuis rebus quae pessum obiere▪
            
            Perdita quae fuerant haec reparare volet
            Omnia florebunt, redeunt nunc aurea secla.
            In melius surgent quae cecidere bona.
            Debes ergo illi totam te reddere fidam
            Cuius in accessu commoda tot capies.
            Salue igitur dicas, imo de pectore summo.
            Elizabeth Regni non dubitanda salus,
            Virgo venit, veniat
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                optes comitata deinceps.
            Pignoribus charis, laeta parens veniat
            Hoc deus omnipotens ex alto donet olympo.
            Qui caelum & terram condidit at
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                regit.
            Which the Queenes maiestie most attentiulye
harkened vnto. And when the childe had pro
                  •
               ounced
he did kisse the oration whi
                  •
               h he had there faire
written in paper, and de
                  •
               iueredit vnto the Quenes
maiestie, which most gētly receiued thesame. And
when the Quenes maiestie had heard all y• was
there offred to be spokē, thē her grace marched toward
Ludgate, where she was receiued with a
noyse of instrumētes, the forefront of y• gate being
finelie trimmed vp against her maiesties cōming.

From thence by the way as she went down toward
fletebridge, one aboute her grace noted the cities
charge, that there was no cost spared. Her grace
answered that she did well consyder the same, and
that it should be remembred. In honorable aunswere,
worthie a noble prince, which may comforte
all her subiectes, considering there can be no point
of gentlenes, or obedient loue shewed towarde her
grace, whych she doth not most renderlie accepte,
and graciously waye. In this maner, the people
on either side reioysing, her grace wente forwarde,
towarde the conduite in Fleetestrete,
where was the fifte and last pageaunt erected in
forme folowing. From the conduite which was
bewtified with painting, vnto the Northside of the
strete, was erected a stage embattelled with foure
towres and in the same a square platte rising with
degrees, and vppon the
                  •
                vppermost degree was
placed a chaire, or seate royall, and behynde the
same seate in curious and artificiall maner, was
erected a tree of reasonable height and so farre aduaunced
aboue the seate as it did well and semelye
shadow the same, without endomaging the syght
of any part of the pageant, and the same tree was
bewtified with leaues as greene as arte could deuise
being of a conuenient greatnes and cōteining
therupon the fruite of the date, and on the toppe of
the same tree in a table was set the name thereof
which was A palme tee, and in the aforesaide seate
or chaire was placed a semel
                  •
               e and mete personage

richlie apparelled in parliament robes, with a sceptre
in her hand, as a Quene crowned with an open
crowne, whose name and title was in a table fixed
ouer her head, in this sort. Debora the iudge and
restorer of the house of Israel. Iudic. 4. and the other
degrees on either side were furnished with .vi.
personages, two representing the nobilite, two the
clergie, & two the cōminaltye. And before these personages
was written in a table Debora with her
estates consulting for the good gouernement of Israel.
At the feete of these and the lowest part of the
pageant was ordeined a conuenient rome for a
childe to open the meaning of the pageant. When
the Queenes maiestie drew nere vnto this pageāt,
and perceiued, as in the other, the childe readie to
speake, her grace required silēce, and commaunded
her chariot to be remoued nigher, that she myght
plainlie heare the childe speake, whych said as hereafter
foloweth.
            
               Iaben of Canaan king had long by force of armes
               Opprest the Isralites, which for gods people went
               But god mind
                     •
                  ng at last for to redresse their harmes,
               The worthy Debora as iudge among them sent.
            
            
               In war she, through gods aide, did put her foes to flight,
               And with the dint of tworde the bande of bondage brast.
               In peace she, through gods aide, did alway mainteine right
               And iudged Israell till fourty yeres were past.
            
            
               A worthie president, O worthie Queene, thou hast,
               A worthie woman iudge, a woman sent for staie.
               And that the like to vs endure alway thou maist
               Thy louing subiectes wil wt true hearts & tonges praie.
            
            
               Which verses were written vpon the pageant, and
thesame in latin also.
            Quando dei populum, Canaan rex pressit Iaben,
            Mittitur a magno Debora magna deo:
            Quae populum eriperet, sanctum seruaret Iudan,
            Milite quae patrio frangeret hostis opes.
            Haec domino mandante deo lectissima fecit
            Faemina, et aduersos contudit ense viros.
            Haec quater denos populum correxerat annos
            Iudicio, bello strenua, pace grauis.
            Sic, O sic populum bello
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                et pace guberna,
            Debora sis Anglis Elizabetha tuis.
            The voide places of the pageant were filled with
pretie sentences concerning the same matter. Thys
ground of this last pageāt was, yt forsomuch as the
next pageant before had set before her graces eyes
the florishing & desolate states of a common weale,
she might by this be put in remēbrance to cōsult for
the worthy gouernment of her people, considering
god oftimes sent women nobly to rule among men,
as Debora whych gouerned Israell in peas the
space of .xl. yeres: & that it behoueth both men & women
so ruling to vse aduise of good coūsell. When y•
Quenes maiestie had passed this pageāt, she marched
toward Tēplebarre. But at S. Dunstones
church where y• children of thospitall wer appointed
to stand with their gouernours, her grace perceiuīg

a childe offred to make an oracion vnto her, stayed
her chariot, and did caste vp her eyes to heauen,
as who should saye, I here see thys mercyfull
worke towarde the poore whom I muste in the
middest of my royaltie nedes remembre, and so
turned her face towarde the childe, whych in
latin pronounced an oracion to this effecte, that
after the Queenes hyghnes had passed through
the citie and had sene so sumptuous, rich, and notable
sepectacles of the citiezens which declared
their most hartie receiuing and ioyous welcomming
of her grace into the same: thys one spectacle
yet rested and remained, which was the euerlasting
spectacle of mercy vnto the poore membres of
almighty God, furthered by that famous and
most noble prince king Henry the eight, her graces
father, erected by the citie of London, and aduaunced
by the most godly verteous and gracious
prince kyng Edwarde she .vi. her graces dere and
louing brother doubting nothing of the mercy of
the Queenes most gracious clemencie by the
which they may not onely be releued and helped,
but also stayed and defended, & therfore ince
                  ••
               auntly
they would pray and crie vnto almighty God for
the long life and raigne of her highnes with most
prosperous victory against her enemies.
            The childe after he had ended his oracion, kissed
the paper wherin the same was written, and reachedit
to the Quenes maiestie whych receiued it

graciouslye both with woordes & countenance, declaring
her gracious mynde towarde theyr reliefe.
From thence her grace came to Temple barre,
which was dressed fynelye with the two ymages of
Gotmagot the Al
                  •
               ione, and Corineus the Briton,
two gyātes bigge in stature fur
                  •
               ished accordingly,
which held in their hādes euē aboue y• gate, a table,
wherin was writen in latin verses, theffect of all the
pageantes wh
                  ••
               h the citie before had erected, which
verses wer these.
            Ecce sub aspectu iam contemplaberis vno.
            O princeps populi sola columna tui.
            Quicquid in immensa passim perspexeris vrbe
            Quae cepere omnes vnus hic arcus habet:
            Primus tesolio regni donauit 
                  〈◊〉
               ,
            Haeras quippe tui vera parentis 
                  •
               ras.
            Suppress
                  ••
                vitiis, domina virtute, Secundus
            Firma
                  •
               it sed
                  •
               m r
                  •
               gia virgo tuam.
            Tertius ex omni posuit te parte beatam
            Si, qua caepisti pergere velle, velis
            Quarto quid verum, respublica lapsa quid esse
                  •
               
            
            Quae florens staret te docuere tui
            Quinto magna loco 
                  〈…〉
               
            
            Caelitus in regni gaudia 
                  〈…〉
               
            
            Perge ergo, regina, tuae spes 
                  〈◊〉
                gentis,
            Haec postrema vrbis sus cip
                  •
                vota tuae.
            
               Viue diu, regna
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                diu, virtutibus orna
            Rem patriam, et populi spem tueare tui.
            Sic o sic petitur caelum Sic itur in astra
            Hoc virtutis opus, caetera mortis erunt.
            Which versis wer also written in Englishe meter
in a lesse table as hereafter foloweth.
            
               Behold here in one view, thou mayst see all that playne
               O princesse to this thy people the onely stay:
               What echewhere thou hast seen in this wide town, agaī
               
               This one arche whatsoeuer the rest conteynd, doth say.
            
            
               The first arche as true 
                     •
                  eyre vnto thy father dere,
               Did set thee in the th
                     •
                  one where thy graund father satte,
               The second did confirme thy seate as princesse here,
               Uertues now bearing swaye, and vyces 
                     〈◊〉
                   down flatte.
            
            
               The third, if that thou wouldst goe on as thou began,
               Declared thee to be blessed on euery syde,
               The fourth did open Trueth, and also caught thee whan
               The commōweale stoode well, & when it did thence slide.
            
            
               The fifth as Debora declared thee to be sent
               From heauen, a long comfort to vs thy subiectes all,
               Therfore goe on O Queene, on whom our hope is bent,
               And take with thee this wishe of thy town as finall.
            
            
               Liue long, and as long raygne, adourning thy countrie
               With vertues, and mayntayne thy peoples hope of thee,
               For thus, thus heauē is won, thus must y• pearce y• skye,
               This is by vertue wrought, all other must nedes dye.
            
            On the South side was appoynted by the citie a
noyse of singing children, & one child richely attyred
as a Poet, which gaue the quenes maiestie her fare
well in the name of the hole citie, by these wordes.
            
               As at thyne entraunce first, O prince of high renowne,
               
                  Thou wast presēted with tonges & heartes for thy fayre,
               So now sith thou must nedes depart our of this towne,
               This citie sendeth thee firme hope and earnest prayer.
            
            
               For all men hope in thee, that all vertues shall reygne,
               For all men hope that thou, none errour wilt support,
               For all men hope that thou wilt trueth restore agayne,
               And mend that is amisse, to all good mennes comfort.
            
            
               And for this hope they pray, thou mayst continue long,
               Our Quene amongst vs here, all vyce for to supplant,
               And for this hope they pray, y• God may make the strōg,
               As by his grace puissant, so in his trueth constant.
            
            
               Farewell O worthy Queene, and as our hope is sure,
               That into errours place, thou wilt now trueth restore,
               So trust we y• thou wilt our soueraigne Queene endure,
               And louing Lady stand, from hencefurth euermore.
            
            Whyle these woordes were in saying, and certeine
wishes therein repeted for maintenaunce of
trueth and rooting out of errour, she now and then
helde vp her handes to heauenwarde and willed the
people to say, Amen.
            When the childe had ended, she said, be ye well
assured, I will stande your good quene. At whiche
saying her grace departed forth through tēple barre
towarde Westminster, with no lesse shoutyng and
crying of the people, then she entred the citie with a
noyse of ordinance whiche the towre shot of at her
graces entraunce first into towre streate.
            The childes saying was also in latin verses wrytten
in a table which was hanged vp there.
            O Regina potens, Cum primā vrbem ingredereris,
            Dona tibi, linguas, fida
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                corda dedit.
            
               Discedenti etiam tibi nunc duo munera mittit,
            Omina plena spei, vota
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                plena precum▪
            
            Quippe tuis spes est, in te quod prouida virtus
            Rexerit, errori nec locus vllus erit
            Quippe tuis spes est, quod tu verum omne reduces
            Solatura bonas, dum mala tollis, opes
            Hac 
                  〈◊〉
                orant, longu
                  •
                vt Reg
                  •••
                gubernes,
            Et regni excindas, crimina cuncta tui.
            Ha
                  •
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                freti orant, diuina vt gratia fortem,
            Et verae fidei te velit esse basin.
            Iam Regina vale, et sicut nos spes tenet vna,
            Quod vero inducto 
                  〈◊〉
                ditus error erit.
            Sic 
                  〈◊〉
                speramus quod eris Regina be
                  •
               igna
            Nobis per regni tempora longa tui
            Thus the Queenes hyghnesse passed through
the citie, whiche without any forreyne persone, of
it selfe beawtifyes it selfe, and receyued her grace
at all places as hath been before mencioned, with
most tender obedience and loue, due to so gracious
a quene and soueraigne ladie. And her grace lykewise
of her side in all her graces passage shewed her
selfe generally an ymage of a woorthye Ladie and
Gouernour, but priuately these especiall poyntes
wer noted in her grace, as sygnes of a most princelyke
courage, whereby her louing subiectes maye
ground a sure hope forthe rest of her gracious doinges
hereafter.
            
               Certain notes of the quenes maiesties great mercie,
clemencie, and wisdom vsed in this passage
            Aboute the nether ende of Cornehyll towarde
Cheape, one of the knightes about her grace had espyed
an auncient citizen, whiche wepte, and turned
his head backe, and therewith said this gentleman,
yonder is an Alderman (for so he tearmed hym)
whiche wepeth & turneth his face backeward. How
may it be interpreted that he so doth, for sorowe, or
for gladnes? The quenes maiestie heard hym, and
said, I warrant you it is for gladnes. A gracious
interpretatiō of a noble courage, which would turne
the doutefull to the best. And yet it was well known
that as her grace did confirme thesame, the parties
cheare was moued for verye pure gladnes for the
sight of her maiesties person, at ye beholding whereof,
he toke such comforte, that with teares he expressed
thesame.
            In Cheapeside her grace smiled, and being therof
demaunded the cause, aunswered, for that she had
heard one say, Remember old king Henry 
                  •
               heyght.
A naturall child, which at the very remēbraunce of
her fathers name toke so great a ioy, yt all men may
well thinke, that as she reioysed at his name whom
this realme doth hold of so woorthy memorie: so in
her doinges she will resemble thesame.
            When the cities charge withoute parcialitie
and onely the citie was mencioned vnto her grace,
she, saide it shoulde not be forgotten. Whiche saying
myght moue all Englishemen heartely
                  •
                to shewe

due obedience and entiernes, to their so good a
Queene which will in no poynt forgeat any parcell
of duetie louingly shewed vnto her.
            The answer which her grace made vnto maister
Recorder of London, as the hearers know it to be
true, and with melting heartes heard thesame: so
may the reader thereof conceiue what kinde of stomacke
and courage pronounced thesame.
            What more famous thing doe we reade in auncient
histories of olde tyme, then that mightye prynces
haue gentlye receyued presentes offered them by
base and lowe personages. If that be to be wondred
at (as it is passingly) let me se any writer that in any
one princes lyfe is able to recounte so manye presidentes
of this vertue, as her grace shewed in yt one
passage through the citie. How many nosegayes did
her grace receiue at poore womens handes? How
ofttimes stayed she her chariot, when she sawe any
simple body offer to speake to her grace? A brāche of
Rosemary geuen to her grace with a supplicatiō by
a poore woman about flete bridge, was seen in her
chariot til her grace came to westminster, not withou
                  •
               
the merueylous wondring of such as knew the
presenter, and noted the Queenes most gracious
receiuing and keping thesame.
            What hope the poore and nedy may looke for at
her graces hande, she as in all her iourney continuallye,
so in her harkenyng to the poore chyldren
of Christes hospitall with eyes cast vp into heauen,
did fullye declare, as that neither the welthier estate

could stande without consideracion had to the
pouertie, neither the pouertie be duelye considered,
vnles they were remembred, as commended to vs
by goddes owne mouth.
            As at her first enterance she as it were declared,
her selfe prepared to passe through a citie that most
entierly loued her, so she at her last departing, as it
were, bownde her selfe by promes to continue good
Ladie and gouernor vnto that citie whiche by outward
declaracion did open their loue, to their so louing
and noble prince in such wyse, as she her selfe
wondered therat.
            But because princes be set in their seate by gods
appoynting and therfore they must first and chiefly
tēder the glory of him, from whom their glory issueth,
it is to be noted in her grace, that forsomuch
as god hath so wonderfully placed her in the seate
of gouernment ouer this realme, she in all doinges
doth shew her selfe most myndfull of his goodnes
and mercie shewed vnto her, & amongest all other,
two pryncipall sygnes thereof were noted in thys
passage. First in the Towre, where her grace before
she entred her chariot, lifted vp her eyes to heauen
and sayd.
            O Lord, almighty and euerlasting God, I geue
thee most hearty thākes that thou hast been so mercifull
vnto me as to spare me to beholde this ioyfull
daye. And I acknowledge that thou hast dealt as
wonderfully & as mercifully with me, as thou didst

with thy true and faithfull seruant Daniel thy prophete whom thou deliueredst out of the denne from the crueltie of the gredy and rageing Lyons: euen so was I ouerwhelmed, and only by the deliuered. To thee therfore onely be thankes, honor, & prayse, foreuer. Amen.
            The second was the receiuing of the Byble at the little conduit in cheape. For when her grace had learned that the Byble in Englishe should there be offered, she thanked the citie therefore, promysed the reading thereof most diligentlye, and incontinent commaunded, that it should be brought. At the receit wherof, how reuerently did she with both her handes take it, kisse it, & lay it vpon her breast 
                  ••
                the great comfort of the lookers on. God will vndou
                  •
               tedly prese
                  ••
               e so worthy a prince, which at 
                  ••
               s honor 
                  ••
                
               
                  〈◊〉
                taketh her beginning 
                  〈◊〉
                this saying is true, and written in the boke of Truth, He that first seketh the kingdome of God, shall haue all other thinges cast vnto him.
            
               Now therfore all English hertes, and her naturall people must  nedes praise Gods mercy, which hath sent them so woorthy a prince, and pray for her graces long continuance amongest vs.
            
         
      
      
         
            Imprinted at London in fletestrete within Temple barre, at the signe of the hand and starre, by Richard 
                  •
               ottill, the .xxiii. day of Ianuary.
         
      
   