
      
         
            
            
            An anſwere in action
to a Portingale Pearle,
called a Pearle for a Prince:
Geuen by a Laye man in a
Legacie, vvhich Legacie
he desireth to ſe executed
before his
death.
1570.
            
               Hierom. ad Paulam &c.
¶Let men firſt reade, leaſt they ſeeme
not through iudgment, but through
the preſumpſion of hatred, to blame
that which they know not.
            ¶ Imprinted at London in Fleetſtreete;
by William How: for Dionis
Emilie.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            An anſwer in action
to a Portingale Pearle, called
a Pearle for a Prince.
            
               
                  IN PRIMIS, I bequeath
to a Preacher,
and Miniſter
of the word of God,
to preache .xii. Sermons
in the pariſh
Church of S. Giles
withoute Cryplegate
in London, ſixe poundes in lawfull
Money of Englande. In whiche Sermons
I requier, the Lordes praier, the
Créede or Articles of the Faith, and the
x. Commaundements of almighty God
to be entreated of: And ye firſt Sermon
to begin the firſt Sonday in April, next
comming, and ſo euery firſt Sonday in
euerie moneth for the yere folowing.
            Alſo I will that the Preacher .xiiv.
daies before his firſt Sermon, ſhal ſéeke
out of the poore being godly, or that wil
promiſe hereafter to obey Almightie
God, twenty men of the age of .xviv.

yeres & vpward, and .xx. women of the
age of .xiiii. yeres and vpwarde. And .x.
children of the age of vi. yeres & vpward
All the which perſons ſhalbe able to ſay
the Lordes Prayer, their beleif, & the .x.
commaundements of Almightie God in
their mother tounge. And if any of the
ſayd perſons cannot ſay them, they ſhall
promiſe to learne them within one
Moneth, and alſo to their power to obey
and kéepe them. And the ſame perſons
ſhall alſo promiſe to be at the Church,
at eight of the clocke in the morning, at
the beginninge of euery one of the .xii.
Sermons, and at the ende of euery
Sermon they ſhal haue .ii.d. a peece geuen
vnto them by the Preacher, that is
v.l'j. And ſo many of them, and ſo often
as the Preacher ſhall thinke good, they
ſhall prepare themſelues to Communicate
and receaue the holy Supper of the
Lorde Ieſus. And at the ſame time and
times, the money and other thinges is
geuen them, they ſhall haue this read
vnto them, to th'entent they may know
to directe themſelues in that forme that
they looſe not the benefite of that which

is after to be geuen. And at the ſecond
Sermon, the Preacher ſhall enquier of
thoſe whiche can ſay the Commaundements
of Almightie God, whether they
haue in their conuerſation laboured to
keepe them. And if any be founde wilfully
to breake the ſame, the ſame perſon
or perſons ſhalbe put out and others
taken in their place, and this to be done
at euery one of the .xii. Sermons. And
at the ſixt Sermon, euery one whiche
can ſay the Lordes Prayer, their Beleife
& Commaundements of Almightie
God, and is not founde wilfully to
to breake the ſame, of the which I deſier
diligent inquirie to be made of their
neighboures, ſhall being men, haue
Shertes of two ſhillinges a peece. And
the womē Smockes of two ſhillinges a
peece. Sum .v.l'j.
            
            Prouided that if any cannot ſay them
or wilfuly breake them, the Sherts &
and Smockes ſhalbe reſerued in the
Preachers hands vntil the twelfth and
laſt Sermon be finiſhed.
            Alwaies prouided, and to be vnderſtand,
that it is not poſſible for an idle

perſon to kéepe them. For Idleneſſe beyng
one of the ſinnes of Sodom, wherefore
thoſe which can & may laboure and
wil not, I do wil vtterly to be exempted
from this benefite. And at the laſt and
twelfth Sermon, ſo many of thoſe appointed
perſons, aforeſayde, as can ſaie
the Lordes Prayer, the Beleefe and .x.
Commaundements of Almightie God,
& hath not ben found wilfully to breake
the ſame, ſhall haue .vi. ſhillings & eight
pence a peece in money. And if at the
twelfth and laſt Sermon, any of the
ſayd appoynted perſons be founde vnmeete
& vnworthy to receiue the ſame:
to weete, that cannot ſay the Lordes
Prayer, the Beleefe, and Commaundements
of almightie God, or wilfully
hath broken the ſame. Then the ſame
money, Shertes and ſmockes, I will
to come to thoſe perſons of the fifty,
which haue beſt obſerued the conditions
afore remembred. Sum of this Legacy
is .vj. poundes, v. poundes, & .v. poundes
and .xvi. poundes, thirteen ſhillings and
foure pence. Sum in all is, thirty two
poundes thirteene ſhillinges and .iiii.d.
            
            
               
And ſuch a Church of ſo many Soules,
thus to be built, I affirme to be better
accepted of Almightie God, & better for
the Common wealth, and more agreable
to thoſe Churches, buylt by Sainte
Paule, at Rome, at Corinth &c. Then
coſtly buyldings be they neuer ſo ſumptuouſly
done amongſt the Papiſtes and
Iewes, which prefer ye Stony Temple
of God before the liuing Temple of god
which be ye bodies of men. And the ſame
being vndecked both within & without,
yet ceaſe not with great coſt and charge
with the Iewes, dayly to buylde theyr
ſtony Temples with Stone, Tymber,
Belles, Veſtments, Muſicke, with a
huge nomber of Torches and Candels,
burnt in the day light, when the burning
and light is neither profitable to
God nor man. Alſo ſettinge vp deade
Images, & puttinge on them Gownes
and coates, which neither do féele colde
nor heate: Alſo furniſhing them with
many coſtly Iewels: And the Temples
of God, and liuing Images of God,
which are the bodies of men vnfurniſhed
of thinges to ſerue neceſſitie.
            
               
Theſe be the ſignes and Images which
D. Oſorius of Portingale, in his booke
entituled the Pearle for a Prince, the
leafe .43. doth affirme nothinge to be
more better to quicken our memorie,
to thinke one God, and to remember
his benefites. But the holy Ghoſt in
the fourth Chapter of Deuteronomie,
affirmith, them to mar and corrupt vs.
And the actions of the Papiſtes in preferring
the dead and counterfait Images
to Candels and Coates, and to the
higher place: And the true and liuing Images
of God which are the bodies of
men being vnfurniſhed of things neceſſary
& apopinted to the lower place,
proueth the holy Ghoſt to ſpeake trewly,
And Oſorius of portingale with all
his learning and eloquence, to affirme
an vntrueth. Alſo their Stony Temple
is furniſhed with a nomber of Idle
perſons, which do pray after the maner
of the heathen, which thinke to be hard
for their many words & much babeling,
the which thing Chriſt our Sauioure
forbiddeth in the .vj. Chapiter of the
Goſpell of S. Mathew that Chriſtians

ſhould belike vnto them, for that our
heauenly Father knoweth what things
we haue néede of before we aſke of him.
            Which perſons alſo prefer Sodometrye
and Whordome before honorable
Mariage. For honorable Mariage is
vtterly expelled out of their Cloyſters.
            The holy Ghoſte by S. Paule ſaithe,
It is better to marry then to burne: But the actions
of the Papiſtes do ſhewe them to
be of an other minde, for their actions
affirme it to be better to burne then to
be maried. And the actions of ye Prieſts,
Friers, Monkes, & Nunnes, &c. Do affirme
not onely burning in luſt, but alſo
fornication better thē mariage, for none
may remaine in their cloyſters that be
maried: But they may remaine ſtill in
their cloiſters that haue committed fornication,
and thinke their vow not broken,
hauing had the popes abſolution, we
               Si non caſtè tamen cautè. Thus you do
ſée, though Oſorius hath holyneſſe in his
wordes, yet in this you may ſée filthines
and Hipocriſie in the Papiſtes actions,
But be not deceaued with their wordes
but loke to their actions. Oſorius ſaieth

in his accuſations .41. leafe. For we
will ruſhe into thoſe houſes in which holie virgins
being encloſed day and night, do ſinge Himmes
to the glorie of God and praye to Chriſte for the
good eſtate of Kinges and Princes and for ſauegard
of the whole Communaltie. &c. The Proverbe
is: Faire woorkes make fooles
faine or glad. But be not deceaued with
wordes, but conſider and marke their
actions, and you ſhall ſee ye King Henrie
of Fraunce, vpon whom the mightye
God ſhewed a wonderfull Iudgement,
after he had threatned yt his eies ſhould
ſe all the profeſſoures of Chriſtes Goſpell,
of his nobilitye, burned, whiche
denyed Antichriſte the Pope: but before
he coulde ſe it, his owne eies in Iuſting
when he thought himſelfe moſte
ſafe were firſte thruſte out. And the
ſame King Henry of Fraunce bearing
aſmuch good wil to Abbeys & Cloyſters
as Oſorius of Portingale: yet he found
ſome ſo filthie and vnſufferable, that
for rauiſhing of women and after murthering
of them, the Cloyſter with the
Freeres were bothe burned together.
And if the eies of men were as cleare

to beholde all thinges, as the eyes of
the mighty god, many ſuch Cloyſters,
Nunneries and Sels, might be founde
amonge the Papiſtes of like goodnes.
wherfore be not deceaued with Oſorius
wordes, but looke to their Actions.
            S. Paule ſpeaking by the holy Ghoſie,
forbad none, yonge nor olde, to liue in
ſingle and chaſte life, but praiſed & commended
the ſame to all eſtates and all
ages, one and other, without exception:
But he expreſly commaundeth that the
Churche ſhould receaue no widowe vnder
three ſcore yeares: But Oſorius
with the Papiſtes would be wiſer then
the holy ghoſte ſpeaking in S. Paule:
but theire actions on the contrarye ſhall
proue them fooles. Againe how muche
thoſe Cloiſters & Sels are to be feared
to liue one with another as the Sodomites,
the eaſineſſe and idlenes of their
life, with the fatte feedinge of many of
them, hauing monſtrous fatte bodies,
yeldeth reaſon to make the matter ſuſſpitious.
But the confeſſion of M. D.
Harding in his Booke againſt the Biſhoppe
of Sariſbury, entituled A Confutacion

&c of the booke made by Ihon
Caſa. for the whiche he was kepte
backe from being Cardinall, as M. Harding
affirmemeth, in which booke the
ſaid Iohn Caſa. with eloquent wordes,
and with a Rhetoricall ſtile cōmendeth
the life of Sodomites: Alſo Andrias Alciatus
and Paulus Iouius, with other writers in a
maner maketh the matter verie apparant,
what thoſe thoſe Cardinales, Biſhops,
Abbots, Freers, Monkes, and
the reſt be, and how hollie they liue:
Wherefore take heede for all is not
Gold that Oſorius of Portingale with
is Rhetoricall ſtile, maketh to gliſter
as appeareth by that afore noted.
            Agayne the ſame perſons prefer alſo
the precepts and Commaundements of
men before the precepts & Commaūdementes
of Almighty God. Euen as the
Iewes did, which toke them ſelues to be
the Churche of God and were ſo taken
in the time of Eſay the Prophet. For in
his .29. Chapiter, after he had threatned
that their Aulter ſhould be brought into
diſtreſſe in the .13. and .14. verſe he hath
theſe words Therfore the Lord ſaid becauſe this

people come nere vnto me with their mouth, and
honour me with their lippes, but haue remoued
their hartes far from me, & their feare toward me
was taught by the precept of men: Therfore behold
I will do a meruaylous worke in this people, euen
a meruaylous worke and a wonder, for the wiſedome
of their wiſe men ſhall periſh: and the vnderſtandinge
of their prudent men ſhalbe hid.
            
            The ſame churche of God, ſo taken amongſt
the Iewes in the time of chriſte
our Sauiour, fell away alſo by the ſame
meanes, as appeareth in the .15. chapter
of S. Mathews Goſpell. Euen as the
Papiſtes alſo this day be fallen away, in
vayne ſeruinge God, and teachinge for
Doctrines, mens precepts. And as the
Scribes and Phariſies demaunded of
Chriſte our ſauiour, Why doo thy Diſciples
tranſgreſſe the traditions of the elders? Euen in
like maner doo the Papiſts with Oſorius
demaunde of the Proteſtants, Why do ye
trangreſſe the traditions of the elders? And euen
as Chriſt our ſauiour anſwered the
Scribes and Pharaſies, with this queſtion,
Why doo ye breake the commaundements
of God for your traditions? Euen in like maner
doo the Proteſtants anſwere the
Papiſtes, with Oſorius with the very

ſame queſtion, Why doo ye breake the
cōmaundements of God for your owne
traditions, erecting Cloyſters, Nunries
Friers, & Mounkes, with ſuche a huge
monſtrous nomber of traditions, Ceremonies
and other mens inuentions, &
obſeruations, that if they ſhould be declared,
a greate volume were not able
to conteine them. And the moſt miſchief
of all, to breake one of thoſe, you
make greater conſcience then to breake
the cōmaundements of almightie God.
And theſe be the churches, Nunries, &
Cloyſters, & Cels, for the whiche Oſorius
of Portingale, hath publiſhed many fair
names, Elegantly and Rhetorically, as
one whiche by the arte of wordes, can
make a Flie, ſéeme to be greater then
an Elephante, and copper to be better
then Golde or God. And after he hath
made greate boaſt of them, he requireth
with all to know what is ſet vp in place
of them:The ſtonie Tēple with the traditiōs of the highe Preiſts▪ Scribes and Pharaſies, put downe by Chriſt Ieſus our ſauiour at Ieruſalē. As if he might ſay now with ye
Scribes and Phariſies, Chriſte Ieſus
hath broken downe the goodly ſtone
Temple at Ieruſalem, and put away
the traditions of the churche of God:

what hath he ſet vp now in the place
thereof. For it is not reaſon ſayeth
Oſorius that he ſhould bewayle that is taken
away, before he ſe what is ſet vp in
the place of that is pulled downe: Reade
the Goſpel of Chriſte Ieſus (Oſorius) and
with the ſame examine yt doctrine they
preache, and ſe how the ſame agreeth
with the doctrine of chriſte Ieſus, and
you may ſee, if you call for grace, what
is ſet vp in place of yt is plucked downe.
But Oſorius anſwereth, if their doctrine
be accordinge to the worde of God: yet
their liues are not reformed to the word
of God. But amongſt ye Papiſts where
be Freers, Monkes, Images, Nonnes,
the Maſſe, the Stewes, and thoſe mad
Biſhops as Iohn Caſa. and other mad
Cardinals which practiſe the worke of
Sodome, there the Prieſtes and people
be better reformed to the obedience
of the worde of God. Very notablie ſaid
Oſorius. Let this be examind and being
found true, it is to be agreed, that you
haue praiſed yt, that was praiſe worthy,
and diſprayſed that, that was diſprayſe
worthy. But proceede you forwarde,

ſhrinke not backe when you com to tryal,
& let the liues of the Proteſtants be
examined and compared with the liues
of the Papiſtes, & alſo with the Athieſts
This bargaine thus agreed, marke wel
the ſequel:Oye Idolatrous Athieſts, take parte with the Idolatrous Papiſts that like as thei put cō
                  fidence in clothing and lighting Images, Blockes, and ſtockes &c. ſo you mai put confidence in your wits ſtrength, freendes, riches, landes, &c. But O ye true Chriſtians, worſhip that invyſible power by Ieſus Chriſte according to his word, whoſe inuiſible power is ſeene by the creation of the vvorld being conſidered in his workes. Rom. 1. ca. In the word of God it is cō
               maunded,
that no filthy communication
proceede out of our mouthes, in this,
make compariſon, and ye ſhall finde the
Proteſtants ſpeake with new tonges,
to weete, that which tendeth to Ciuilitie,
humanitie and Chriſtianitie, and the
Papeſts with the Athieſts keepe their
olde Bawdie tongues ſtill, and they
take the ſame ceaſſing from bawdie talking,
a marke to know heritikes which
wil not receiue the Popes ceremonies.
Againe, the word of God comaundeth,
Thou ſhalt not take the name of the Lord thy God
in vaine &c. Make compariſon and ſe who
taketh the name of yt mightie God with
moſt feare and reuerence, and ye ſhall
finde that amongſt the Papiſtes and Athieſts,
he that wil not ſweare and blaſpheme
the Glorious name of the mightie
God, they take it a ſure marke to
know thoſe heretiques whiche will not

receaue the Popes ceremonies.
            
               Agayne, the worde of God ſaith: There
ſhalbe no whoare of the daughters of Iſraell,The foliſhneſſe and filthines of Papiſts who prefer befor the holi ſcriptures the minde of the holy ghoſt their counſell as as this Concill Toletan where was thus de creed. One hauing no wife and that hath a Concubine may not be put from the Communion ſo that he be contented with one woman be ſhe wife or harlot. nor
whoare keper of the ſonnes of Iſraell, And in the
new Teſtamente it is written, that no
fornicatoure ſhall enter into the Kingdom of God,
            In this make compariſon, and ye ſhal
fynde the Stewes plucked downe amongſt
the Proteſtantes, and fornicators
puniſhed: and contrary amonge the
papiſts & Athieſts the ſtewes ſet vp and
the fornicators ſo farre exempted from
puniſhment, that D. Hardyng is ſo vnſhamefaſte
in his booke againſte Biſhop
Iewell, to call it a neceſſarie euill. And
in Queene Maries time, a Freere at
Paules Croſſe named Peto, was not aſhamed
to make a pece of his ſermon, to
ſet vp fornicatours the ſtewes againe,
yea to ſpeake againſt the Stewes is a
plaine marke to knowe the Heritikes
(ſaye the Papiſtes) whiche will not receaue
the Popes ceremonies. Agayne,
The word of God commaundeth, when
you will be merie, Sing pſalmes, in this make
compariſon, and you ſhall finde the proteſtantes
ſinge Pſalmes, & the Papiſtes

with the Athieſts ſinge baudy ſonges wt
ſuch like abhominacion, & if one be takē
amongeſt them ſyngyng of pſalmes,
he is taken for an heretyke, and empryſoned.
And ſo this alſo, they take to
be a marke to knowe Heretykes,
which wil not receaue the Popes Ceremonies.
Againe where Chriſte our Sauioure
commaundeth in theſe wordes,
When thou makeſt a feaſt, call the poore, the maimed,
lame, blinde &c. Conſider whether amongſt
the papiſtes, &c. or proteſtantes,
this is beſt obſerued:The athieſts ioygne thē ſelues commōly with the papiſtes, agaynſt the Chriſtians. But althoughe amongeſt
the proteſtantes, this be beſt
obſerued, yet the papyſtes with the Athieſts
take it, but a marke to know
Heretikes whiche will not receaue the
Popes Ceremonies. Againe, where
the woorde of God aſketh, Howe the loue
of god dwelleth amonge them that ſhutte vp their
compaſsion from the poore. And in another
place, He that ſhutteth vs his eares at the crye of
the poore, ſhall crie himſelfe and not be hearde.
            
            Now, compare the common wealth
of the Proteſtantes, and the common
wealth of the Papiſtes together, and ſe
where is beſt orders appointed for the
poore. But this alſo (ſay the Papiſtes) is

but a marke to know Heretikes whiche
will not receiue the Popes ceremonies.
Agayne, the worde of God in the .20. cha.
of Eſay the prophet, Threatneth Plagues vpon
them that come neare vnto God with their mouthes,
and honour him with their lippes, when their
hartes are farre from God: Now compare the
Proteſtantes with their Churches, and
the Papiſtes with their Nunneries and
Cloyſters together. The Proteſtants
pray in theyr mother tongue, or in ſuch
a tongue as they vnderſtande, but the
moſt parte of the Papiſtes, pray in ſuch
a tongue as they vnderſtand not: Conſider
therefore vpon which of theſe two
the plague is moſt like to fall, whether
vpon the Proteſtantes or Papiſtes.
            Yea further conſider vpon whom the
plague is fallen. For the Papiſts affirm
that ſayinge ouer the Lordes praier in
Latin fiue times ouer, although the vnlearned
vnderſtand not a worde thereof,
yet he pleaſeth God. But the profeſſours
of the glorious Goſpell of Chriſte
Ieſus, affirme that ſaying ouer the ſame
Lordes prayer once, or els many times
ouer wtout vnderſtanding profiteth not.

yea to ſay it once either els many times
ouer without obedience profiteth not.
The huge nomber of Papiſts ſay, Et demitte
nobis debita noſtra ſicut & nos &c. But becauſe
they vnderſtand it not, they therfore
cannot obey it: and therfore deſier ye
Plagues of God to fal vpon their ſinnes
which is come to paſſe, for you ſhall ſe amongſt
the Papiſts, ye which is againſt
nature. The father preſent the ſonne to
death,Beholde how the Papiſts Images do teach and inſtruct them. and the ſonne the father, as one
Stowe preſented his owne Father in ye
time of Quéene Mary to be burned. Alſo
ye mother put the ſōne to death, as Herene
the Empreſſe who with the Images,
called lay mens bookes was enſtructed
to put downe her owne ſonne Conſtantine
the ſixt being Emperour and thruſt
out his eyes of the which he died: For
that he caſt downe men made of wood,
which ſhe eſtemed more then her owne
ſonne, yea her owne fleſh and bloud, and
the liuing Image of God. She toke vp
alſo the bones of her huſband Conſtantine
the fift, and burned them. And at
the ſame time ſhe thruſt out her ſonnes
eyes, as Etropias writeth. The Sunne
did not geue light in .17. dayes, ſo that

Mariners with their ſhippes loſte theyr
wayes in the Seas. The want of which
light, the people affirmed to come, becauſe
the'mperours eyes were put out.
Alſo the brother ſtaying the brother, as
Alphonſus Diazius a Spaniard, whiche
cam from Rome into Germanie to ſlea
his owne brother, & there ſlue him, not
for that he diſobeyed the worde of God,
but for that he denied & diſobeyed mens
Traditions, the Popes ceremonies.
            And thus the papyſtes obtayne their
prayer euen as the children of Iſrael luſted
in the wylderneſſe obtayned theyr
prayer, bothe water out of the Rocke,
Manna from Heauen, and Fleſh and fethered
fowles as the ſande of the ſea.
            But ye meate was yet in their mouthes
when the wrath of God came vpon thē.
The Deuels obtayned their prayers to
go into the Heard of Swine. The deuel
obtayned his praier to trie Iob. And
thus the prayer of Papiſtes ſpeakynge
the worde of God, the ſame worde doth
not returne voyde, for their praier is
tourned into ſinne. But this (ſay the papiſtes)
is but the ſayinge of Heretikes,

which will not receaue the Popes ceremonies
and Traditions. Here agayne
in the ſame chapter & in the ſame place,
Eſay the prophet threateneth that becauſe
the Churche of God amongſt the
Iewes, taught the feare of God with the
precepts of men, Almightie God would
take away the wiſdome of their wyſe
men, & the vnderſtanding of their prudent
men ſhould be hid. Conſider what
a numbre of ceremonies the churche of
Rome hath put forth to teache the feare
of God, whiche Oſorius mainteineth in
the booke called A Pearle for a Prince.
and ſe notwithſtandinge, the learning &
eloquence of Oſorius and the Papiſtes,
whether this plague is not threatned to
be fulfilled on the Papiſtes, as it was
threatned to be fulfilled on the Iewes.
And ſe, and conſider againe, whether the
ſame was not fulfilled vpon the churche
of God at Ieruſalem, and whether the
ſame be not alſo fulfilling daily on the
Papiſtes, by the great fal the Church of
Rome hath had in this laſt hūdred yeres
and more. Conſider further whether
their wiſdome be not taken from them

that would geue Gownes and Coates,How the Papiſts be taught and inſtructed With their Images
and Candels to blockes and ſtockes, and
the liuinge Temples of God mens bodies
beinge vnfurniſhed. And conſider
further, whether their wiſdome be not
taken from them, that amongſt them do
light ſo many thouſand of Torches, and
Candels in the broade day light, when
neither God nor man hath any néede of
them. And conſider agayne, what S.
Paule writeth in the firſt to the Rom.
of Oſorius and the papiſts, who haue turned
the glory of the incorruptible God,
to the ſimilitude of the Image of a corruptible
man, making him like an olde
man, with a graye bearde, and a body
with three heads. The holy ghoſt ſpeakyng
in S. Paule, affyrmeth that they
that did thus, wrought many thinges againſt
nature, and thinking themſelues
wiſe, became fooles.Marke the truth of the vvorde of God, O ye papiſts with your freinds the Athieſts. But Oſorius with
the Papiſtes hath done this aboue remembred,
and the ſequele of this, hath
brought forth this in experiēce, that the
Papiſtes doo many thinges againſt nature,
as afore is noted, wherby they
proue the Scriptures true and the holy

Ghoſte to ſpeake truely, that thinkinge
themſelues wiſe and learned, they are
become fooles.
            And here ſomwhat more to ſpeake of
the auctoritie of the Pope & his doctrine.
            If the Pope, Cardinalles, Biſhops,
Abbots, D. Oſorius with D. Harding. &c
Durſt ſuffer ſuche a Churche as this aforeſaid
in ye Legacie to be built amōgſt
them, the ſame would ſhew whiche
Churche weare more able to abide the
lighte, or the toucheſtone, but they dare
not do it for feare the princes and people
might manifeſtly ſee the confutacion of
all their new Religion, and younge and
newe Ceremonies, whiche hath no antiquitie
with or cōparable to the worde
of God. Againe they dare not ſuffer ſuch
a Churche to be builte amongeſt them,
for feare the gayne and Glorie they receaued
of the Princes and people, by
their newe Religion, and newe and
young Ceremonies ſhould be decreaſed
or deminiſhed. So that I may cite truly
to the Pope, Cardinals &c. this place
of Scripture written in the .12. Chapiter
of the Goſpel of S. Iohn. 43. vearſe

               For they loue the praiſe of men more,
then the praiſe of God. yea if the Pope,
Cardinalles, Prieſtes. &c. woulde ſuffer
ſuche Churches to be builte amongeſt
them, they would alſo ceaſe to geue pardon
to thoſe theyr papiſtes, whiche promiſe
to the Proteſtantes and breake
it. Which ſweare to the proteſtantes,
and forſweare themſelues. Yea they
would ceaſe to geue pardon to thoſe papiſtes,
which poyſon the proteſtantes,
murther the proteſtants &c. Yea they
would ceaſe to geue pardon to thoſe ſubiectes
whiche Rebell againſt their moſt
gracious Soueraine Lady and Prince:
the whiche Rebels or Subiectes here in
England, before her Maieſty drew any
ſwerd againſt them, hath firſt begunne
to drawe out their ſwerde againſte her
maieſtie. But theſe be the frutes of the
Popes newe Religion and newe Ceremonies,
wherfore I may ſay vnto the
Pope, Cardinalles &c. out of the olde
religion the worde of God, and the
wordes be written in the firſt Chapiter
of the Prophet Eſay. 21. vearſe. Howe is
the faithfull Citie become an harlot, it was full of

Iudgement and Iuſtice lodged therin, but now they
are murtherers. That the nature of papiſts
is to murther, before any ſeeke to murther
them: conſider of this laſt rebellion
of Northumberland & Weſtmerlande,
and that the nature of the Pope and
Cardinalles, &c. is to honour, aide,
helpe, and pardon ſuche parſons. Conſider
what they receaue from ye Popes
deare children to further this wicked
Rebellion againſt their moſte gracious
Prince, who neuer toke the bloode of
any one of their fingers. This marke
ſpectacle, or glaſſe, being well marked,
loked in, and conſidered, may be ſufficient
matter to put away all the murthering
doctrin of papiſtry. That Rome
was a faithful Citie, cōſider the wordes
of S. Paule written in the firſt Chapiter
to the Romaines, the which Epiſtle
S. Paule writ to Rome, & that Rome
hath his departing from the ſame Doctrine,
written by S. Paule, according
to the Propheſy of S. Paule, in his .2.
Epiſtle to the Theſſalonians .2. Chapiter,
in whiche Chapiter he writethe of
theſe two thinges, bothe the whiche is

proued true that the day of Chriſt was
not at hand, and that there ſhould come
a departing firſt, and the day of Chriſt
was not at hand for it is .14. C. yeares
and od ſince the writing therof. Againe,
many departinges hath come ſince that
tyme, but none cōparable to the Pope,
within the Temple of God, or within
the Churche of Chriſte, that is of them
that profeſſe Ieſus Chriſte. For the
Pope hath vnitie, antiquitie, and vniuerſalitie,
afore all antichriſts, ſo that
he is now ſuperiour to Mauhomet amongſt
the Turkes, in perſecuting and
murtheringe them yt haue in their lyues
and actions, the doctrine which S. paule
in his Epiſtle writte to Rome, the
whiche old Religion Rome once receaued
before this their departing S.The olde Romaniſts be the Proteſtants the new and yong Romaneſts be the Pope and Papiſtes. Paule
in his Epiſtle to the Romaines wryt,
To all you that be at Rome beloued of God called
Saynctes, &c. But now ſince the departing
all thoſe yt will now write to the church
of Rome, muſt write to the Pope. And
thus according to the propheſie of ſainct
Paule to the Theſſalonians .2. chapter a
fore noted. This man of ſinne is now

ſtart vp & ſitteth in the Temple of God,
that is in the ſtony Temple with his Image
in mens conſiences, with his ceremonies,
and vpon the neckes of Emperours
with his feete, and vpon theyr
mouthes with his ſhowes, and lift vp aboue
the Earth, rydinge and ſittinge on
the peoples ſhoulders: Alſo, he is affirmed
to be neither God nor man, but a
middell creature betwéen bothe. Alſo
that he can not erre. Alſo affirming that
he putteth forthe for Religion to be as
the light, and that Chriſte our Sauiour
his Goſpell and doctrine in compariſon
of that he putteth forth, is as the night
or darkeneſſe. Alſo that the Goſpell of
chriſte our ſauiour, is like to the ſhell of
a Nutte, and the Pope his Goſpell to be
like the curnell of a Nut. And thus his
commyng hath been with all power according
to the ſame propheſie in theſe
wordes folowing, Euen him whoſe comming
is by the workinge of Satan, with all power, &c.
Alſo the propheſy declareth him to come
with ſignes and lying wonders, whiche
alſo proueth true in him & his Religion,
by the Holy Maide of Kent, by ſweating

Images, by laughyng Images, by wrye
neckt Images, by ſpeakyng within Images,
Take this marke to knowe the Papiſts are confuted. for the learned Proteſtants hauīg anſwered their bokes ſuffer them generally to go abroade amongſte the people. but the lerned Papiſts hauing anſwerd their bookes dare not ſo generally ſuffer them to go amongſt the people for ſore eies cannot abid the light, &c as the rotten ſtocke called the
Holy Roode of Grace, in the whiche Image
a man was vſed to ſtande, & with
in the Roode was a nomber of Wyers,
to make the Image turne his eyes, to
nodde with his head, to hange the lippe,
to moue and ſhake his iawes, ſo as if the
gift were ſmale he would hang a frownyng
lyppe, but if the gift were great,
then ſhoulde the Iawes go meryly &c.
by their holy bloud of Hales which was
the bloud of a Ducke, and by the prieſts
& Friers was preached to be the Bloud
of Ieſus chriſt &c. Alſo by theyr breaden
God, and yet call it the Sacrament, as
they call Baptyſme a Sacrament.
            Alſo they affirme in the Sacramente of
the Lords ſupper, ye accidence of breade
to remaine, & the ſubſtance of breade to
begonne, wheras in natural philoſophy
euery accydence hath his beyng by his
ſubſtance, and contrary without ſubſtance,
impoſſible to haue any accydence
by naturall philoſophie. Agayne by the
Scriptures, whiche truly teacheth the

power of God to be aboue naturall philoſophy,
ther is no more mēſion made of
taking away the ſubſtāce, then there is
menſion made of taking away the accydence,
& ther is no more menſion made
of the abiding of the accidence then ther
is made menſion of abiding of the ſubſtance:
and yet we ſée, and the papiſtes
confeſſe, the accidence of breade to remaine,
the which accidence the Pope
teacheth to worſhip as Chriſt our Sauiour.
But beſide this accidence confeſſed
by the papiſtes to remaine. When
the ſame accidence is put in the mouth,
the ſame taſteth as ye ſubſtāce of breade,
and when the ſame is let downe into the
ſtomake, the ſame noriſheth as the ſubſtance
of breade, ſo that we ſe all things
remaine naturally to our eye, to our
taſte, and to the noriſhment of our bodies,
and ſo are forceſed to come to our
faith, to receaue Chriſt ſpiritually, for
his words are ſpirit and life, as he him
ſelfe affirmeth. And S. Paule agreing
with the doctrine of chriſte our ſauiour,
calleth it A ſpirituall meat and a ſpirituall drinke,
all this not withſtandinge, the pope the

man of ſinne teacheth it to be Fleaſhe,
bloud, and bone, within, and the accydence
of breade without. Thus with
theſe and many other liyng wonders,
the Pope according to the propheſy of
S. Paule ſheweth himſelf to become &c.
Alſo that the princes and people ſhould
receaue theſe ſtrong deluſions and beleue
lies the propheſy ſheweth the cauſe
in theſe wordes, Becauſe they receaued not the
loue of the trueth, &c. That the word of God
is called trueth, ſo Daniell the prophet
calleth it in the olde Teſtament, the .10.
chap. 21. verſe, in theſe wordes: But I wyll
ſhew thee that which is decreed in the Scriptures of
trueth, &c.
               The Pope would ſanctifie the Princis and people with giuing thē his ſeremonies. But Chriſt Ieſus ſanctifieth the people vvith geuing them the rreuth that is his holy worde. And the wordes of Chriſt our
Sauiour in the new Teſtament accordeth
and confirmeth the ſame in the .17.
chapter of S. Iohn .17. verſe. Sanctifie them
with thy trueth: thy worde is trueth, &c. That
the Pope tooke this ſanctification & truth
from the princes and people, and gaue
them in place therof, Legenda aurea, &c
In their mother tongue the ſame is manifeſt,
that the princes and people were
contente ſo to be deceaued and ſo had no
loue to the trueth, & becauſe they loued

not the trueth, therefore ſayth the propheſie,
God ſhall ſend them ſtronge deluſion
that they ſhould beléeue lies, &c.
And what lies they haue beléeued, looke
in Legenda Aurea, as they cal it. Alſo in
the Feſtiual. Alſo in Sermones Dyſcipuli
Where euery ſir Iohn or morow maſſe
prieſt, tooke to himſelfe this blaſphemous,
rebellious, and abhominable title
and the ſame is in the .C.xi. Sermonde,
Sacerdos eſt altior regibus, felicior angelis,
creator ſui creatoris, That is, a prieſt
is higher then Kinges, more happy then
Angels, creator of his creator: had not
they néede to haue Torches and Candels
to light them at noone dayes, that
would beléeue this? Yet this was ſome
of their Catholike Doctrine whiche the
prynces and people receiued accordyng
to ye propheſie.S. Paule in 1. Theſs. 1. ca. doth not cōmend thē becauſe thei turned from Idols to Images, as the papiſtes do: but he doth cōmēd thē, becauſe they turned from Idols or Images to ſerue the liuyng & true god. Do you the like, o ye papiſts, that you may ceaſe from the vnnatural murdering of your owne children, frends, and neighbours &c. That the proteſtants may ſay to you with S. Paule, & quomodo conuerſi fueritis ad Deū à ſimulacris, vt ſeruiretis Deo viuenti, &c. and do not ſay hereafter, that it is a marke to know Heretiques by, who in their wordes with S. Paule, do ſay the lyuyng god, leaſt ye call S. Paule Heretique alſo. Againe princes would
go to Ieruſalem, &c. to viſit the Image
of Chriſte or of his croſſe, & leaue chriſte
himſelf at home in his owne lande and

countrey vnfurniſhed of thinges neceſſary,
I meane poore men, wemen, and
children, and will you papiſtes ſay they
did not beléeue lies? Againe the Pope
the man of ſinne, told the Princes when
they held the ſtirop of the Popes horſe,
and held his horſe by the bridell, they
gaue vnto God great honoure. But the
Pope the man of ſinne, teceaued not the
ſame reſpecting his owne honour, for his
owne perſon did not regard the ſame.
            And will you Papiſtes ſay they did not
beléeue lies? Againe, the Pope with his
ſhauelings, told Emperours and Princes
that the profeſſours of the Glorious
Goſpell of Chriſte, called Proteſtants,
that they were Rebels and Traitours,
& would plucke the Princes out of their
ſeates. And the Pope the man of ſinne,
reacheth the people to obey Gods Commaundemēts,
before the Princes commaundements,
which is right, for the
ſame doth the learned Proteſtantes
teache alſo, & ſo ought to be: but marke
this further which foloweth. The Pope
the man of ſinne, teacheth the people to
obey his commaundements before the
commaundement of their Prince▪ Yea,

to take vp the ſworde in his quarell againſt
their owne naturall Prince. Yea
to obey euery hedge preiſt that cōmeth
in the Popes name, before their owne
naturall prince. The whiche Doctrine
hath cauſed the ſubiects to poyſon theyr
owne natural prince:It is written in the .18. of S Mathew. Neceſſary it is that offē
                  ces come. But it is alſo written wo to D. Hardyng and to the Pope &c Throughe whom the offences in Rebellion and the offences in the Stewſe commeth. the which doctrin
hath cauſed the ſubiects to rebel againſt
their owne naturall Prince, as of late
here in Englande: The whiche doctrine
hath cauſed, the ſubiects to deny their obedience
to their own naturall Prince.
The which doctrine hath cauſed the ſubiectes,
to plucke their owne naturall
Prince out of his ſeate, as King Pipin of
Fraunce &c. The like wherof was neuer
ſene to be don amongſt the Chriſtians
called Proteſtants. For next vnto
the commaundement of God, they obey
the commaundement of their naturall
prince, and when the commaundement
of their prince is againſt the cōmaundement
of God, the common people or
any other priuate perſon or perſons, be
taught to flee to ſuffer, and not to rebell.
But yet the Pope taught the Chriſtians
called Proteſtants to be rebels. But O
ye Papiſtes, did not the princes & people

beléeue lies? Muche more might be
added but for tediouſneſſe, I paſſe them
ouer & come to another verſe of the propheſie,
whiche telleth how he ſhalbe reueyled
as in theſe wordes, S verſe. And
then ſhall the wicked man be reueyled. That
he is reueyled to our Soueraigne Lady
the Quéenes Maieſtie. That he was reueyled
to Kynge Edwarde the ſixt, her
Maieſties brother. That he was reueyled
to Kynge Henry the eight, hir Maieſties
father, and to diuers other mightie
Princes of this Realme of Englande,
the ſame is manifeſt and apparent.
            That he is reueyled to many mightie
prynces in Chriſtendome, and to many
notable learned men in Chriſtendom,
and to numbers of all ſtates in chriſtendom,
the ſame is manifeſt by the harde
ſhifte of diſputinge he is driuen vnto,
which is to promiſſe, to breake promiſſe
To ſwearyng and to forſwearyng: To
Poyſon, to Murther, to Inſurrection, to
Rebellion, ſettinge the princes agaynſt
their Subiectes, and the ſubiects againſt
their Prince, and all to keepe himſelf vp
that he may ryde on foure mens ſhoulders,

as S. Paule and S. Peter neuer
did. And thus tearyng Chriſtendom in
péeces, makynge the ſame a pray to the
greate Turke, rather then he woulde
preache, labour, and ſuffer as S. Peter
and S. Paule aforetime hath doone, as
is manifeſt by the Scriptures as alſo by
other Eccleſiaſtiall Hiſtories. And it foloweth
alſo in the ſame prophecy in the
ſame 8. verſe in theſe wordes, Whom the
Lorde ſhall conſume vvith the ſpirit of his mouthe,
               Antichriſt is promiſed to conſume with the ſpirit of god his mouth: but the pope doth conſume by the doctrine in the word of God. Ergo the Pope is one Antechriſte.
               and ſhall abboliſh with the brightneſſe of his cominge,
The ſpirit of his mouth is the
Scriptures his holy worde, as witneſſeth
Eſay the prophet in his .11. Chapter
4. verſe, where is theſe wordes: And he
ſhall ſmite the earthe with the Rodde of his mouth
and with the breath of his lippes ſhall he ſlay the
wicked. That this ſpirit of his mouthe,
this breath of his Lippes the holy Scriptures
whiche ſlayeth the wicked, was
kept from the princes and people, that
they might not haue the ſame in theyr
mother tongue, to ſtuddy and meditate
vpon the ſame to this yere .1569. amōgſt
the Papiſtes is yet manifeſt. That the
Pope with his ſhauelynges feared the
princes and people from the readynge

& ſtudyng of the holy Scriptures, which
ſlayeth the wicked: Preachinge vnto
them that it was to harde for them to
vnderſtande, and woulde not admoniſh
them with S. Peter, to beware of the
darke and harde places which the wicked
take to liue in voluptouſneſſe and ſo
peruert all the Scriptures to their deſtruction
and dampnation. And agayne,
did not comfort the humble and godly to
the readyng of the Scriptures, as ſaynct
Peter in his ſeconde Epiſtle and firſte
chap. 21. verſe, where he preacheth thus
to his congregation.The Pope cardinals, &c dare not put the Byble in the mother tongue and giue it to the princes and people and admoniſh them with S. Peter that they haue a moſt ſure worde of the prophets to the which they ſhould doo well, to take heede although thei may tranſlate it and coate it for them ſelues, fauourablie: for their doctrine can no more abyde the Princes and people to knovv the vvorde of god, then ſore eyes can abide the light of the Sunne. 
               Wee haue alſo a moſt
ſure worde of the Prophets▪ to the which ye do wel
that ye take heede, as vnto a lyght that ſhineth in a
darke place. And he telleth them how long
they ſhould ſtuddie and reade, in theſe
wordes, Vntill the day dawne, and the day ſtarre
aryſe in your hartes. The .119. pſalme of Dauid
alſo agreeth with this doctrine, approuynge
the ſame to be olde and true
doctrine. But the Pope the man of ſinne
vtterly forbiddeth them to haue it in
theyr mother tongue, as yet amongeſt
the papiſtes is manifeſt to this day. Yea

thoſe which haue it in their mother tōge
amongſt them being knowne, be taken
as Heretikes, and burned without any
queſtion beyng moued concerninge the
godlineſſe and rightouſneſſe of their life
But by and by a plaine argument taken
they be Heretikes to ſay agaynſte the
Pope & his ceremonies, euen as Hunne
which was hanged in ye Lolards tower,
in the yeare of our lord God .1514. R.
Fitziames, being then Biſhop of London,
who at the inſtigacion of his Chancelor
D. Horſey, who murthered the
ſaid R. Hunne, before his death cauſed
him to be brought from the Lolardes
tower to his manner of Fulham, the .21
of December in the yere aforſaide, and
this was one article the Biſhop obiected
againſt him.
            
               Oye Papiſts loke in the 12. c. of S. Iohn, and you ſhall finde that the Pope ſhall not be iudge but ſermo quē loquutus ſum, ille iudicabit eū in extremo die. whether it be Emperour, Biſhop or pope, &c. And looke in the ſixt chap. of the Reuelation. And haſte you to ſlaye vp the number which ſhalbe killed for the teſtimony of the word of God. &c. 
               Item that the ſaid R. Hunne hath in
his keeping Engliſh bookes prohibeted
and dampned by the lavv. As the Apocalips
in Engliſh, Epiſtels and Goſpels
in Engliſh &c. But bleſſed be God
whiche hath ſent his worde, the ſpirite
of his mouthe, the breathe of his lippes,

whiche ſlayeth the wicked, vnto many
mightie Princes and other noble perſonages,
and of all ſtates and kyndes of
people in Chriſtendom, both noble and
vnnoble, in their knowne mother tonge
ſince the which time, the Pope the man
of ſinne, hath had his conſuminge and aboliſhyng
accordynge to the propheſie,
and ſo ſhall conſume and abboliſh with
the brightneſſe of Chriſte our Sauioure
his commyng: And this conſumyng and
abboliſhing ſhalbe generally in the conſience
of men. But not ſo generally in ye
maners of mē. And this one marke take
for a concluſion, that where ſo euer the
worde of God is in the mother tongue,
and is ſtudied, folowed, & obeyed, there
the Pope with his ceremonies cannot
ſtande: no more then darkeneſſe can abide
the light, or trueth falſehood. The
Lorde Ieſus open the eyes of the Pope,
Cardinals, &c. That both Proteſtantes
and Papiſtes may agree to builde the liuynge
Temples of God mens bodies,
with doctrine within them, and with
thoſe neceſſaries according to the word
of God, without and vpon them, & after

this full furniſhed, to erecte and furniſh
the ſtony Temples wt things neceſſary.
And this is reaſonable according to the
law of God, and the law of nature. And
otherwiſe, it is prepoſterous and out of
order, and agaynſt the law of God, and
againſt the law of nature. Wherefore
the Lorde our God graunt all men to obey
the ſame mightie God who created
Nature, & hath moſt wiſdome to geue
the moſt prudent rules and lawes for
the vſe of the ſame. Wherfore toward
the building of the liuing Temples of
God, mens bodies, which the Papiſtes
neglected, and built and furniſhed ſtony
Temples afore them, I haue for my
parte begon to erect and edefie this one
litle Church, and with praier againe I
beſéeche almightie God to graunt that
others of greater abilytie may builde
greater Churches, to the conuerſion or
confutacion of Oſorius, and all other papiſtes
and Heretikes, and to the peace,
benefite, and wealth of the whole ſtate
and cōmon welth of Chriſtendome, and
to the furderaunce of the glorious Goſpell
of Chriſte Ieſus, Amen.
            
               
               
                  Actes. 7. Chap. verſe. 47. and 48.
                  But Salomon builte him an houſe,
how be it, The moſt high dwelleth not
in Temples made with handes as ſaith
the Prophet Eſay, the 66. chap.

And the 17. chap. Act. 24. verſe.
                  God that made ye world and al things
that are therein, ſeing that he is Lorde
of Heauen and earth, dwelleth not in
Temples made with handes &c. And
thus much for the ſtony Temple.
But for the Temple of mens bodies
is thus written. 1. Corinth. 3. chap.
16. and 17. verſe.
                  Know ye not that ye are the Temple
of God, and that the ſpirite of God
dwelleth in you, if any man deſtroy the
Temple of God, him ſhall God deſtroy,
for the Temple of God is holy whiche
are ye &c.
And 16. chap. 19. verſe.
                  Know ye not that your bodies is the

Temple of the holy ghoſte which is in
you whom you haue of God and you are
not your owne.
And .2. Corinth. 6. chap. 16. verſe.
                  And what agréement hath the Temple
of God with Idols, for ye are the
Temple of the liuing God, as God hath
ſaide I will dwell among them & walke
there and I wilbe their God and they
ſhalbe my people.
And Epheſ. 2. chap. 20. 21. 22. verſe.
                  And are built vpon the foundacions of
the Apoſtles & Prophets, Ieſus Chriſt
himſelfe being the chiefe corner Stone,
in whome all the building coupled together
groweth vnto an holy Temple in
the Lorde, In whom ye alſo are builte
together to be the habitacion of God by
the Spirite.
               
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   