
      
         
            
            
            The DICTIONARY of ſyr Thomas Eliot knyght. ❧
            
            Londini in aedibus Thomae Bertheleti typis impreſſ. Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum ſolum. ⸫
         
         
            
            THE COPIE OF THE KYNGES GRACIOVS PRIVILEGE.
            
               HENRY THE EYGHT, by the grace of God, Kynge of Englande and of Fraunce, Defendour of the faythe lorde of Irelande, and ſupreme heed in erthe immediately vnder God of the vniuerſall Churche of Englande, To all prynters of bokes within this our realme, and to all other officers, mynysters▪ and ſubiectes, theſe oure letters herynge or ſeinge, gretynge. we late you wyte, that we of our grace eſpeciall, haue gyuen priuilege vnto our well beloued ſeruant Thomas Berthelet, that no maner perſon within this our 
                  •
               ealme durynge the naturall lyfe of the ſayde Thomas, ſhall printe any maner of bokes, what ſo euer our ſayd ſeruant ſhal prynt fyrst or ſhall prynt agayne vpon other mens corrections the ſame within the ſpace of ſyxe yeres nexte enſuynge the pryntynge of euery 
                  〈◊〉
                he boke ſo printed by our ſayde ſeruant. wherfore we woll and commaunde you, that ye nor none of you preſume to prynte any of the ſayde bokes, durynge the tyme of this oure priuilege, as ye intende to eſchewe our diſpleaſure.
         
         
            
            TO THE MOSTE EXCELLENT PRINCE, AND OVR moste redoubted ſoueraygne lorde kynge HENRY the .VIII. kynge of Englande, and Fraunce, defender of the faythe, lorde of Irelande, and Supreme heed in erthe immediately vnder Christe, of the Churche of Englande, his humble and faythefull ſeruaunt, Thomas Elyot knyght deſyreth perfite felicitie.
            
               
                  TRVELY I am, and euer haue bene of this opynion, mooſte noble, moſte puiſſaunt, and moſte vertuouſe Prynce, that the Royall aſtate of a kynge here in erth, next vnto god, is of men moſte to be honoured, loued, and feared in an incomparable degree and facion. For no man hauynge the free vſe of reaſon, beholdynge at his eien the diſpoſition moſte wonderfull ſette by diuine prouydence in thynges aboue vs, aboute vs, and vndernethe vs, with the ſondry alternations of tyme, wyll denye, to be of thoſe thynges one principall ruler and moderatour, by whoſe eternall ſapience all thynges ben gouerned. Vnto that office of gouernance is (as it were by the generall conſent of al people) one name appropried, in the which although by diuerſitie of langages, the letters and ſyllables are oftentymes chaunged, yet the worde ſpoken hath one ſignification, which implieth as moche as a KINGE in englyſhe, as it may appere to them, which do rede holy ſcripture, and will marke howe often god is there callid kinge, and alſo the prophetes do ſo frequently name hym. More ouer the paynims beinge onely ladde with naturall affections, callyd Iupiter, to whome aboue other their goddis,
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                they reſerued the power vniuerſall, kynge of goddis and of men: as who ſaythe, there may be no greatter name gyuen vnto hym, whome they ſuppoſed to be the gyuer of lyfe vnto creatures. To the whiche example, for the ſimilitude of that diuine office men dyd attribute vnto their ſoueraygne gouernours that excellent denomination, calling them ſemblably kynges, and aſſigning to them the cōmune diſtribution of Iuſtyce: Wherby the people vnder their gouernaunce, ſhulde be kepte and preſerued in quiete lyfe, not exercyſed in beſtiall appetite, but paſſed forth in all partes of honeſtie, they fynally ſhuld of god be rewarded with immortalitie. This wel conſydred, it ſhall be to all men apparant, that they, whiche rebell agaynſt kynges, be ennemies to god, and in wyll confounders of naturall order and prouidence. But aboue all thinges, I haue in mooſte admiration, the maieſtie of you, whiche be verye kynges raygnyng in Iuſtice, whan I conſyder, that therin ſemeth to be a thynge ſupernaturall, or (if it may be ſpoken without derogation vnto goddis honour) a diuine influence or ſparke of diuinitie: whiche late appered to all them that behelde your grace ſyttyng in the Throne of your royal aſtate, as ſupreme heed of the churche of Englande nexte vnder CHRIST, about the deſciſion and condemnation of the pernicious errours, of the moſte deteſtable heretyke Iohn̄ Nicolſon, callyd alſo Lambert, at the whyche tyme your hyghneſſe, more excellently than my tunge or penne can expreſſe, declared to be in your royall perſone the perfite image of kyngely maieſtie, compacte

of theſe excellent qualities, trewe Religion, Sapience, Iuſtice, and Mercy, all men reioycinge at the manifeſte and moſt honorable declaration of your euangelicall faythe: meruaylynge at the fulmination of the moſte vehement argumentes procedyng from your hyghnes in the confutation of abhomynable hereſyes: extollynge the iuſte reprehencions of the peruerſe opinions and interpretations of the arrogant maſters of the ſaid Lambert, in whoſe writynges, and his owne propre wytte, he more truſted (as your hyghneſſe trewely alledged agaynſte hym) than in the playne context of holy ſcripture, and the determinate ſentence of holy and great lerned doctours: Inioyenge alſo as well at your gracis mooſte wonderfull pacyence, in the longe ſuſtayninge of the folyſhe and tediouſe obiections of the ſayde Lambert, as alſo at your moſt chriſtian charitie, in mouynge and exhortynge ſo ſtubborne an heretike, with the moſt gentyll and perſwaſible langage, to recant and forſake his myſcheuouſe hereſies. This maieſtie your true and louynge ſubiectes beholdynge, and than herynge the ſpirite of god ſpeakyng in you, his enoynted Kynge, and myniſter elected: they were with ioy ſo replenyſhed, that whan they deſyred to expreſſe eche to other the comforte, whiche they than receyued, the ſame comforte was of ſuche importaunce, that it mought none otherwyſe be declared, but by abundance of teares, ſent out of theyr eyen by vnſpekable gladnes. More ouer the preſence of you, whyche are kynges, do minyſter to them that be inferiours vnto you, an amplification of powers callyd naturall, contayned as well in the wytte and ſenſes, as in the force or puiſſance of corporall membres. to the confirmation wherof, howe many men haue ben knowen, whyche er they haue attayned to the familyar acquayntaunce of kynges, haue bene demed to be, ſome but of a meane wytte and knowlege, ſome but of a baſe courage or proweſſe, whiche afterwarde haue exceded in wytte or courage all mens expectations, and fynally bene of all men allowed for honourable and notable perſonages. Of this wonderfull maieſtie in your royall perſon, moſt gracious ſouerayn lorde, I haue my ſelfe, in my ſelfe, late founde a meruaylous experience. For about a yere paſſed, I beganne a Dictionarie, declaryng latine by engliſhe, wherin I vſed lyttell ſtudy, beinge than occupied about my neceſſarye buſynes, whiche letted me from the exacte labour and ſtudy requiſyte to the makynge of a perfyte Dictionarie: But whyles it was in printyng, and vneth the half deale performed, your hyghnes being informed therof, by the reportes of gentyll maiſter Antony Denny, for his wyſedome and diligence worthily callyd by your highneſſe into your priuie Chamber, and of Wyllyam Tildiſley, keper of your gracis Lybrarie, and after mooſte ſpecially by the recommendation of the moſt honourable lorde Crumwell, lorde priuie ſeale, fauourer of honeſtie, and next to your highneſſe chiefe patron of vertue and cunnyng, conceyued of my labours a good expectation, and declaryng your moſte noble and beneuolent nature, in fauouryng them that wyll be well occupied, your hyghneſſe in the preſence of dyuers your noble men, commendynge myne enterpriſe, affirmed, that if I wolde erneſtely trauayle therin,

your highnes, as well with your excellent counſaile, as with ſuche bokes as your grace had, and I lacked, wold therin ayde me: with the which wordes, I confeſſe, I receiued a newe ſpirite, as me ſemed: wherby I founde forthwith an augmentation of myn vnderſtandynge, in ſo moche, as I iuged all that, whiche I had writen, not worthy to come in your gracis preſence, with out an addition. Wherfore incontinent I cauſed the printes to ceſſe, and beginninge at the letter M, where I lefte, I paſſed forth to the laſt letter with a more diligent ſtudy. And that done, I efteſones returned to the fyrſt letter, and with a ſemblable diligence performed the temenant. In the whiche my proceding, I well perceyued, that all though dictionaries had ben gathered one of an other, yet netheleſſe in eche of them ar omitted ſome latin wordes, interpreted in the bokes, whiche in order preceded. For Feſtus hath manye, whiche are not in Varros Analogi: Nonius hath ſome, whiche Feſtus lacketh: Neſtor toke nat all that he founde in them bothe. Tortellius is not ſo abundant as he is diligent: Laurentius Valla wrate only of wordes, which are called elegancies, wherin he is vndoubtedly excellent: Perottus in Cornucopie, dyd omitte almoſt none that before him were written, but in wordis compounde he is to compendiouſe: Fryere Calepine (but where he is augmented by other) nothyng amended, but rather appaired that which Perottus had ſtudiouſely gathered: Nebreſſenſis was both well lerned and diligent, as it appereth in ſome wordes, which he declareth in latin: but bicauſe in his dictionarie wordes are expounde in the ſpainyſhe tunge, whiche I do nat vnderſtand, I can nat of hym ſhewe myn opinion: Budeus in the exact triall of the natiue ſence of wordes, aſwell greke as latine, is aſſuredly right cōmendable, but he is moſte occupied in the conference of phraſis of bothe the tunges, whiche in compariſon are but in a fewe wordes: Dyuers other men haue written ſondry annotations and commentaries on olde latine authors, among whom alſo is diſcorde in their expoſitions. Whan I conſydred all this, I was attached with an horrible feare, remembryng my dangerous enterpriſe (I being of ſo ſmal reputation in lernyng in compariſon of them, whom I haue reherſed) as well for the difficultie in the true expreſſynge the lyuely ſence of the latine wordes, as alſo the importable labours in ſerching expending and diſcuſſing the ſentences of ancient writers. This premeditation abated my courage, and deſperation was euen at hand to rent al in pieces that I had written, had nat the beames of your royal maieſtie entred into my harte, by remembraunce of the comforte, whiche I of your grace had lately receyued, wherwith my ſpirite was reuyued, and hath ſet vp the ſayle of good courage, and vnder your graces gouernance, your highneſſe being myn onely mayſter, and ſtyrer of the ſhyppe of all my good fortune, I am entred the goulfe of diſdaynous enuie, hauynge fyniſhed for this tyme this ſymple Dictionarie, wherin I dare affirme, may be founde a thouſande mo latine wordes, than were togither in any one Dictionarie publyſhed in this royalme at the tyme whan I fyrſte began to write this commentarie, which is almoſt two yeres paſſed. For beſide the conference of phraſes or fourmes

of ſpeakynge latin and engliſhe, I haue alſo added proper termes belongynge to lawe and phiſike, the names of diuers herbes knowen among vs: alſo a good number of fiſhes founden as wel in our occean, as in our riuers: Moreouer ſondrie poyſis, coyne, and meaſures, ſometyme vſed among the auncient Romaynes, Grekes, and Hebrues, whiche knowlege to the reders not only of hiſtories and orations of Tullie, but alſo of holy ſcripture, and the bokes of auncient phiſitions, ſhall be founde pleaſant and alſo commodiouſe. Nor I haue omitted prouerbes, callyd Adagia, or other quicke ſentences, whiche I thought neceſſarie to be had in remembraunce. All be it for as moche as partely by negligence at the begynnynge, partly by vntrue information of them, whom I truſted, alſo by to moche truſt had in Calepine, ſome fautes may be founden by dilygent redynge, I therfore moſt humbly beſeche your excellent maieſtie, that where your hyghneſſe ſhall happen to doubte of any one worde in the fyrſte parte of this warke, or perchance do lacke any worde, whiche your maieſtie ſhall happen to rede in any good author, that it maye lyke your grace to repayre incontinente vnto the ſeconde parte, whiche is myn addition, ſekyng there for the ſame worde in the letter, wherwith he begynneth, truſtynge veryly, that your highnes there ſhall be ſatisfied. And for as moche as by haſte made in printyng, ſome letters may happen to lacke, ſome to be ſette in wronge places, or the ortography nat to be truely obſerued, I therfore haue put all thoſe fautes in a table folowing this preface: wherby they may be eaſily corrected: and that done, I truſte in god no manne ſhall fynde cauſe to reiect this boke, but rather thankefully to take my good wyll and labours, gyuynge to your maieſtie mooſte hartye thankes, as to the chiefe author therof, by whoſe gracious meanes menne beinge ſtudious, may vnderſtande better the latine tunge in ſyxe monethes, than they mought haue doone afore in thre yeres, withoute perfyte inſtructours, whyche are not many, and ſuche as be, are not eaſy to come by: the cauſe I nede not to reherſe, ſens I ones declared it in my booke called the Gouernour, whiche about .viii. yeres paſſed, I dydde dedicate vnto your hyghneſſe. And for my parte, I render moſt humble thankes vnto your maieſtie, for the good eſtimation that your grace retayneth of my poore lerning and honeſtie, promyſynge therfore to your highnes, that duryng my lyfe naturall, I ſhall faythfully employe all the powers of my wytte and body, to ſerue truely your maieſtie in euery thynge, wherto your mooſte excellent iudgement, ſhall thynke my ſeruyce conuenient & neceſſary, In the meane tyme and alway, as your bounden ſeruant, I ſhal hartily pray vnto god, to proſpere your hyghenes in all your vertuouſe procedynges, grauntynge alſo that your maieſtie may longe raigne ouer vs, to the incomparable comforte and ioye of all your naturall and louynge ſubiectes. AMEN.
            
         
         
            
            THO. ELIOTA EQVES LECTORIBVS VERE DOCTIS.
            
               ETSI NIHIL DVBITO DE VESTRO candore, prudentia, ac benignitate lectores candidiſſimi, metus tamen liuoris alieni me uehementer cogit, ut in huius operis principio uos aggrediar praeoccupatione quadam, non tamen artificioſa, ſed per
                  
                     
                  
                  quam
                ſimplici ac uerecunda: qua ſolum erratula, perpauca nimirum deprecando, morſus inuidorum, qui nuſquàm non ſunt, facilius euitarem. Noſtis optumi uiri 
                  
                     
                  
                  quam
                periculoſo certamine, lis adhuc pendeat inter huius aetatis medicos de re herbaria: qua, me hercle, ut nihil extet humanae ſaluti conducibilius, ſi probe cognoſcatur: ita nihil penè deterius, aut magis noxium, ſi quic
                  
                     
                  
                  quam
                in ea, male intelligendo, quod lectori futurum ſit fraudi, perperam committatur: quod cum ipſe cognorim, alioqui cupidus redigendi in hos cōmentarios quorumcun
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                uerborum quae apud latinos authores reperiantur, ſenſus integros ac genuinos: coepi cum quibuſdam herbariis ac pharmacopolis agere, quos exiſtimaueram ea in re per
                  
                     
                  
                  quam
                gnaros fuiſſe, ac perdiligentes, ut ſtirpium non ſolum nomina, uerum etiam figuras ipſas mihi ſcribenti ſuppeditarent. at homines uel improbe ſuam ignorantiam diſſimulantes, uel ut mihi imponerent (quod magis exiſtimo) turpiter mentiētes, alias figuras, alia
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                nomina mihi praebuerūt, quā earundē herbarū fuiſſe, quas ego noſſe cupiebam, poſtea diligentius inueſtigando per meipſum comperi: quo factum eſt, ut ab his deluſus, uel potius proditus, aliquot herbas ac arbores aliena fide male deceptus, huic Dictionario ſub falſis nominibus inſeruerim: quod tandem cum ex ſolidioris doctrinae uiris, ſero propemodum conſultis, tum ex inquiſitione perdiligenti, tam in libris Dioſcoridis et Galeni, 
                  
                     
                  
                  quam
                in ipſis ſtyrpibus a me iā uiſis ac multo penitius conſyderatis deprehendiſſem, adeo tantae negligentiae me certe poenituit, ut eo nomine tot menſiū labores (ut mihi uidebatur inaniter exhauſtos) flammis conſumpſiſſem: ni me potentiſſimi, ac longe ſapientiſſimi Principis noſtri Henrici octaui Regis Angliae numen, interpellaſſet: cui meam fidem in perficiundo hoc negotio paulo ante obſtrinxeram: facturum igitur me ſatis exiſtimabam uobis ueſtri
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                ſimilibus, uiris uti
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                bonis aeque at
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                doctis, ſi in tabellam, appendicem huic epiſtolae, herbarum uocabula uel a me perperam interpretata, uel non ſatis cognita diligenter coegero, quo minore cum periculo lectores quicquid mihi deciderit imprudēti reſarcire poſſint. Abeſt enim 
                  
                     
                  
                  quam
                plurimum, ut huiuſce rei me quic
                  
                     
                  
                  quam
                pudeat, cum in manibus tractentur cottidie libri doctiſſimorum hominum, tertium aut quartum recogniti, nouis
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                additionibus iterum at
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                iterum in

lucem aediti, quod hercle cur mihi tantum non liceat, ne
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                moribus ne dū legibus ullus quiſquam praeiudicauerit. Sed mihi obiicient aemuli, multa quidem uerba, quae apud Calepinum reperiantur, uel à me ſponte praetermiſſa, uel mihi nimium feſtinanti ſtolide dilapſa. Neutrum confitebor hercle nam cum primum ſtatuiſſem Dictionarium latino anglicum (ita iam lubet rei nouae, nouum nomen effingere) pro quodam meo nepote cōficere: in animo tum erat ne
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                plureis graecas dictiones aggerere, 
                  
                     
                  
                  quam
                quae uideri poſſent ualde neceſſariae, ad eos authores intelligendum, qui latine ſcribentes clariſſimi reputantur. Igitur non alia graeca uocabula deſumpſi mihi, quā ea quae uel in ciuitatem receptae (ut dicere ſolent) locum quempiam apud probatum aliquem authorem adornaſſent, aut maiorem copiam, aut ſenſum illuſtriorem praebuiſſent. caetera quaecun
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                penes huiuſmodi authores uel nus
                  
                     
                  
                  quam
                reperta, uel ab iis ipſis circumſcripta, ne meam operam in depingendis chartis nimium otioſis imprudenter luderem, libenter praetermiſi, quod ſcirem, graecas literas noſce cupientibus, aliorū librorum, quos Lexica uocant, haud minorem copiam extare, nec mihi duos parietes de una fidelia dealbare admodum uacabat: nam quid per deum immortalem arrogantius dici poſſit? quid equidem ſtultius? 
                  
                     
                  
                  quam
                in latino Dictionario ex uerbis graecis, aceruos ingentes colligere, miſcellaneas
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                cōſarſinare, cum ad rem literariam plaera
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                nihil faciant, imo nonnum
                  
                     
                  
                  quam
                officiant cum inquirentem ſedulo latinam aliquam dictionem, diu
                  ••
               us 
                  
                     
                  
                  quam
                par ſit retineant. Deni
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                praetermiſi nimia uetuſtate iam obſoleta uocabula, quae Terentii, Plauti
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                uenerandam antiquitatem longe praecedere, aut plebeiorum ſordes nimium olere uideantur. tum quod authores quibus uſui fuerunt eiuſmodi uoces nus
                  
                     
                  
                  quam
                extent: tum quod nulla in re, latine loquentibus utiles, plurimum ſtylo, puritati
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                ſermonis officere uehementer poterint. Si quis obſcoena uocabula deſyderet, quibus iacentem uenerem inter legendum ſuſcitare queat: alios dictionarios conſulat, meū
               
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                contemnat, hoc nomine (ſi lubet) quod eiuſcemodi uocibus careat. Noueram humani ſenſus quantum fuerint ſemper ad incendium prompti, ſi deliteſcentem igniculum ex laſciuiuſculis uerbulis uel modicè delibauerint: ſciebam quam auidi ſint homines tam foede, ac demū poenitendae uoluptatis illecebris animos perluendi, quā praecipites fuerīt ad exequendū, quod libido ſuaſerit. Praeterea non ignorabā ipſam Venerem non tantopere ſolicitatam omnino quieſcere: leuioreſ
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                impreſſiones efficere. Malebam igitur (conſcius futurae rationis, quam apud Chriſtū iudicem initurus ſum) uideri quibuſdam gratum aliquid ſubtrahere, ob id
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                male audire apud cinoedos 
                  
                     
                  
                  quam
               libet procaces: quam damno cum meo tum aliorum inexpiabili, facem ſaeuienti Cupidini, laſciua uerboſitate

ſubminiſtrare. Viculos quoſdam, pariter at
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                rinulos et monticulos admodum ignobiles, quos extra Coſmographorum tabulas, uel nus
                  
                     
                  
                  quam
                reperietis uel per
                  
                     
                  
                  quam
                raro, id tamen cum ſui ſitus deſcriptione ſatis commoda non curarim tantopere, ut in his uellem tempus & chartam inaniter decoquere, contemptus idem accidit in otioſis nominibus, quae neque tropū afferant, nec in quopiam authore fabulam illuſtrent. Ceterum pro tam inani farragine comparaui lectoribus ſuppellectilem longe commodiorem, ex his dictionibus, quae in legendis authoribus, ob ſenſus diuerſitatem, haud mediocrem difficultatem afferant. Adieci praeter herbarum ac piſcium cognomina, quorum nullus dictionarius ante hunc meminit (ni fallor) menſuras ac pondera, tam ueterum graecorum at
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                latinorum 
                  
                     
                  
                  quam
                etiam Hebreorum. hanc equidem operam, cunctis hominibus qui in literis tum ſacris, tum prophanis ſtudioſè uerſentur, me pulchre nauaſſe iudicaueritis, quoties memineritis, quàm inſigni uecordia ad lectionem iucundiſſimam rei tam uulgaris ignorantia per docti homines caecutire uideantur. Tandem ne nimis longa praefacione, uobis in rebus maioribus at
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                grauioribus occupatis, potius faſtidium 
                  
                     
                  
                  quam
                benefitium afferam, id breuiter a uobis impetrare cupio, ut meam uoluntatem in hac re aequi boni
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                conſulatis. cogitetiſ
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                apud uosipſos, id operis iam coeptum ab equite britanno, barbariſſimo ſcilicet, utpote in paternis tantum aedibus educato, nec ab anno aetatis duodecimo ab altero quopiam preceptore literis inſtructo, ſibi ipſi nimirum duce tam in ſcientiis liberalibus, 
                  
                     
                  
                  quam
                in utraquè philoſophia: quod procul abeſt, ut oſtentando dicam uel arroganter: ſed ut gratiis DEO OPT. MAX. cum a me tum ab his, quibus hic meus liber fuerit utilis, utrin
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                redditis: alii muſarum uberiori benefitio freti, meo quidem exemplo, parem aut maiorem operam aggredi, pro ſua Republica non dubitarent. Vos ualete, memores, primos conatus, cuiquam ſcribenti, uix unquam feliciter cecidiſſe.
         
         
            
            THE TABLE OF CORRECTIONS.
            
               
                  
                     ACETABVLVM, rede a ſaulcer, wherin vyneger or other lyke ſauce is put. Put out the reſydue, and reade it in the table of meaſures.
               
                  Acinicula, rede Acuncula.
               
               
                  Acus, rede it in the addition.
               
                  Aedilitas, litum, rede litium.
               
                  Agaranomus, rede Agoranomus.
               
               
                  Ambroſia, rede in the addition.
               
                  Antiſta, reade Antiſtita.
               
               
                  Apiaſtrum rede an herbe, whiche hath leaue
                     •
                   lyke to blacke horehound, but greatter, and more tender, and are nat ſo rough, and ſmelleth lyke a cytron, ſome do take it for Marche.
               
                  Appoſitus, iette to, rede ſette to.
               
                  Archarius, rede in the Addition.
               
                  Aſsiptor, rede Aſcriptor.
               
               
                  
                     Aſſec
                           •
                        a,
                   rede Aſſecla.
               
            
            
               
                  BIothenatos, rede Biothanatos.
               
               
                  Biremes, adde to, alſo ſhippes, hauing it raunges of ores,
               
                  Bon, adde to, alſo the people of Benar or Berne, and the marches therof.
               
                  Brabenta, rede Brabenta.
               
               
                  Bugloſſa, rede, is that herbe, whiche is cō
                  monly callyd Borage.
            
            
               
                  CAdus, rede in the Addition, and alſo in the table of meaſures.
               
                  Calix, rede in the addition.
               
                  Calydonia, rede, It is alſo a countrey in the northe parte of Scotlande.
               
                  Calta, rede in the addition.
               
                  Camerinam mouere, reade in the addition.
               
                  Carcritoma, rede Carcinoma.
               
               
                  Cardinum, rede Cardamus.
               
                  Carpatine, put out okers, and rede cokars.
               
                  Cerates, rede the foure ſcore and ſixtenthe parte of an ounce.
               
                  Chameleopardus, rede lyke a panther.
               
                  Cenſio, rede Cenſeo.
               
               
                  Chena, rede clena.
               
               
                  Choenix, rede in the table of greke meſures.
               
                  Chus, rede in the table of greke meaſures.
               
                  Climacterius, rede climactericus.
               
               
                  Commeats, rede commeatus.
               
               
                  Conſuerſco, rede conſueſco.
               
               
                  Coriarius, adde to, alſo a curriar.
               
                  Cura, carae, rede curae.
               
                  Cynomia, rede Cynomyia.
               
               
                  Congius, reade in the Table of Romayne meaſures.
            
            
               
                  DEcuſsis, rede in the addition.
               
                  Demeanculum, rede demeaculum.
               
                  Demenſum, rede in the addition.
               
                  Duellium, rede Duellum.
               
               
                  Haematices, rede haematites.
               
                  Increpo, pere, adde to, uel pare.
            
            
               
                  LApathos, rede in the addition.
               
                  Latico, rede latito.
               
                  Legacitius, rede Legatitius.
               
               
                  Leucantha, rede Leucacantha.
               
               
                  Latumae, rede Latumiae.
               
               
                  Lonem radere, rede Leonem radere.
               
               
                  Leſbos, for Ageum, rede Aegeum.
               
               
                  Lingua bula, rede Lingua bubula.
               
               
                  Litem ſuam facere, there for one, rede one.
               
                  Lucifigus, rede Lucifugus.
               
            
            
               
                  MAlo, mauul, rede mauule.
               
                  Marconiani, rede Marcomanni.
               
               
                  Maſtiche, adde to commonlye callyd Maſtix.
               
               
                  Mater matrina, rede & hath a mother liuing.
               
                  Medimnus, rede in the table of meaſures.
               
                  Mediocris, dlere, rede mediocre.
               
               
                  Medius, a, um, in the myddell.
               
                  Melamirus, rede Melanurus.
               
               
                  Membraneus, rede of parchmyn or velum.
               
                  Merdo, oreur, rede ordure.
               
                  Metreta, & metretes, rede the greke table of meaſures.
               
                  Mina, rede in the addicion and in the tables of poyſe and money.
               
                  Modius, rede in the table of meaſure.
               
                  Muralis, adde to the end pelitory of the wal
            
            
               
                  NEdum, after, for fundere, rede funderem, Nihil cum fidibus graculo nihil cū amacino ſui, rede, cum amaracino ſui.
               
               
                  Nucamenta, thynges on the bowghes of nutte trees or pitche trees hangyng down lyke frynges, and be nat leaues.
               
                  Numeris omnibus abſolutus, on euery parte perfyte, put out ly.
               
                  ¶Olus atrum, for perſely rede Alyſander.
               
                  Ozinum, rede ozimum.
               
            
            
               
                  PAralleli, for lon rede ſon.
               
                  Patrizo, for lyke a father, reade lyke his father.
               
                  Pectunculus, a lyttell fyſhe, adde therto, I ſuppoſe it is a cockyll.
               
                  Pharmacentice, rede Pharmaceutice.
               
               
                  Pituita, for rowme rede rewme.
               
                  Puuia, rede pluuia.
               
               
                  Pollex, rede a fynger bredth, and the third parte of a fynger.
               
                  Polus, of extre, rede of an axe tree.
               
                  
                  Pupugi, rede the pretertence of pungo.
               
               
                  Putitius, a foole, rede a foole.
            
            
               
                  Qui, reade after the latine, wherfore was Epicurus more happy that he lyued in his owne countray, than Metrodorus whiche lyued at Athenes.
               
                  Quinarius, rede at the ende, whiche is of our money .iii. pens farthing, or therabout.
            
            
               
                  REmuncopae, for dryuen rede drawen.
               
                  Renones, rede after wherin the ancient Almaynes.
            
            
               
                  SAlillum, rede a lyttell ſaltſellar.
               
                  Salinum, rede a ſalteſellar.
               
                  Saxatilis, piſces ſaxatili, rede ſaxatiles.
               
                  Scytae, Scythia, putte theym out there, and reade them after.
               
                  Scorpiuros, putte out all the deſcription of the herbe, and rede a lyttell herbe callyd alſo Scorpioides, hauyng ſmall leaues, and the ſede therof is like the tayles of Scorpions.
               
                  Seſtertius, & ſeſtertiū, rede them afterwarde in the table of coyne.
               
                  Sextarius, rede in the table of meaſures.
               
                  Singillatim, for euery ouche rede eueriche.
               
                  Specimen edere, to ſhewe a profe. put oute the reſidue.
               
                  Sprarchus, rede ſpirarchus.
               
               
                  Spithama, reade after in the table of meaſures.
               
                  Squilla, rede at the laſte ende, I ſuppoſe it a prane.
               
                  Sernunt ſe ſomno, rede ſternunt.
               
               
                  Struma, for whiche is, rede wherin is.
               
                  Sulcus, ſometyme it is put of a dyche, rede for a dyche.
            
            
               
                  TThyſus, put out all, for as moche as it is afore declared in Thyrſus.
               
                  Trachelum, reade for tho ſayle, the ſayle.
               
                  Trulla, rede a treye.
               
                  Tucetum, reade at the ende. alſo a ſauſage.
            
            
               
                  ¶Vafer, for flye, reade ſlye.
               
                  Vlex, for to ti, rede to hym.
            
            
               In the addition.
               
                  Adarca, for grownyng, rede growynge.
               
                  
                     Agger
                           ••
                        ,
                   rede aggerere.
            
            ¶Here endeth the Corrections.
         
         
            
            
               
                  coat of arms or blazon
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
               
               
                  A. ante B.
                  
                     
                        A
                      Sygnifieth of, or from.
                  
                     
                        Ab, and Abs,
                      be of the ſame ſygnification, only A, goth before a worde, which begynneth with a cōſonāt: ab and abs goth before a word that doth begyn with a vowell.
                  
                     Abatis, two wordes made of the prepoſition, a, & the ablatiue caſe plurell of Batus, whiche in englyſſhe is a meaſure, ſignifieth an officer, that hath the orderyng of meaſures,Eſdra. as a clerke of the markette,
                  
                     Abaccidentibus, an officer, vnto whome it belōgeth to write ſuch thingꝭ as do chance.
                  
                     Abacti, officers depoſed, or ſuch as be conſtrayned to reſygne their authoritie.
                  
                     Abactores, theues that ſteale cattell.
                  
                     Abacus, a countyng table, or cupborde.
                  
                     Abaculus, of Plinie is taken for accompt.
                  
                     Abalienatus, he whom a mā putteth frō him
                  
                     Abalieno, aui, are, to put or tourne away.
                  
                     Abana, a ryuer in the coūtrey of Damaſke vnder the hyll called Libanus.
                  
                  
                     Hieron.
                     Abanec, a gyrdell that the prieſtes of Iewes dyd weare.
                  
                     Abambulo, aui, are, to aſcend or mount vp.
                  
                     Abaphus, vndied or vncoloured.
                  
                     Abauus, my great grandefathers father.
                  
                     Abax, abacis, a cupboorde, or dreſſer, alſo an aſtronomers tables.
                  
                     Abaci, the tables inbowed, wheron pylars doo ſtande.
                  
                     Abbas, atis, an abbotte.
                  
                     Abbatiſſa, an abbeſſe.
                  
                     Plinius.
                     Abarimon, a countreye in Tartari, where men haue fete tourned backwarde, and be wonderfull ſwifte, and be wylde.
                  
                     Abaſter, one of the horſes of Pluto kyng of Helle.
                  
                     Abdera, a citie in the realme of Thracia.
                  
                     Abderita, a citeſyn of Abdera.
                  
                     Abdias, the name of a prophete.
                  
                     Abdico, aui, are, to expell or put out of fauour, or reſygne an offyce, or to refuſe his ſonne or kynſman.
                  
                     Abdicauit filium, He refuſed hym for his ſonne. Abdicauit ſe magiſtratu, He hath reſygned his offyce or dignitie.
                  
                     Abdico, ixi, cere, to denie or forſake.
                  
                     Abdo, didi, dere, to hyde.
                  
                     Abdómen, the fatte aboute the kydneyes. It is alſo the vdder and teates of a ſowe, full of mylke, whiche is in Italy hadde for a delycate meate.
                  
                     Abdùco, xi, cere, to leade awaye, or leade out, or pull away, or take with.
                  
                     Abellinae, fylberdes of Abellino, a citie in Naples.
                  
                     Abemo, emi, ere, to take or putte of a garment. Abemito ueſtem, Put of thy cote.Plau, ce.
                  
                  
                     Abeo, iui, uel ii, ire, to depurte, or go away.
                  
                     Aberceo, to forbid. Eam abercet domo, He forbyddeth hir his howſe.
                  
                     Aberro, aui, are, to erre or wāder very moche, to depart ferre of, or a ſonder.
                  
                     Aberūco, aui, are, to wede out, or pluck out.
                  
                     Abeſſa, the name of a Iuge in Iſrael.
                  
                     Abfore, to be awaye.
                  
                     Abgrego, aui, are, to ſeuer or take oute of the flocke, or to drawe ſheepe.
                  
                     Abhinc, before this tyme.
                  
                     Abhorreo, ui, rêre, to abhorre, to hate.
                  
                     Abhorreſco, to feare to beholde.
                  
                     Abiecto, aui, are, to caſte often away.
                  
                     Abies, ietis, a fyrre tree.
                  
                     Abietarius, a carpentar.
                  
                     Abigeatus, tus, felony in ſtealynge cattell.
                  
                     Abigēus, a ſtealer of cattell.
                  
                     Abigo, egi, gere, to dryue away any thinge, that is euyll or noyous. alſo to driue awaye cattell by thefte or deceyte.
                  
                     Abiicio, ieci, iicere, to caſt away, to renoūce to deſpiſe.
                  
                     Abintegro, yet ageyne efteſones.
                  
                     Abinteſtato, inteſtate or without teſtament.
                  
                     Abiudico, aui, are, to recouer or take away by iudgement.
                  
                     Abiugo, aui, are, to vnyoke, diſcharge, or putte aſonder.
                  
                     Abiungo, xi, ere, to feuer or ſonder.
                  
                     Abiurati, ſworne brethern, or confederatis.
                  
                     Abiuro, aui, are, to denye by an othe, or to kepe a thinge wrongfully.
                  
                     Abiudicatum, adiudged, gyuen by iugemēt.
                  
                     Ablacto, aui, are, to weaue.
                  
                     Ablaqueo, aui, are, to rydde the erthe from trees or vynes, and cutte awaye the vpper rotes, that they may beare the more fruite.
                  
                     Ablego, aui, are, to ſende away.
                  
                     Abligurio, iui, ire, to conſume in banketting or farynge delycately.
                  
                     Abloco, aui, are, to ſette or let to an other.
                  
                     Abluo, ui, ere, to waſſhe of.
                  
                     Abnego, aui, are, to denye vtterly.
                  
                     Abnepos, otis, A ſonne in the fourthe degree in lyneall diſcent.
                  
                     Abnuo, nui, ere, to deny or refuſe with coū
                     tenance or becke, to becke away.
                  
                     Abnuto, ſignifieth to do the ſame oftētimes
                  
                     Aboleo, eui, uel ui, ere, to put out, or raſe out to anulle, or vndo for euer.
                  
                     Aboleſco, to brynge to naught.
                  
                     Abolla, a Senatours habyte, or a ſowldiours cloke.
                  
                     Abominor, atus ſum, nari, to take for ylle lucke, or haue in deteſtation.
                  
                     Aborigines, people, whyche fyrſte helde

the countrey aboute Rome, & lyued abrode hauynge no houſes. They may alſo be taken for any other people, whoſe beginning is not knowen.
                  
                     Abonor, abortus ſum, aboriri, to be borne afore naturall tyme.
                  
                     Aborſus, an vntymely byrthe, nygh to the conception: which may be called aborſion.
                  
                     Abortus, an vntymely byrthe, nyghe to the iuſte tyme of delyueraunce, whereby the chylde dieth.
                  
                     Abortio, onis, et Abortinus, the byrthe dyſtroyed with ſome hurte, or other myſaduenture, or medycine.
                  
                     Aborno, tiui▪ tire, to brynge forthe a chylde, 
                        〈◊〉
                      be perfecte.
                  
                     Abortrium, idem quod abortus.
                  
                  
                     Abortinus, a, um, that thynge, whiche procureth the ſayd vntymely byrthe.
                  
                     Abpatruus, My fathers great vncle.
                  
                     
                        Ab
                              •
                           ado, 
                              •
                           i, dere,
                      to pare or ſcrape away.
                  
                     
                        Ab
                              ••
                           e,
                      out of the matter, or out of the purpoſe▪ vnſemely, vnconuenient.
                  
                     
                        Abte
                              •
                           o, aui, are,
                      to renoūce, or forſake.
                  
                     
                        Ab
                              •
                           tua,
                      agaynſte thy profite.
                  
                     
                        A
                              •
                           , p
                              ••
                            ere,
                      to take fro, or take by fors.
                  
                     
                        Ab
                              ••
                           gu
                              •
                           ,
                      they whiche beinge at lybertie, 
                        〈◊〉
                      them ſelūs to an other mans rule, by theyr conſente.
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           , aui, 
                              •
                           re,
                      to take awaye.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        , to diſſolue or repell a lawe.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        , an herbe called ſouthern wode.
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              〈…〉
                           , tumpere,
                      to breke of, plucke 
                        〈◊〉
                      cutte of.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        , of or fro.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        , a ryuer of Armeny, that incloſeth the 
                        〈◊〉
                      Armente.
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              〈…〉
                           , dere,
                      to go away.
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           , et ab
                              •
                           cen
                              •
                           o,
                      a departyng.
                  
                     
                        Ab
                              •
                           us,
                      is of phiſytions taken for an impoſ
                        •
                     ume or botche, or for a courſe of euyll humours to ſome parte of the body, wherby matter is ingendred.
                  
                     
                        Abſe
                              •
                           do, di, dere,
                      to cutte of.
                  
                     
                        Abſe
                              •
                           do,
                      ſignifieth the ſame.
                  
                     Abſcio, iui, ire, to go out of remembrance.
                  
                     Abſcondo, di, dere to hyde.
                  
                     Abſcus, tis, abſent, or awaye.
                  
                     Abſentaneus, a, um, that whiche in abſence is doone.
                  
                     Abſentia, abſence.
                  
                     Abſentio, tire, to thinke contrary.
                  
                     Abſento, aui, are, to be abſent.
                  
                     Abſimilis, moche vnlyke.
                  
                     Abſis, idos, the ſtrake of a cart whele, wherin the ſpokes he ſette
                  
                     Abſiſio, tere, to departe from a place▪ ſometyme it ſignifieth to abſteine or leaue of.
                  
                     Abſoleo, ere, to be out of vſe.
                  
                     Abſoletus locus, a place vnoccupied or neglected.
                  
                     Abſoluo, ui, ere, to looſe that whyche was bounden. alſo to performe or accomplyſhe. Alſo to ſpare or forgyue, to pardon, to ſpede, to aſſoyle.
                  
                     Abſono, abſonaui, abſonare, to diſcorde or ſowne euylle.
                  
                     Abſonus, na, num, that whiche ſowneth nat wel, or diſcordeth, or ſcantly may be herde.
                  
                     Abſorbeo, bui, nel abſorpſi, ére, to ſwalowe, or ſuppe of all, to deuoure or conſume.
                  
                     Abſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , without.
                  
                     Abſtemius, he that drinketh no wyne.
                  
                     Abſtentus, accurſed out of the churche.
                  
                     Abſterreo, ui, ere, to prohybyte or lette, or putte fro.
                  
                     Abſtinentia, abſtinence, a vertue in forbearynge to take an other mans goodes.
                  
                     Abſtineo, ui, ere, to abſteyne or forbeare, or tempre.
                  
                     Abſto, ſtiti, ſtare, to ſtande farre of.
                  
                     Abſtorqueo, torſi, quere, to gette by force or tourmentes.
                  
                     Abſtraho, xi, ere, to take by force or by craft
                  
                     Abſtrudo, ſi, dere, to hyde.
                  
                     Abſtulit, of Aufero, he hath birefte, taken away, or borne away.
                  
                     Abſum, fui, abeſſe, to be away, or ferre of, or to fayle, or to be diſtant or abſent.
                  
                     Abſumo, pſi, ere, to ſpende or conſume.
                  
                     Abſurdus, ſurda, ſurdum, inconuenient, foolyſſhe, diſcordinge, diſhoneſte, abhorringe, or odious.
                  
                     Abſynthium, wormewoode,
                  
                     Abſyrtides, be ylandes in the Venitian ſee.
                  
                     Abſyrtus, the brother of Medea, whome ſhe dyd cutte into pieces, and threwe into the ſee, whan ſhe fledde frome her father with Iaſon.
                  
                     Abundantia, haboundance, more than ſufficient rycheſſe.
                  
                     Abunde, habūdantly, plentuouſly, inough, and more than inough.
                  
                     Abundo, aui, are, to habunde, to haue out of meaſure more than inough.
                  
                     Abuolo, aui, are, to flee away.
                  
                     Abutor, abuſus ſum, abuti, to abuſe, to vſe a thynge: diſhoneſtely, vncomely, contrarye to that, that it ſerueth for, oute of order, or in vayne.
                  
                     Abuſiue, improprely, agaynſte Nature, or cuſtome.
                  
                     Abydena, trifles, thinges of ſmalle eſtimation, wanton toyes, thynges vnſeemely for menne to vſe.
                  
                     Abydeni, a people in Aſia, whyche hauynge their Cytie diſtreſſed with a longe Syege, felle into a furye, or madneſſe, and

ſlewe all their wiues, their chylderne, and afterwarde them ſelues.
                  
                     Abydos, the citie of the ſayd people.
                  
                     Abyla, a hylle in the occean See agaynſte Spayne, whiche is called oone of Hercules pylars.
                  
                     Auguſtinꝰ Ambroſiꝰ.
                     Abyſſus, is a depenes without bottom.
               
            
            
               
                  A ante C.
                  
                     AC, ſignifieth ſometyme, and. as Doctus ac iuſtus es, Thou arte kunnyng and iuſte. Sometyme it is taken for Than, as Haud ſecus ac iuſsi faciunt, They doo none otherwiſe than they be commanded. Sometyme it dothe ſignifie as, as Superbis perinde, ac ſi Rex eſſes, Thou arte as proude as if thou were a kynge.
                  
                     Acatia, is the iuyce of a fruite called ſiliqua. It maye be called alſo in Englande veriuyſe.
                  
                     Acadoemia, a vniuerſitie, whiche toke that name of a place nighe to Athenes, where Plato the great phyloſopher taught phyloſophye.
                  
                     Academici, were a ſecte of phyloſophers, whyche folowed and taughte the opynyons of Plato.
                  
                     Acanthis, idis, a byrde that feedeth on thyſtelles, and maketh her neſt with claye, and is called in englyſſhe, a Tytmuſſe. It was alſo a boye, whiche the poetes doo fayne was tranſformed into a floure of his name. It is alſo a buſhe, lyke a whyte thorne, with laſſe leaues, moſy, and pryckynge. Dioſcorides ſayth, that it is an herbe, that groweth in ſtony and moyſte grounde, and hath leaues broder and longer than letyſe, in forme lyke to rockette, ſomwhat blacke, and in broyſynge ſofte and fatty, hauynge a ſtalke of two cubytes high, of thyckeneſſe of a mans fynger, garnyſhed vnder the top with lyttell longe leaues and pryckynge, wherevnto groweth a whyte floure.
                  
                     Acapna, drye wodde that ſmoketh not.
                  
                     Acara, a towne in the myddelle of Hungarye.
                  
                     Acarnania, a parte of a royalme in Grece, named Epirus. It is alſo a lyttell countreye in Egypte: and it is a citie by Syracuſis in the royalme of Sycile.
                  
                     Acarpia, lacke of fruite.
                  
                     Acatalectos, a verſe, wherein one ſyllable lacketh.
                  
                     Acatium, the greatteſt ſayll in the ſhyppe.
                  
                     Accalaurentia, the name of her, that nouriſhed Romulus and Remus, the fyrſt builders of Rome.
                  
                     Accedo, acceſſi, dere, to goo to, or approche. Sommetyme it ſygnifyeth to gyue an eare or harken, to take hede, and to make moche of.
                  
                     Accelero, aui, are, to make haſte or ſpede.
                  
                     Accendo, di, dere, to kendle, inflame, prouoke, or gyue boldnes.
                  
                     Accenſi, were ſowldiours appoynted to be aboute great offycers for defence of their perſones. Feſtus ſaythe, that it were they, whiche after the dethe of ſouldiours were put in their places. Varro affirmeth, that they were miniſters redy at the commaundementes of principall offycers.
                  
                     Accentus, an accēt or tune, wherby a ſillable is pronounced.
                  
                     Accepſo, in the ſtede of acceperim, I haue taken.
                  
                     Acceptabula, all veſſayle or other thynge, that may receyue and kepe what ſoo euer ſhall be putte into it.
                  
                     Acceptilatio, an acceptaunce, a word of the lawe, whyche hapneth in this wyſe. One ſayth to an other, Art thou contented with that that I haue promyſed the? or that by my bargain I owe to the? The other ſaith, ye I am contented. This is Acceptilatio. Alſo wherin ſoo euer I haue bounden my ſelfe by receyuynge of any thynge, it maye be called Acceptilatio.
                  
                  
                     Acceptum, thankfull, pleaſant, allowable.
                  
                     Acceptum fero, to knowledge my ſelfe to haue receyued, that is not yet payde, alſo to take thankfully.
                  
                     Accerſo, ſiui, ſire, to call forth, or ſende for.
                  
                     Accerſo, ſere, tertiae coniugationis, to goo to calle, or fetche.
                  
                     Accidens, is an accident, whiche may be, or not be, without corruption of that, wherin it maye be.
                  
                     Accido, di, dere, to falle downe in doing reuerence.
                  
                     Accingo, cinxi, cingere, to gyrde, to prepare, to make redye to do ſome thyng.
                  
                     Accinctus, gyrte, redye, quycke in his buſyneſſe.
                  
                     Accio, iui, ire, to calle to.
                  
                     Accipio, coepi, cipere, to take, to here, to ſuppoſe, to knowe, to vnderſtande, to receiue, to intreate or entertayne.
                  
                     Accipiter, a hawke.
                  
                     Accliue, ſtepe bendynge.
                  
                     Acclino, aui, are, to enclyne or bende to.
                  
                     Accliuis, ſiue accliuius, ryſynge vpwarde to a ſmalle toppe.
                  
                     Accludo, to ſhutte to.
                  
                     Accola, the nexte inhabytant.
                  
                     Accola campi, He that dwellethe nexte to the fielde. Alſo he that commeth oute of one countreye, and dwelleth in an other.
                  
                     
                     Accolo, to dwell by or nyghe, ſpecially hilles or waters.
                  
                     Accōmodo, aui, are, to accommodate, appropre, to applye, make apte, ſet in order, gyue, or inclyne.
                  
                     
                        Acc
                              •
                           edo, didi, ere,
                      to giue credēce, to aſſent.
                  
                     Accreſco, creui, creſcere, to growe to.
                  
                     
                        Accubi
                              •
                           um,
                      a bedde or couche to lye on by daye tyme, as it was the maner of the olde Romaynes, to eate lyenge on their beddis.
                  
                     Accubicus, the lyenge in the ſaid maner.
                  
                     Accubo▪ accubui, bare, to lye by, or to ſytte, or lye downe to cate.
                  
                     Accumbo, cubui, bere, to lye downe, to lye by, to lie or ſytte downe at feaſtes and bankettes. Accūbere menſā, to ſyt at one table.
                  
                     Accumulo, aui, are, to accumulate or gather in heapes, to increaſe.
                  
                     
                        A
                              ••
                           uro, aui, are,
                      to take good hede.
                  
                     
                        Accu
                              •
                           a
                              •
                           us, ta, tum,
                      wherin is moche dylygence, curtouſe.
                  
                     Accurate, diligently, curiouſely.
                  
                     
                        Accu
                              •••
                           o, 
                              〈◊〉
                           , 
                              •
                           ere▪
                        
                      to rūne to, to ſpede thither
                  
                     
                        Accuſato
                              •
                           ius, 
                              ••
                           a, tium,
                      whiche conteyneth an accuſation.
                  
                     Accuſo▪ aui, are, to accuſe.
                  
                     
                        Ac
                              •
                           dra,
                      ſiouthe, pen
                        •
                     yſenes, heuyneſſe of harte, weryneſſe.
                  
                     
                        Acc
                              ••••
                           , 
                              •••
                           tas 
                              •
                           um,
                      to be wery, or to waxe ſlouthefull.
                  
                     
                        A
                              •
                            et acentreta,
                      thynges wherof the paynt in the myddes is not knowen.
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            acere,
                      to be ſowre or ſharpe.
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           
                           ▪ 
                           
                              •
                           um,
                      without a heed.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                      a tree, the wodde wherof is moſte gentyll to worke in, and is named in englyſhe Dowgeon.
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           , et Aceracris, acre,
                      ſower as 
                        〈◊〉
                      ſommetyme it betokeneth ſtronge, ſometyme ſharpe. Acer inimi
                           •
                        us, a ſharpe ennemye. Alſo ſore, as Acres animaduerſores, ſoore punyſſhers.
                  
                     
                        Acredo, A
                              ••
                           tudo, Acritas,
                      ſharpeneſſe, or ſowerneſſe.
                  
                     Acriter, ſharpely, or ſowrely.
                  
                     
                        Acer, ace
                              ••
                           s,
                      chaffe of mylſede.
                  
                     Aceroſum frumentum, vnkleane wheate.
                  
                     Acerbitas, bytternes of taſte, ſharpenes of tyme, crueltie in man.
                  
                     Acerbo, baui, are, to trouble, to make bytter, or abhomynable.
                  
                     Acerbus, ba, bum, vnrype, bytter, difficult, or peynefulle, as, Robuſtorum iuuenum acerba mors, The dethe of yonge menne is peynefulle, as who ſaythe, they dye with greatte difficultie.
                  
                     Acerſecomes, He that neuer cuttethe his heare.
                  
                     Aceruatim, in heapes.
                  
                     Aceruo, aui, are, to gather into heapes.
                  
                     Aceruus, a heape or gatherynge togyther▪ ſpecially of grayne.
                  
                     Aceſco, ſci, ſcere, to waxe ſowre or tarte, ſpecially in lykour.
                  
                     Acetabulum, a kynde of veſſell, which may be called a charger, or a baſyn, and was a veſſell, wherin were thinges ſacrified.
                  
                     Acetare, to moue or ſtyrre.
                  
                     Acetarium, a ſalate of herbes. it is alſo a gardeyn, where ſalate herbes do growe.
                  
                     Acetum, vynegre.
                  
                     Achaei, people in Grecia. and ſomtyme they be taken for grekes generally.
                  
                     Achaeron, tis, is of poetes taken for a ryuer of helle.
                  
                     Achaia, a region in Grecia.
                  
                     Achareon, the mayne ſayle of a ſhyppe.
                  
                     Achates, was the name of the companyon or mynton of Aeneas the Troiane. It is alſo the name of a precious ſtoone founde in Sicile, which is in colour browne, and hath cerkles blacke and whyte.
                  
                     Achetae, greſſhoppers, which chirpe loude and pleaſantly.
                  
                     Achilleum, a ſponge, whiche is verye ſofte, and hath ſmalle holes.
                  
                     Aciaeris, a hatchet of braſſe, which amonge the paynyms was vſed in ſacrifice.
                  
                     Acicula, a pynne.
                  
                     Acidula, peares that be ſower.
                  
                     Acidus, da, dum, ſowre, or ſharpe.
                  
                     Acies, betokeneth the edge of a knyfe, or other weapon or toole. Alſo the front of an hoſte, at the ioynynge of battayle, more ouer that parte of the eie, whyche is called the ſyghte.
                  
                     Acinacis, a crooked ſworde that the Perſyans vſed.
                  
                     Acini, be lyttell kernels, whiche be in grapis, raiſons, pomegranates, & other beries.
                  
                     Accipenſer, or Aquipenſer, a kynde of ſyſhe whiche hathe the ſcales tourned towarde the hedde.
                  
                     Aclanes, he that neuer cryeth.
                  
                     Aclytes, a weapon vſed in the olde tyme.
                  
                     Aconitum, an herbe, wherin is mooſte feruent poyſon.
                  
                     Acontiae, certayne impreſſyons in the fyrmament lyke to fyrye dartes, whyche doo ſeeme to flie.
                  
                     Acopa, medicines to remedy weryneſſe.
                  
                     Acopis, a precious ſtone lyke a glaſſe, with ſmalle golden dropes, wherwith yf oyle be heate, and the body therwith anoynted, it diſſolueth all weryneſſe.
                  
                     Acor, ris, a tartenes lyke vnto vnripe wyne or pomegranates.
                  
                     Acquieſco, eui, eſcere, to leane, as to leane

my heed or arme vppon any thynge. Alſo it ſignifieth to aſſent to other mens ſayinges.
                  
                     Acquiro, ſiui, rere, to attayne a thynge that is ſought for.
                  
                     Acraton, pure wyne, wtout a lay, or vnmixte.
                  
                     Acredo, dinis, the ſharpnes that is in fruites, whiche be not rype.
                  
                     Acredula, the wodde larke.
                  
                     Acrimonia, tartnes, which biteth the tūge, and perceth the heed, as in the taſte of garlyke, oynions, and other lyke thynges. It ſignifieth ſometyme ſharpnes in ſpeking or mynde: ſometyme lyuelynes and quyckeneſſe of wytte.
                  
                     Acrochordones, a kind of wertes, as great as beanes, ſo ſmall at the rootes, that they do ſeme to hange by a ſynewe.
                  
                     Acroma, a ſubtyll ſentence or leſſon, requiringe moche ſtudy and ſerche. it is alſo taken for all thynges to be recited or doone, to delyte the audience.
                  
                     Acta, water bākis, or which mē do cal ſtrō
                     des, wheron the ſee floweth. Alſo it is that which we cal actꝭ, cōcerning mens lyues or priuate buſynes put in writing. alſo ſuch dedes as haue hapned out of iugement. Acri
                        
                           •
                        ata be thoſe, whiche haue hapned in iugement, proprely they, which be in doyng.
                  
                     Acreon, the name of a mā, whom Diana, bicauſe he did ſe her nakid, turnid īto an hart, & ſo was he torne & ſlain of his own hoūdis.
                  
                     Actio, onis, betokenith ſomtime pronunciation, ſometime an oration writen, ſometime an action in the lawe, ſometyme an hyſtorie, ſometyme a defence, otherwhyle a recompence in wordes for benefite receiued, as gratiarum actio, for thankes. generally it is taken for act or dede in euery thyng.
                  
                     Actioſus, buſye.
                  
                     Actito, aui, are, to practiſe, ſpecially in ciuile cauſes.
                  
                     Actor, whiche bothe the dede. Alſo in the lawe the plaintife, complaynant, or demandaunt. Alſo a player of enterludes. Alſo a mannes factour or baylyffe, that hathe the charge of his buſyneſſe.
                  
                     Actualia nomina, names, which do procede of acte, as Rex, a regendo, of gouernynge, Dux a ducendo, of leadynge.
                  
                     Actuarius, ria, rium, actiue.
                  
                     Actuarius, a ſubſtantiue, ſignifieth a notary or ſcribe, or any other that writeth ſpedily. Alſo it betokenith a kynde of ſhippes, whiche be callid barkis.
                  
                     Actum eſt, it is loſte.
                  
                     Actuoſus, full of actes.
                  
                     Actus, ta, tū, performed, alſo arryued, thruſt in, brought to, or feared.
                  
                     Actus, tus, a dede, the partes of a comedie or play, a dayes warke in tyllage.
                  
                     Actutum, anon, without tarienge.
                  
                     Aculeus, a prycke or ſlynge.
                  
                     Acumen, the ſharpnes of euery thing. it ſignifieth alſo clerenes of witte.
                  
                     Acumino, aui, are, to ſharpen.
                  
                     Acinicula, a ſmalle nedell.
                  
                     Acuo, ui, ere, to make ſharpe, as a knyfe, or other thinge lyke. ſomtyme it betokenethe to teache, otherwhile to ſteere.
                  
                     Acupictores, imbrowderers.
                  
                     Acus, ci, a fiſhe called a banſtikle or bāning.
                  
                     Acus, aceris, chaffe.
                  
                     Acus, acus, a nedell, alſo chaffe of corne, alſo an order in battayle.
                  
                     Acutus, ta, tum, ſharpe, but in voyce it betokeneth high and ſmall, as a treble.
               
            
            
               
                  A, ante D.
                  
                     AD, by hym ſelfe, or ioyned to an other word, ſignifieth to, or at, as Vado ad oppidum, I go to the towne. Erat ad ripam fluminis ingens arbor, There was at the ryuers iyde a great tree. Some tyme it ſignifieth agaynſt, as, Ad illum mihi pugna eſt, Againſt him is my warre. Sometyme it betokeneth in comparyſon, ſometime cauſe, as, Ad quid hoc feciſti? For what cauſe, or wherto diddeſt thou this? Sometime about, as Ad duo millia hominū occiſa ſunt, There be ſlayne aboute two thouſand men. Alſo after, as, Ad haec, After this.
                  
                     Ad annum, durynge a hole yere.
                  
                     Ad diem, at the day appoynted.
                  
                     Ad tempus, for a whyle.
                  
                     Ad exemplum, to the example or lykenes.
                  
                     Ad extremum, fynally at the laſte.
                  
                     Ad pedes defilio, I light on my fete.
                  
                     Ad rem facit, it maketh for the matter, or is conuenient.
                  
                     Ad rem pertinet, it belongeth to the pourpoſe.
                  
                     Ad uerbum, worde by worde.
                  
                     Ad unum, vnto the laſte.
                  
                     Adaeque, ſemblably, ſo moche: as, Adaeque miſer, ſo moche a wretche.
                  
                     Adagia, an olde wife, whiche late hadde a chylde.
                  
                     Adagium, a prouerbe, or as I mought ſay. an olde ſayde ſawe.
                  
                     Adamas, adamantis, a precious ſtone, called a dyamant.
                  
                     Adamo, aui, are, to loue very well.
                  
                     Adamuſsim, by rule, ſtreight as a lyne.
                  
                     Adapto, aui, are, to ioyne to.
                  
                     Adaquo, aui, are, to water horſe or cattell.
                  
                     Adarea, a frothe or fome growyng on reedes in the fennes.
                  
                     
                     Ad calendas graecas, ſignifieth Neuer. For the olde grekes had no calendes.
                  
                     Addico, xi, dicere, to ſaye, to iudge, to appoynte, or depute.
                  
                     Addictus, he that is iudged, appoynted, or deputed.
                  
                     Addictus, ta, tum, openly ſolde. Alſo Addicere was whan the iuge in the old tyme delyuered the dettour to his credytours, to do with hym what they lyſted.
                  
                     Addiſco, didici, diſcere, to lerne wel, or adde to in lernynge.
                  
                     Additus, ta, tum, added or put to.
                  
                     Addo, didi, dere, to adde, ioyne, or put to.
                  
                     
                        Add
                              ••••
                           , 
                              •
                           m, cere,
                      to lerne.
                  
                     
                        Add
                              ••
                           mio, miui, 
                              •
                           e,
                      to ſlepe.
                  
                     
                        Add
                              •••
                           , xi, cere,
                      to bryng to, or bring forth, ſometyme to drawe or plucke togither.
                  
                     A
                           ••••
                        tations, a frownyng forcheed. ſomtyme 
                        ••
                     ducere is to ertende or thruſt out.
                  
                     
                        Ad
                              •••
                           , di, 
                              •
                           e
                              •
                           e,
                      to deuoure.
                  
                     
                        Ade
                              •••
                           ,
                      ſo moch, moreouer, ſurely, without doubte. Somtyme it ſignifieth euen, as Ture
                           ••
                         
                        
                           •
                        o eras audies uerba, Thou thy ſelf 
                        〈…〉
                      ſhalte here his wordes.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈…〉
                        , to go to, to demaunde, to attempte, to make aſſaulte.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        , the fatte of all thynge.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        , opteyned gotten, or founden.
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           , ta
                              •
                           i, ta
                              •
                           e,
                      to dwelle by.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        , moreouer.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        , to cleane faſte, to ſette ſure, to 
                        〈◊〉
                      to.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        , to blowe or to breathe on a thyng.
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           , aui, are,
                      to bynde to, or tye, or 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           , ui, bere,
                      to put to, to haue by me.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                      thermore.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        , at tyme appoynted.
                  
                     
                        Ad
                              •••
                           ,
                      yet, hitherto.
                  
                     
                        Ad
                              •••
                           , 
                              〈◊〉
                           , cere,
                      to lye by.
                  
                     
                        Adid
                              ••
                           ,
                      ſhort battes of a cubyte longe and an halfe, hauynge pikes of yron in theym, and were tyed to a lyne, that whanne they were throwen, he that did caſt thē, mought plucke them agayn vnto him, hurlebattes.
                  
                     Adigo, egi, adigere, to procure or ſtyre, to bynd by othe, or promyſe, to bryng or dryue to, to faſten or ioyne to.
                  
                     Adirciales, feaſtes that pryeſtes made in the olde tyme.
                  
                     Adiicio, ieci, iicere, to caſte to, to adde or putte to, or increaſe.
                  
                     Adiicere oculum, to loke on, or conſyder.
                  
                     Adimo, emi, ere, to take away, or diminiſhe.
                  
                     
                        Adineo, iniui, i
                              •
                           e,
                      to put in.
                  
                     Adinſtar, lyke to.
                  
                     Adipales, feaſtes that prieſtes were wonte to make.
                  
                     Adipatus, ta, tum, larded, baſted.
                  
                     Adipiſcoi, adeptus ſum, to gette or optain: ioynid with a ꝑſon it ſignifieth to ouertake.
                  
                     Aditio, tionis, an acceſſe, or repaire.
                  
                     Adito, taui, tare, to go to.
                  
                     Aditus, tus, acceſſe, commyng to, or entrie.
                  
                     Adiudico, aui, are, to adinge.
                  
                     Adiugo, aui, are, to yoke or ioyne to.
                  
                     Adiungo, xi, ere, to ioyne to, to applye.
                  
                     Adiuro, aui, are, to denye with an othe, to coniure.
                  
                     Adiuto, aui, are, to helpe often.
                  
                     Adiuuo, aui, are, to helpe.
                  
                     Adiutorium, helpe.
                  
                     Adiumentum, helpe.
                  
                     Adlimina, a porter, whiche dothe kepe the vtter gate.
                  
                     Ad liquidum, clerely, euidently, playnly.
                  
                     Admando, aui, are, to ſende to, to delyuer any thynge to one to bringe to an other.
                  
                     Admanus, at hande, redy.
                  
                     Adminiculor, aris, et Adminiculo, are, to ayde, to ſuccour.
                  
                     Adminiculum, ayde, ſupportation.
                  
                     Admiratio, a wonderynge.
                  
                     Admiror, raris, ratus ſum, rari, to wonder.
                  
                     Admiſſarius equus, a ſtalyon horſe.
                  
                     Admiſsionales, vſhers of the chambre.
                  
                     Admiſſura, the acte or tyme whan beaſtes doth their kinde in generation. Seaſoning.
                  
                     Admitto, miſi, mittere, to admitte, to put to, to brynge in, to ſuffre, to ſuſteyne, or take.
                  
                     Admodū, very moche, ſomwhat, reſonably.
                  
                     Admodum, as it were.
                  
                     Admolior, iris, molitus ſum, liri, to putte or adde to.
                  
                     Admoneo, nui, êre, to warne, to exhorte.
                  
                     Admordeo, momordi, dêre, to byte ſoore.
                  
                     Admoueo, ui, êre, to moue to, or put to.
                  
                     Adoleo, leui, lui, êre, adultum, to begynne to grow, to do ſacrifice with incenſe, or other fumes, to burne ſwete thynges.
                  
                     Adoleſcentia, is the aege betwene chyldehode and mannes age, whiche is betwene xiiii. and .xxi.
                  
                     Adoleſcentior, aris, atus ſum, to be wanton, or full of youthe.
                  
                     Adoleſcenturio, iui, ire, to playe the boye.
                  
                     Adonia, feſtiual dayes, which were kept in the honor of Adonis, the derling of Venꝰ.
                  
                     Adonis, the name of a chylde, whiche was ſonne of Cynare, kyng of Cypres, whome Venus had for her derlynge, whiche was ſlayn with a bore, whom the poetes fained, that Venus turned into a purple floure.
                  
                     Adonidis horti, gardeyns for a lyttell tyme pleaſant, whiche ſhortely decayen.
                  
                     Adoptio, an election of an heyre out of the cours of inheritance, as by wyll or gyfte.
                  
                     
                     Adoptitius, he that is adopted or taken in the ſtede of a ſonne.
                  
                     Adoptiuus, the ſon of him that is adopted.
                  
                     Adopto, aui, are, to elect or apoint an heire.
                  
                     Adoratio, reuerence due to god, or ſaintes. alſo an inwarde deuotion and affection to hym that reuerence is doone vnto: and is an expreſſe mocyon or acte of reuerence done with the body.
                  
                     Adorea, et adoreola, A prayſe that is giuen to them that haue victorie. Alſo a cake of fyne wheate, whiche they vſed in ſacrifice.
                  
                     Adoreum, ſede corne.
                  
                     Adordior, iris, adorſus ſum, riri, to ſpeake to, to beginne.
                  
                     Adorior, adortus ſum, to ſette on ſodaynly, to begynne. Adorior hunc, I ſette on him.
                  
                     Adoro, raui, are, to honour with inclination of the body, to beſcche.
                  
                     Ad plenum, perfectly, fully.
                  
                     Adprimus, chiefe of all.
                  
                     Adpulſus, Adpulſio, the dryfte of ſheepe to the water.
                  
                     Adrepo, pſi, ere, to crepe to.
                  
                     Adrumo, maui, to grudge or make rumor.
                  
                     Adruo, rui, ere, to turne the erth in tyllage.
                  
                     Adſcire, to ioyne or putte to.
                  
                     Adſum, fui, eſſe, I am here, er preſente, or at hande.
                  
                     Adſummam, in concluſion, finally.
                  
                     Adtempus, for a tyme.
                  
                     Adueho, uexi, uehere, to bring to or cary to.
                  
                     Aduena, a ſtraunger.
                  
                     Aduenio, ni, uenire, to come to.
                  
                     Aduentitia bona, goodes whiche doo come vnloked for.
                  
                     Aduentitius morbus, ſyckenes that cometh without our defaute, and of ſome menne is called an vncome.
                  
                     Aduentitius, He that commethe to a place by chaunce.
                  
                     Aduentito, aui, are, to come often to.
                  
                     Aduento, aui, are, to come nigh.
                  
                     Plautus in Muſtellaria.
                     Aduentores, commune reſorters, or haunters to a place.
                  
                     Aduerſarius, an aduerſarie.
                  
                     Aduerſitores, ſeruantes, whiche do fetche home their maiſters after dynar or ſupper.
                  
                     Aduerſor, ſatus ſum, ſari, to repugne or be contrarye, or to refuſe.
                  
                     Aduerſus, contrary, or agaynſt.
                  
                     Aduerto, ti, tere, to tourne to.
                  
                     Aduiuo, uixi, uiuere, to lyue yet.
                  
                     Adulor, atus ſum, lari, to flatter.
                  
                     Adulatio, flatterye.
                  
                     Adulter, adultera, a man or womā auoutrer.
                  
                     Adulterinae claues, counterfaite keys.
                  
                     Adulterinus, na, nū, counterfaite, or forged.
                  
                     Adultero, raui, rare, to coūterfaite or forge.
                  
                     Adulterium, auoutry.
                  
                     Adultus, ta, tum, full growen.
                  
                     Adumbro, aui, are, to make or giue ſhadow, to repreſente or expreſſe, as peynters doo, that do ſhadowe ymages in playne tables, to make them ſhewe imboced or rounde.
                  
                     Adunco, aui, are, to make croked.
                  
                     Aduncus, croked or hooked.
                  
                     Adunguem, to the perfection.
                  
                     Aduno, aui, are, to gather togyther.
                  
                     Adunum, eueryche one.
                  
                     Aduocatus, an aduocate.
                  
                     Aduoco, caui, care, to call to, or cal to help.
                  
                     Aduolo, ſaui, are, to flie to, or nygh a place.
                  
                     Aduotū, after myn, or thin, or his appetite.
                  
                     Aduſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , vntyll.
                  
                     Adytū, the chauncell or other ſecrete place of the temple, where none came but prieſtes, or perſones ſanctifyed.
               
            
            
               
                  Ae, ante D.
                  
                     AEdere ſpiritum, to yelde vp the goſt,Cicero ad Attic. to dye.
                  
                     Aedere facinus, to do an yll dede.
                  
                     Aedere ſtragem, to make a ſlaughter of mē.Tit. Liuiꝰ.
                  
                  
                     Aedere nonuna, to telle the names to be wrytten.
                  
                     Aedere librum, to ſette forth ſuch a boke.Cicero in V
                           ••
                        e.
                  
                  
                     Aedere ſcriptum, to ſhewe forth writing.
                  
                     Aedere praelium, to make battayle.
                  
                     Aedepol, an othe amonge gentyles, ſygnyfyenge by Pollux houſe.
                  
                     Aedes, a hous. and if there be ioyned thervnto the name of god or of a ſaynt, it ſygnifieth a churche, or temple. Aedes ſaluatoris, ſaynt Sauiours churche.
                  
                     Aedieula, an oratorie, or place, where images were kepte.
                  
                     Aedificiū, al the hole building of the hous.
                  
                     Aedifico, caui, care, to buylde.
                  
                     Aediles, officers, whoſe charge was to ſee to the kepynge vp and maynteynyng of tē
                     ples, and priuate houſes, and to make prouiſion for ſolemne playes.
                  
                     Aedilitas, litum, the office of the Aediles.
                  
                     Aedilitius, He that hadde ben ones in that authorytie.
                  
                     Aeditiuus the prelate of the temple.
                  
                     Aediticius, a Iudge or arbitratour choſen of the one parte.
                  
                     Aedituor, ari, to rule ouer the tēple or hous
                  
                     Aeditus, tâ, tum, hygh and ſtronge.
                  
                     Aedituus, the prelate of the temple or churche, and may be nowe called the perſone or paryſhe prieſte.
                  
                     Aedo, aedidi, tum, to ſet forthe or publyſhe. Alſo it ſignyfyeth to brynge forthe by generacyon.
               
            
            
               
               
                  Ae, ante G.
                  
                     AEger, gra, grum, ſycke.
                  
                     Aegipanes, beaſtes lyke to men, hauynge fete lyke to gotes.
                  
                     Aegre, greuouſely, or heuily.
                  
                     Aegrumonia, ſyckenes.
                  
                     Aegroto, aui, are, to be ſycke.
                  
                     Aegrotatio, ſyckeneſſe.
                  
                     Aegrotus, ta, tum, ſycke.
               
            
            
               
                  Ae, ante M,
                  
                     ¶Aemulor, emulatus ſum, aemulari, to enuie without malyce, or to folowe, or ſtudye to be lyke to an other.
                  
                     Aemulus, he that foloweth or enuieth another, onely for deſyre of glorie.
               
            
            
               
                  Ae ante N.
                  
                     ¶Aenatores, blowers in trumpettes.
                  
                     Aeneus, aenea, aeneum, braſon.
                  
                     Aenigma, tis, a derke queſtion, harde to be vnderſtanded.
                  
                     Aenigmatiſtes, he that pourpoſeth harde queſtions.
                  
                     Aenum, a cawdron.
               
            
            
               
                  Ae, ante Q.
                  
                     ¶Aequabilis, equall.
                  
                     Aequabilitas uitae, wherin is no varietie or 
                        •••
                     ble.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        , of one age.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        , equall, playne, lyke, of lyke age.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        , lyke wyſe.
                  
                     Aequamentum, indifferencie.
                  
                     Aequaminis, he that is neyther extolled with ꝓſperitie, nor diſcōforted in aduerſite.
                  
                     
                        Ae
                              •
                           ua
                              •
                           mitas,
                      takyng in good parte.
                  
                     
                        Aequa
                              •
                           mite
                              •
                           ,
                      moderatly, paciētly, coldly.
                  
                     
                        Aeque
                              •
                           uſtly,
                      or as well.
                  
                     Aequabonique facio, I take in good parte, I ſeeke not, or care not.
                  
                     
                        Aequid
                              •
                           ale,
                      the tyme whan the dayes and the nightes be of one length.
                  
                     Aequilibrium, of euen weight or poyſe.
                  
                     Aequimanus he that vſeth the one hand as well as the other.
                  
                     Aequinoctium, the tyme of the yere, whan the day is as longe as the night, whyche is twiſe in the yere. In ſpryng time about the viii, Calendes of Aprile: And in Autumne aboute the .viii. calendes of October.
                  
                     Aequinoctiale, the adiectiue of aequinoctiū.
                  
                  
                     Aequiparo, aui, are, to cōpare or make equal
                  
                     Aequipolleo, ui, ere, to haue lyke power, or be of lyke eſtimation.
                  
                     Aequitas, equitie, iuſtyce, or enennes.
                  
                     Aequiualco, ui, ere, to be equiualente, or of lyke valour.
                  
                     Aequiuocum, one worde hauynge dyuers ſygnifycations.
                  
                     Aequo, aui, are, to make euen or playne.
                  
                     Aequor, the ſee, ſomtyme other waters.
                  
                     Aequus, euen or playne.
               
            
            
               
                  Ae, ante R.
                  
                     ¶Aer, the ayre ſommetyme wynde, blaſte, breathe, or ſounde.
                  
                     Aera, rae, money numbred.
                  
                     Aerarii milites, ſowldiours waged.
                  
                     Aerarium, a treſory, where treſure is kept.
                  
                     Aere diruti milites, ſowdiours, whiche for ſome defaute were put out of wages.
                  
                     Aeripes, whiche is as ſwyfte as the wynd.
                  
                     Aerius, of the ayre or lyke to the ayre.
                  
                     Aeratus, myxte with copper.
                  
                     Aerugo, ginis, ruſt or canker in mettal, ſpecially in copper or ſyluer.
                  
                     Aeruginoſus, ruſtye, or cankred.
                  
                     Aerumna, labour paynfull, care of minde, with heuynes, infelicitie.
                  
                     Aeruſcate, to gette money by falſehode.
               
            
            
               
                  Ae, ante S.
                  
                     ¶Aes, aeris, is proprely copper or braſſe. It is oftentymes taken for money, ſometyme for trumpettes.
                  
                     Aes noſtrum, Moneye that other menne do owe vnto vs.
                  
                     Aes alienum, money that we doo owe to other men.
                  
                     Aes ſuum, money that other men doo owe vnto hym, whom we ſpeake of.
                  
                     Aes ductile, mettal that wol be ſone moltē.
                  
                     Aeſculum, an oke that beareth maſte.
                  
                     Aeſtas, Sommer.
                  
                     Aeſtimabile, that whiche may be valewed.
                  
                     Aeſtimatio, a peyne ſette.
                  
                     Aeſtimo, aui, are, to eſteme, to value.
                  
                     Aeſtiua, places to be in for ſhadowe in the ſommer tyme.
                  
                     Aſtiuo, aui, are, to dwelle or be in a ſommer place.
                  
                     Aeſtuaria, places whervnto the ſee floweth and ebbith, or meres, filled with ſalt water.
                  
                     Aeſtuo, aui, are, to waxe hotte, to bourne, to flowe lyke the ſee.
                  
                     Aeſtuoſus, hote, or feruente.
                  
                     Aeſtus, tus, tui, heate of the wether, or burnynge of the ſunne. Alſo the vyolence or troublous motion of the ſee.
               
            
            
               
                  Ae, ante T.
                  
                     ¶Aetas, age.
                  
                     Aetate, an aduerbe, ſignifieth long tyme.
                  
                     Aeternus, euerlaſtynge.
                  
                     Aether, the fyrmament.
                  
                     Aethera, rae, the ayre.
                  
                     
                     Aethra, ſygnifieth the ſame.
               
            
            
               
                  Ae, ante V.
                  
                     ¶Aeuum, longe or euerlaſtyng tyme.
               
            
            
               
                  A ante F.
                  
                     
                        AFer, or Apher,
                      a man born in Affrike.
                  
                     Affabilis, a mā eaſy to be ſpokē vnto.
                  
                     Affabilitas, gentylnes in heryng.
                  
                     Affabre, counnyngly, craftily.
                  
                     Affabrum, counnyngly or craftily wrought
                  
                     Affaniae, tryfles.
                  
                     Affatim, abundantly.
                  
                     Affecto, aui, re, to ſeke affectualli, to trouble whan it is put with damno, or other lyke.
                  
                     Affectata oratio, a curyouſe fourme of ſpeakynge.
                  
                     Affectatio, curyoſitie.
                  
                     Affectate, curyouſely.
                  
                     Affectus, ta, tum, troubled or vexed.
                  
                     Affectus, tus, tui, et affectio, affection or naturall motion, as gladneſſe, deſyre, and ſuche lyke.
                  
                     Affero, fers, attuli, afferre, to brynge to.
                  
                     Afficio, eci, ere, to moue affection or diſpoſition, either to good or to yll.
                  
                     Afficit me gaudio, It maketh me gladde.
                  
                     Afficit me dolore, It maketh me ſory.
                  
                     Affecit cum laetali uulnere, he gaue to hym his deathes wounde.
                  
                     Affigo, gere, to nayle to, or faſten.
                  
                     Affines, in fieldes betokeneth adioynyng: In men it betokeneth alyance by mariage.
                  
                     Affirmo, aui, are, to affirme.
                  
                     Affirmatio, affyrmaunce.
                  
                     Affligo, flixi, gere, to punyſhe.
                  
                     Afflictatio, punyſhement of the body with ſyckeneſſe.
                  
                     Afflare, to blowe wynde.
                  
                     Affluo, fluxi, fluere, to ouerflow or abunde.
                  
                     Affore, to be preſente.
                  
                     Affrica, The thyrde parte of the worlde, wherin is Carthage, Numidia, and all the countreys nowe called Barbarye.
                  
                     Affricanus, a man of Affrike. Alſo the moſt noble capitayne Scipio, was called Affricanus, bycauſe he ſubdewed that countrey to the Romaynes.
                  
                     Affrico, cas, caui, uel affrixi, to rubbe.
                  
                     A fronte at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         à tergo, A prouerbe ſignifieng the conferrynge of thynges paſſed, with the ſtate of thinges preſent.
               
            
            
               
                  A ante G.
                  
                     AGamēnon, was the generall Capytayne of the grekes, atte the ſyege of Troye.
                  
                     Agamneſtor, was kynge of Athenes.
                  
                     Age, Go to.
                  
                     Agedum, go to yet.
                  
                     Agellus, a lyttell ſyelde.
                  
                     Ager, agri, a fielde. Somtyme a territorie belongynge to a towne, wherin is includid fieldes, medowes, woddes, and waters. Sommetime a manour with the demeanes. ſometyme the arable felde onely.
                  
                     Agger, eris, a heape of ſtones or turfe. alſo a bulworke, or a countremure to a fortreſſe or campe in battayle. ſometyme it ſygnyfieth a caulſey.
                  
                     Aggero, aui, are, to heape vppe.
                  
                     Agglomero, to make vppe on heape, by addynge to.
                  
                     Agglutino, naui, nare, to ioyne togyther.
                  
                     Aggrauo, aui, are, to be bourdenouſe or chargeable.
                  
                     Aggredior, gredi, to goo to, or come to, to inuade, to begynne, to attempt.
                  
                     Aggrego, aui, are, to gather to gyther.
                  
                     Agilis, nymble, or lyght.
                  
                     Agilitas, nymblenes, dexteritie.
                  
                     Agina, wherin the beame of a payre of balance is hanged.
                  
                     Aginator, he that is meuid with a litle gain.
                  
                     Agiographa, bokes of holy ſcripture.
                  
                     Agito, tare, to do often, to pryck, to cōpell, to trouble, to perſecute, to vexe, to conſyder, to reuolue, to ſolycite.
                  
                     Agmen, an hooſte of men.
                  
                     Agnati, kynsmen of the fathers ſyde.
                  
                     Agnatum, that whyche is in byrthe more than nede requireth.
                  
                     Agnomen, the ſurname that I haue by my father.
                  
                     Agnoſco, noui, noſcere, to knowe.
                  
                     Agnus, a lambe.
                  
                     Ago, egi, agere, to do, to leade, to dryue, to labour, to here, to ſpeake, to pronounce, to fayne, to goo. Nudi agunt, They go naked. I extende or ſprede. Radices agunt,
                     Pom. Mel. They ſprede their rootes. I treate of a thynge, I gyue. Ago gratias, I gyue thankes. I brynge forthe, alſo to expell. Venena membris agit, It expellethe poyſon oute of the membres.
                  
                     Agolū, a ſtaffe to dryue cattell with.
                  
                     Agonia, fere & heuines, or vexatiō of mynd.
                  
                     Agoniſma, the rewarde of victorie.
                  
                     Agoniſta, a champyon.
                  
                     Agonizo, aui, are, I contende, or fyghte valyantlye.
                  
                     Agonotheta, he that makethe a commune game, and payethe the rewarde to theym that do wynne it.
                  
                     Agaranomus, he that ſetteth the pryce of vyttayle, a talker.
                  
                     Agoraeus, a markette manne, a haunter of markettes.
                  
                     
                     Agrarius a landed man. Alſo he that fauoreth the lawes, whiche be made for the orderynge of poſſeſſions.
                  
                     Agrarius, ria, rium, pertaynynge to landes or poſſeſſions.
                  
                     Agrerus, a greſte, wylde growen, withoute culture. Alſo he that is rude and beaſtlye, without gentyll maners.
                  
                     Agricola, a huſbande manne.
                  
                     Agricolator, the ſame.
                  
                     Aggripetae, they that do aſke their portion in diuiſion of landes.
                  
                     Agrippae, they whiche be borne with their feete forewarde.
               
            
            
               
                  A ante H.
                  
                     AHenum, a porte to heate in drynke.
                  
                     Ahenus, a veſſelle of whyte braſſe or copper, whyche is bryghte bothe within and without.
               
            
            
               
                  A, ante I.
                  
                     ¶Aio, ais, ait, I ſaye, thou ſayeſt, he ſayth.
               
            
            
               
                  A, ante L.
                  
                     ALa, a wynge of a byrde, and a wyng of a battayle, whyche is proprelye of horſemenne.
                  
                     
                        A
                              •
                           er▪ et alactis, alacre,
                      quycke of ſpirite, 
                        〈◊〉
                      wytte, luſty of courage, mery, and he that lyueth in hope: proprely he that is in a meane betwene glad and ſorte. Somtime it betokeneth a man redy and willing, therof commeth Alacritas, redynes or promptnes of wyll. alſo feruentnes of mynde.
                  
                     
                        Al
                              •
                           tas▪ ta▪ tum,
                      wynged.
                  
                     Alaeda, a larke.
                  
                     Albanum, the parget of a wall.
                  
                     Albedo, albeuido, albor, whytenes.
                  
                     
                        Albeo, ba
                              •
                           , b
                              •
                           re,
                      to be whyte.
                  
                     Albeus, et albeolus, a cheſſebourde.
                  
                     Albieo, aui, are, to be whyte.
                  
                     Albidus, a, um, ſomewhat whyte.
                  
                     Albo, aui, are, to make whyte.
                  
                     Albugo, gitus, a whyte ſpotte in the eyen. alſo the whyte of an egge.
                  
                     Album, a table openly ſette vp, wherin eyther the names of officers, or ſome publike decree is wrytten.
                  
                     Albumen, albuminis, the whyte of an egge.
                  
                     Albumum, the fatte that is in ſome tree.
                  
                     Albus, ba, bum, whyte.
                  
                     Alcedmes, et Alcyones, are byrdes of the ſee, whiche do hatche their yong chykens on the lande, and do lay their egges on the ſandes, in myddes of the wynter, and whā the ſee is mooſte troublous, if they do lay, it becommeth ſodaynly calme, and the ſtormes and wyndes do ceaſſe, vntyl theſe birdes haue all hatched, and brought vp theyr chykens, and made them redy to flee: whiche is in the ſpace of .xiiii. days. This birde is lyttell more than a ſparowe, his fethers be purple of colour, myxt with whyte, and hath a longe necke and a ſmal, his byl ſomwhat grene, longe, and ſclender, and this byrde is ſene very ſeldome.
                  
                     Alea, a dye, playinge at dyes. ſomtyme it ſignifieth chance. Alea fortunae, The chance of fortune. ſomtyme peryll.
                  
                     Aleator, a dyſar.
                  
                     Alecula, a ſprotte.
                  
                     Ales, alitis, a byrde, ſometyme it ſignifyeth ſwyfte in fleing, or runnyng: as Alite planta, ſwyfte of foote.
                  
                     Alexicacon, a remedy to putte away myſchiefe, or any yll thyng.
                  
                     Alexipharmacum, the generall name of medicines, whiche do expell ſyckenes.
                  
                     Alga, reyte, or wedes of the ſee.
                  
                     Algeo, alſi, algére, to be in peyne, proprely for colde, to chyll for colde.
                  
                     Algor, grefe, ſometime it ſignifieth colde.
                  
                     Alias, an aduerbe, ſygnifieth, or els, elles where, an other tyme, ſometyme.
                  
                     Alias res agis, Thou takeſt no heede what is ſpoken.
                  
                     Alibi, els where.
                  
                     Alica, a drynke made of wheate brayed in a ſtone morter, the huſkes of the wheate beinge taken cleane away.
                  
                     Alicubi, ſomewhere, aliubi.
                  
                  
                     Alicunde, from ſome place.
                  
                     Alienigena, a ſtraunger borne.
                  
                     Aliemgenus, na, num, that whiche comethe out of an other countrey.
                  
                     Alieno, naui, nare, to alienate, to putte away, or putte of.
                  
                     Abalieno, are, to ſeparate, to put a ſonder.
                  
                     Alienus, na, nū, diuers, vnlyke, not agreable.
                  
                     Aliger, any thynge that hath wynges.
                  
                     Alimentum, alimonia, ſuſtynaunce, fode, or lyuynge.
                  
                     Alioqui, or els, excepte that.
                  
                     Aliorſum, to ſome other place.
                  
                     Alipedes, ſwyfte runnynge horſes.
                  
                     Aliptes, he that anoynteth a man, and a ſurgion that healeth woundes.
                  
                     Aliqua, by ſome place.
                  
                     Aliquando, ſometyme.
                  
                     Aliquantiſper, a lyttell whyle.
                  
                     Aliquantum, aliquantulum, ſomewhat.
                  
                     Aliquatenus, in ſome parte, by ſome reaſon.
                  
                     Aliquid, ſome thynge.
                  
                     Aliquis, ſome man. Aliquis eſt, He is a man of no ſmall eſtimation.
                  
                     Aliquò, to ſome place.
                  
                     Aliquorſum, towarde ſome place.
                  
                     Aliquot, ſome, nor many, nor fewe.
                  
                     
                     Aliquoties, at ſometymes.
                  
                     Aliter, or els, contrary wiſe.
                  
                     Aliunde, from an other place.
                  
                     Alius, alia, aliud, other, or an other.
                  
                     Allabor, labi, to flow by, ſayl by, or rowe by
                  
                     Allatus, brought.
                  
                     Allecto, aui, are, to allure or drawe to, by fayrenes, to allure.
                  
                     Allectus, allured.
                  
                     Allego, lexi, gere, to aſcrybe, to cheeſe, to aſſygne.
                  
                     Allego, aui, are, to ſende, to allege, or bring forthe, to depute, or gyue auctoritie.
                  
                     Allegoria, a figure or inuerſion of wordes, where it is in wordes one, and an other in ſentence or meanynge.
                  
                     Alleluya, prayſe ye our lorde.
                  
                     Alleuo, aui, are, to lyfte vp.
                  
                     Allex, & allux, the greatte toe, whanne he lyeth ouer the nexte toe.
                  
                     Alliatum, a ſauce made with garlyke.
                  
                     Allicifacio, feci, re, to allure, to drawe to.
                  
                     Allicio, exi, licere, to allure.
                  
                     Allido, ſi, ere, to ſquatte or throw any thing agaynſt the grounde or walles.
                  
                     Alligo, aui, are, to bynde to.
                  
                     Allium, garlyke.
                  
                     Allophylos, a ſtraunger.
                  
                     Alloquor, to ſpeake to.
                  
                     Allubeſco, to doo it gladdely, to obeye, to fauour, to conſente.
                  
                     Allucinatio, a blyndenes of mynde.
                  
                     Allucinor, to be deceyued in opynyon, to fantaſye.
                  
                     Alludo, alluſi, alludere, to doo a thynge in iape, to ſpeake merily, or conſent. ſomtyme it ſygnifieth to ſpeake ſome thynge, which ſecretely hath ſome other vnderſtandyng.
                  
                     Alludere ad hyſtoriam, to ſpeke or do ſome thynge agreable with ſomme hyſtorie before wrytten.
                  
                     Alluo, lui, ere, to flowe nigh to, to waſhe as the water dothe the grounde, whan it floweth ouer it.
                  
                     Allunium, a floode cauſed by rayne, or by ryuers whan they riſe.
                  
                     Alluuies is whan abundance of water mixt with claye, couereth the grounde.
                  
                     Almus, ma, mum, al thinge that noryſheth vs, properly the erth is ſo called, Alma tellus, bycauſe we haue therof our ſuſtinance. Sometyme it ſignifieth quiete, Almus dies, A quiete day. in Virgile.
                  
                     Alma, a virgin hydde, or ſecrete.
                  
                     Alnus, an alder tree. Somtyme it ſignifyeth a ſhyppe or bote.
                  
                     Alo, alui, alere, to nouryſhe or fede.
                  
                     A longe, farre of.
                  
                     Alopecia, a ſyckenes of the heed, whereby the heares do falle of.
                  
                     Alpes, the mountaynes, whiche do depart nowe Italy and Fraunce.
                  
                     Altare, an altar.
                  
                     Alter, rius, teri, an other, the other, one of the two.
                  
                     Alius, an other, the other. Alter, the other, the ſeconde. Sometyme it ſygnifieth both. Vnus aut alter, one or bothe. Vnus et alter, The one and the other.
                  
                     Alter, teris, ſiue alteres, teris, poyſes of lead, made to lyfte vp with bothe handes, to exercyſe men, whyche may not otherwyſe labour: wherof there be now many in England, ſpecially in the chambres of ſtud
                        •
                     tes.
                  
                     Altercor, caris, to contende with wordes one with an other on ſondry partes.
                  
                     Alternatim, by tourne, one at one tyme, an other at an other tyme.
                  
                     Alternis, nowe one, nowe an other.
                  
                     Alternis diebus, ſondrye dayes, where one day is betwene.
                  
                     Alternare, to do thynges by tourne, nowe one and than an other.
                  
                     Alternatio, ſucceſſion by tourne.
                  
                     Altero, aui, are, to alter or chaunge.
                  
                     Alteruter, bothe the one and the other. alſo or the tone or the tother.
                  
                     Althaea, the great malowes.
                  
                     Altilis, in plurali, altilia, all thynge that is franked to make fatte, be it beaſte, fyſhe, or foule. Altilis gallina, a henne franked or fed
                  
                     Altiſonus, he that maketh noyſe frō aboue,
                  
                     Altitonans, he that thoundereth, whiche name the paynyms gaue to their god Iupyter.
                  
                     Altiuolans, all thyng that flyeth hygh.
                  
                     Altrinſecus, to the tone or the tother,Apuleius. to the tone parte, betwene the one and the other, in the higher parte.
                  
                     Altus, ta, tū, high, depe, proprely in the ſee.Vergilius. it ſygnifieth alſo excellent, glorious, anciēt.
                  
                     Aluearium, et Alueare, a place where hiues be ſette. alſo a ſtocke of hyues.
                  
                     Alueolum, et alueolus, a baſket or mawnde, alſo a culuerhole, a cheſſebourde, or tables to playe on.
                  
                     Alueus et aluus, a hyue for bees, a veſſaile to waſhe in, the bealy of any thing that lacketh lyfe. ſometyme it ſignifieth a ſhyppe.
                  
                     Aluini, they whiche be moche vexed with freattynges in the bealy.
                  
                     Alumen, alumme.
                  
                     Alumnari, to nourſe or brynge vp.
                  
                     Alumnus, a ſonne or ſcolar that is brought vp of a man, as of his owne father, eyther with ſuſtinance, maners, or lernynge.
                  
                     Aluta, lether properly tawed. ſomtime it is put for a bagge or a pourſe.
                  
                     
                     Alutamen, any thynge made of lether.
                  
                     Alutarius, a tawyer.
                  
                     Aluus, the bealy. alſo a hyue.
               
            
            
               
                  A, ante M.
                  
                     AMabilis, bile, amyable, worthye to be loued.
                  
                     Amabo, of felowſhip, a good felowſhyp, a familiar word vſed among frendes.
                  
                     Amabundus, he that is a great louer, or amorous.
                  
                     Amando, aui, are, to countremaunde.
                  
                     Amans, amanus, a louer be it man or womā.
                  
                     
                        Amante
                              •
                           ,
                      louyngely.
                  
                     Amanuenſis, a clerke or ſecretarye, alway attendynge.
                  
                     
                        Ama
                              •
                           acus,
                      maioram.
                  
                     Amo, aui, are, to loue hartily.
                  
                     
                        Amareſco, ſci ſce
                              •
                           e,
                      to waxe bytter, or to be bytter.
                  
                     Amaritudo, dinis, bytterneſſe.
                  
                     
                        Ama
                              ••
                           l
                              •
                           ntus,
                      vexed with malyce.
                  
                     Amaſius et Amaſia, he or ſhe that louethe, 
                        〈◊〉
                      loued.
                  
                     Ama
                           •
                        or, a louer, or he that is amorous.
                  
                     
                        Amato
                              •
                           culus,
                      a ſmall or ſymple louer.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        , lyke a louer.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        , a drynke charmed, to make a 
                        〈…〉
                     .
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        , ria, rium, that whyche per
                     
                        •
                     th to loue.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        , a ſeruaunte.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        , a cyrcuite of wordes, or a tale 
                        •
                     wen in length.
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           , ſa ſum,
                      that aboundeth in ſuche fourme of ſpeakynge.
                  
                     Ambidexter, he that vſeth bothe handes lyke welle.
                  
                     Ambigo, to compaſſe, alſo to doubte.
                  
                     Ambigue, doubtefully.
                  
                     Ambiguum, a doubte.
                  
                     Ambio, iui, ne, to compaſſe, to ſeke for promotion, to deſyre, to praye, or intreate.
                  
                     Ambitio, nis, inordynate deſyre of honour or auctoritie.
                  
                     Ambitioſus, he that immoderately deſyreth honour.
                  
                     Ambitus, ambitus, a cyrcute: alſo the offence of ambition, made by the lawes.
                  
                     Ambo, bothe.
                  
                     Ambroſia, was called of the Paynyms the meate of goddis. Some do ſaye, that it is an herbe of the kynde of Mugworte.
                  
                     Ambulacrum, a priuate place to walke in, a walke or galerie.
                  
                     Ambulatio, walkyng, and a walking place.
                  
                     Ambulator, a walker or ſtyrer.
                  
                     Ambulo, aui, are, to walke or ſtyrre aboute.
                  
                     Amburo, buſsi, rere, to bourne all about.
                  
                     Amens, madde.
                  
                     Amentum, a thonge, or that which is bounden to the myddes of a darte, or iauelyne, to caſte it.
                  
                     Ames, amitis, a perche for a hawke.
                  
                     Ametor, he that lacketh his mother.
                  
                     Amice, frendely.
                  
                     Amicinum, a canne or potte, wherout they powre wyne.
                  
                     Amicio, ciui, cire, to clothe, to putte on a garmente.
                  
                     Amicitia, amitie or frendſhyppe.
                  
                     Amictus, cta, ctum, cladde.
                  
                     Amictus, ctus, ctui, a garment or apparayle.
                  
                     Amicus er amica, a frende, a louer.
                  
                     Amicus, ca, cum, ioyned to a thyng, lacking lyfe, ſignifieth profitable, or holſome.
                  
                     Amita, my fathers ſyſter, myne aunte.
                  
                     Amitini, coſyn germayns by broder & ſiſter.
                  
                     Amitto, miſi, tere, to ſuffre to depart, to loſe to ſende, to lette paſſe, to take fro.
                  
                     Amnis, a ryuer, or brooke.
                  
                     Amodo, from hensforthe.
                  
                     Amaeno, naui, nare, to make mery, or glad.
                  
                     Amaenus, na, num, pleaſaunt or dilectable. Locus amaenus, A delectable place.
                  
                     Amaenum ingenium, a pleaſant wytte.
                  
                     Amaenitas, tatis, pleaſure, dilectableneſſe, or myrthe.
                  
                     Amolior, I remoue with great peyne.
                  
                     Admolior, I put to, or ſette vpon a thinge.
                  
                     Amor, loue.
                  
                     Amoueo, moui, mouère, to remoue, to put from a place or a thynge.
                  
                     Amphora, a meaſure, whiche euery waye contayneth a foote it may be vſed for euery potte that is caryed aboute.
                  
                     Amphorarius, he that beareth the potte, a tankarde bearer.
                  
                     Amplector, ti, to imbrace.
                  
                     Amplio, aui, are, to make more, to draw to.
                  
                     Ampliatus, a manne repried, or delayed in iugement, vpon ſome difficultie or conſyderation.
                  
                     Amplitudo, greatneſſe of power or maieſtie, ſometyme it ſygnifyeth largenes, Terrae amplitudo, The largenes of the coūtrey
                  
                     Ampliuagus, moche wandryng.
                  
                     Amplius, more.
                  
                     Amplus, pla, plum, large, wyde.
                  
                     Ampluſtra, Ampluſtria, uel Apluſtra, The takelynge of the ſhyppe.
                  
                     Ampulla, an oyle potte. Alſo a bottelle or flagon. ſometyme it ſignifyeth a thyng that is blowen or puffed.Suetonius in Domitiano. Suetonius vſeth that worde for a drynkyng glaſſe.
                  
                     Ampullor, I ſwelle for pryde.
                  
                     Amputo, taui, tare, to cutte of.
                  
                     Amula, a water pot, and it may be vſed for

holy water potte. See Calepine.
                  
                     Amuletum, any thinge that is ordeyned agaynſt poyſonynge.
                  
                     Amurca, the mother or ſome of all oyles.
                  
                     Amuſsis, the maſons or carpenters rule.
                  
                     Amigdalus, an almonde tree.
                  
                     Amigdalum, an almonde.
               
            
            
               
                  A, ante N.
                  
                     AN, whyther, or if.
                  
                     Anas, natis, a ducke.
                  
                     Anatinus, lyke a ducke.
                  
                     Anatarius, ria, rium, of a ducke.
                  
                     Anathema, in holy Scripture betokeneth ſeparation, els where it ſignifyeth a thyng offered or ſette vp in a temple or churche, as thynges offered and hanged vp.
                  
                     Anathematizo, aui, are, to curſe or gyue to the deuylle.
                  
                     Anatomia, anotomie or cuttyng of men by phiſytions, to conſyder the inwarde partes and membres.
                  
                     Anceps ancipitis, doubteful.
                  
                     Anchora, an anchore.
                  
                     Ancile, a ſhielde without corners, ſuch one in the tyme that Numa was king of Rome, was ſene falle out of the ſkye.
                  
                     Ancilla, a mayden ſeruant it was proprely taken for a bondewoman.
                  
                     Ancillor, to ſerue humbly and diligently.
                  
                     Anclo, aui, are, to drawe wyne or other lykoure.
                  
                     Anfractus, windinges and turnynges, ſpecially in the grounde.
                  
                     Angaria, a conſtraynt or compulſion.
                  
                     Angelus, an aungelle.
                  
                     Angina, a diſeaſe in the throote, called the Quynſe.
                  
                     Angiportus, a great hole in the erthe with many tournynges, or that whyche hathe none iſſue out, or a lane in a towne, whyche leadeth the nexte waye to a ſtrete, or that whiche lyeth on an hauen, whereby marchandyſe is caried frome the water, or recaryed.
                  
                     Ango, anxi, angêre, to tourmente or vexe.
                  
                     Angor, anguyſhe of body or mynde.
                  
                     Anxieras, anxietudo, anguyſſhe or ſorowe.
                  
                     Anguilla, an eele.
                  
                     Anguis, a ſnake.
                  
                     Angularis, lare, cornerde.
                  
                     Angulatim, cornerwiſe.
                  
                     Anguloſus, full of corners.
                  
                     Angulus, a corner.
                  
                     Anguſtia, ſtraytnes, or perplexitie of mind.
                  
                     Anguſtus, ta, tum, ſtrayte.
                  
                     Anhelitus, brethe or wynde of a man.
                  
                     Anhelo, aui, re, to fetch wind, or draw breth.
                  
                     Anhelus, he that drawethe his breathe peynefullye.
                  
                     Animaduerto, tere, to conſyder, to take heede, to ſette my mynde, to beholde, and to thynke.
                  
                     Animaduerſio, conſyderacion, puniſhment.
                  
                     Animaequius, maequia, quium, pacyente, or ſufferynge.
                  
                     Animal, all thynge that hathe lyfe, and is ſenſyble, commonly it is taken for a beaſte.
                  
                     Animalis, le, that wherin is lyfe.
                  
                     Animans, idem quod animal, ſauynge that it is more larger. For it maye ſygnyfye all thynge that hath ſpirite, as welle in heuen, as on erthe.
                  
                     Anima, the ſowle. ſometyme lyfe.
                  
                     Animatus, animata, matum, that hath ſowle or lyfe.
                  
                     Animo, aui, are, to gyue courage or boldeneſſe, to quycken:
                  
                     Animoſitas, boldeneſſe.
                  
                     Animoſus, bolde.
                  
                     Animus, the mynde, the wyl. ſomtime it is put for the ſoule: ſometyme for affection or delectation, ſometyme for wynde or blaſt, ſomtyme for wrathe, ſometyme for a ſowne.
                  
                     Annitor, to reſyſte, or to helpe, to ſette to my mynde.
                  
                     Annales, Hiſtories of actes yerely done.
                  
                     Annalis, le, Annarius, ria, rium, that whiche is done yerely.
                  
                     Annaſcor, to grow or to be borne by a place or manne.
                  
                     Anniculus, la, lum, that whyche is of done yere olde.
                  
                     Annilis, le, aged.
                  
                     Annilis fabula, an olde wyues tale, or a tale without fruite.
                  
                     Annona, vyttayles, ſuſtynance, or lyuynge. Somtyme it betokeneth fyndyng in borde and apparayle.
                  
                     Annonariae expenſae, expenſes in vitayle.
                  
                     Annoſus, ſa, ſum, aged.
                  
                     Annoto, aui, are, to note, to intitle.
                  
                     Annotinae naues, ſhyppes that cary corne.
                  
                     Annuatim, yerely.
                  
                     Annuus, a yere.
                  
                     Annus, a, um, that duryth one yere.
                  
                     Anquina, the corde wherwith the ſayle is bounde to the maſte.
                  
                     Anquiro, to ſeke.
                  
                     Anſa, the eare or handel of a potte or cup. And ſometyme it ſygnifieth occaſion. ſomtyme a bouckle.
                  
                     Anſer, a gooſe.
                  
                     Anſerinus, na, num, lyke a gooſe.
                  
                     Antae, the pooſtes on euerye ſyde of the doore.
                  
                     Antè, antea, before.
                  
                     
                     Ante alios, aboue other, before other, more than other, or beſyde other.
                  
                     Antecapio, coepi, capere, to preuent.
                  
                     Antecedo, ceſsi, dere, to go before, to excel.
                  
                     Antecello, cellui, lere, to excell or haue preemynence.
                  
                     Anteceſſum, payde before hande.
                  
                     Anteccoenium, a colation or drynkynge betwene dynar and ſupper.
                  
                     Anteeo, iui, ire, to precede or excell, or goo before.
                  
                     Antefero, to putte before, or ſet more by.
                  
                     
                        Ante ha
                              •
                           ,
                      before this tyme, or before that tyme.
                  
                     
                        Ante
                              ••
                           quium,
                      the fyrſt tourne in ſpeaking.
                  
                     Antelucanus, na, num, that which is before 
                        〈◊〉
                      lyghte.
                  
                     Anteluco iui, are, to wake before daye.
                  
                     Antelucuio, before day lyght.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        , the croſſe piece wherto the ſayle 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
                  
                     Antepagmentum, a portall.
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              〈…〉
                           , 
                              •
                           ere,
                      to preferre.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        , 
                     
                        ••
                     nge before.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        , outwarde pyllars or poſtes, wherby 
                        〈…〉
                     , or frame to ſuſteyned.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        , they whiche be next the ſtan
                     
                        •
                      appoynted for to defende it.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        , to excelle, or ſtande before.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        , to make my iudge.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        , neui, nite,
                      to preuente.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        , to preuent.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        , the beare of a woman, that is layde
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        , foreheed, nowe gentylwomen do 
                        〈…〉
                      their rolles.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈…〉
                        , all 
                        〈◊〉
                      is before vs.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈…〉
                        , to preuente.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈…〉
                        , a boke of medicines.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈…〉
                        , a medicine to expell poyſon.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        , an example.
                  
                     
                        Ann
                              ••
                           na,
                      a pentiell.
                  
                     
                        Antipa
                              ••
                           us,
                      he that ſercheth for antyquities, or redethe olde warkes, or vſeth olde forme of ſpeakynge or writinge.
                  
                     Antiquo, aui, are, to make voyde, to reduce to the fyrſte ſtate, to repelle. Antiquare legem, to repell a lawe.
                  
                     Antiquus, a, um, auncient or olde. ſometime it ſignifieth noble or worſhypfull.
                  
                     Antiquitas, tatis, auncientie.
                  
                     Antiquitus, of auncient or olde tyme.
                  
                     Antiſtes, antiſtius, a prelate.
                  
                     Antiſia, an abbeſſe or prioreſſe.
                  
                     Antiſtitium, prelacy, or preeminence.
                  
                     Antiſtitor, he that hathe ouer other preemynence.
                  
                     Antila, a Pumpe to drawe water.
                  
                     Antrum, a denne.
                  
                     Anularius, a 
                        •
                     eweller that ſelleth rynges.
                  
                     Anulus, a rynge.
                  
                     Anus, nus, an olde wyfe.
                  
                     Anus, ni, an arſe.
                  
                     Anxifer, he that cauſeth ſorowe.
                  
                     Anxius, anxia, carefull or heuye.
                  
                     Anxietas, anxietudo, care or heuyneſſe.
               
            
            
               
                  A, ante P.
                  
                     Apage, remoue, putte away, or dryue away. Alſo it hath a ſignification of a more vehemency: as Apage hanccaniculā, Away with this bytche: or, hens away with this bytche.
                  
                     Apage ſis, lette be, gette the hens.
                  
                     Apella, withoute a ſkynne. So be the Iewes called of Horacius, bycauſe they be cyrcuncyded.
                  
                     Aper, apri, a boore.
                  
                     Aperio, ui, ire, to open, to diſcloſe, to expownde.
                  
                     Apes uel apis, a bee.
                  
                     Apex, apicis, the crowne of the heed, the toppe of euery thynge. it ſometyme ſygnifyeth a mytar.
                  
                     Apexabo, the gutte whiche is ful of blode, mixte with greaſe.
                  
                     Apluica, one of the thre partis of the world wherof the inhabitantes be at this day called generallye Moores or Morynes, the countreyes be nowe called Tunyſe, Feſe, Marocke.
                  
                     Apianus, na, num, that wherein bees doo delyte.
                  
                     Apiarium, the place where as hyues be ſette.
                  
                     Apiarius, he that nouriſheth bees.
                  
                     Apiaſtra, a byrde whiche doothe deuowre Bees.
                  
                     Apiaſtrum, ſmallage, an herbe.
                  
                     Apicaeones, ſhepe, hauynge ſmalle bodies, and lyttell wolle.
                  
                     Apicula, a yonge bee.
                  
                     Apinae, nurtes without ſhales.
                  
                     Apionia mala, rounde appulles, whyche I take to be they, that are called pomeroyall.
                  
                     Apium, an herbe called ache, ſomtyme it is taken for our commune perſely.
                  
                     Apologia, a defence or aunſwere to a rebuke.
                  
                     Apologo, aui, are, to requyre or aſke.
                  
                     Apologus, a fable, wherin beaſtes or trees doo ſpeake.
                  
                     Apophoretum, a preſente.
                  
                     Apopthegma, matis, a ſhorte and quycke ſentence.
                  
                     Apoplexia, a ſodeyne palſey.
                  
                     Apoſtata, a Rebelle. It is nowe vſed for

them, whiche do forſake the relygion, that they haue ones receyued.
                  
                     Apoſtema, an impoſtume, wherin corrupted humours haue recourſe in any parte of the bodye.
                  
                     Apoſtolus, an apoſtel. it proprely ſignifieth a meſſanger.
                  
                     Apotheca, a wyne ſeller, or ſhoppe, wherin thinges be ſette to ſale.
                  
                     Appareo, rui, rêre, to appiere.
                  
                     Apparitores, officers of iuſtice, attendyng on the great miniſters, to ſomon or attache whom they wyll commaunde.
                  
                     Apparitura, the offyce of a Sergeaunt or baylyffe.
                  
                     Apparatus, tus, apparaylynge or deckyng.
                  
                     Apparatus belli, preparation for warres, artyllerye.
                  
                     Appellatio, a namynge, or appelynge to a hygher iuge.
                  
                     Appello, aui, are, to name or calle familiarly to me. Alſo Vlpian the great lawyer wyl haue it to ſygnyfye, to wowe a mayden to haue her virginitie. ſometyme it ſygnifieth to arryue: Sommetyme to appeale to a higher iudge.
                  
                     Appello, appuli, appulſum, to aryue. ſometyme to apply or ſette my mynde, to direct.
                  
                     Appulſus, appulſus, commynge of beaſtis to wateringe.
                  
                     Appendeo, appendis, pendere, to hange by or nighe.
                  
                     Appendix, that which hangeth at an other thynge.
                  
                     Appendo, dis, dere, to hange vp, to waye in a balance or beame.
                  
                     Appero, ui, tere, to deſyre moche, to go to. ſometyme it ſignifieth to be at hande. Dies appatebat, The daye was come, or at hand. ſomtyme to wounde or ſtryke at, as, Leuās ſe alis, os oculoſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         hoſtis, roſtro et unguibus appetit, Ryſynge with his wynges, his talons and beke, he wounded the face & eies of him that faught on the other parte.
                  
                     Applaudere, to moue handes or feete for ioye, or to beate any thyng to the ground.
                  
                     Applico, applicaui, applicare, uel applicui applicere, to ioyne to, to laye to, or ſette to, or to applye.
                  
                     Applodo, ploſi, dere, 
                     ſupra applaudere.
                  
                  
                     Appluda, chaffe.
                  
                     Apporto, aui, are, to brynge to.
                  
                     Appoſitus, ta, tum, put to, or ſet to. ſomtime it ſignifieth conuenient, or to the purpoſe.
                  
                     Apprimè, chiefely, principally.
                  
                     Approbus, very honeſte.
                  
                     Apricari, to ſytre or go abrode in the ayre, or in the ſonne.
                  
                     Apricus, a place ſette agaynſte the ſonne.
                  
                     Aprilis, the moneth of Apryll.
                  
                     Aprinus, bores fleſhe.
                  
                     Aprono in genua, to knele on my knees.
                  
                     Aptitudo, aptenes.
                  
                     Apto, aui are, to ioyne, to agree two thinges togither.
                  
                     Aptus, ta, tum, apte, agreable, mete, neceſſarye.
                  
                     Apud, at, whan it is ioyned with a perſon, it ſignifieth with.
               
            
            
               
                  A ante Q.
                  
                     AQua, water.
                  
                     Aquagium, a cundyte.
                  
                     Aqualiculus, a lyttell trowgh.
                  
                     Aqualicus, the panche.
                  
                     Aqualis, A baſyne to waſſhe in mennes handes.
                  
                     Aquaricola, a place, wherin water is caſte.
                  
                     Aquariolum, Aquarium, a waſſhyng place.
                  
                     Aquaticus, that whyche haunteth the water, or lyueth therin.
                  
                     Aquatilis, the ſame.
                  
                     Aquatus, ta, tum, that, wherinto water is putte. Vinum aquatum, Alayed wyne.
                  
                     Aqueus, a, um, watrye.
                  
                     Aquila, an egle.
                  
                     Aquilex, he that ſercheth for water, or cō
                     uayeth it.
                  
                     Aquilifer, the ſtandarde bearer of the Romaynes.
                  
                     Aquilo, the northeſt wynde.
                  
                     Aquilus color, ruſſette.
                  
                     Aquiminaria, all water pottes.
                  
                     Aquitania, Guyen.
                  
                     Aquo, aui, are, to fetche or beare water.
                  
                     Aquoſus, ſa, ſum, full of water.
                  
                     Aquula, lyttell water.
               
            
            
               
                  A ante R.
                  
                     ARa, an Aultare.
                  
                     Aranea, a copwebbe. Sommetyme a ſpyder.
                  
                     Araneus, a ſpyder.
                  
                     Arator, a ploughmanne. and ſommetyme a ploughe oxe.
                  
                     Aratrum, a ploughe.
                  
                     Arbiter, tri, an arbitratour.
                  
                     Arbitrarium, arbitrable.
                  
                     Arbitrium, arbytrement, wyll, an eſpyall.
                  
                     Arbitror, to trowe, to iudge, or awarde.
                  
                     Arbor, et arbos, a tree.
                  
                     Arborator, a lopper of trees.
                  
                     Arboreſcere, to waxe to a tree.
                  
                     Arboreus, ea, reum, of a tree.
                  
                     Arbuſtum, a place where trees be ſette, proprelye Elmes, wythye, or Salowe,

it may be taken for an orchard, or a hoppeyarde, or a vyneyarde, where vynes doo growe vp by trees.
                  
                     Arbuſtum, a vyne that rūneth vp in height by a tree or a pole.
                  
                     Arbuſto, aui, are, to ſette vines by trees.
                  
                     Arbutū, an appull called a wyldinge.
                  
                     Arbutus, a wyldyng tree.
                  
                     Arca, a coffer.
                  
                     Arcanum, a thynge ſecrete, or of fewe knowen.
                  
                     Arcatus, bent lyke a bowe.
                  
                     
                        Arceo, cui, 
                              •
                           re,
                      to ſtrayne, to putte of, to dryue away.
                  
                     Arcera, a horſe lytter.
                  
                     Arceſio, to accuſe, to calle for.
                  
                     
                        Archa
                              ••
                           us,
                      a ſtewarde of houſeholde.
                  
                     Archerypus, the firſte example or paterne.
                  
                     
                        Atch
                              •
                           at
                              •
                           t
                              •
                           ti,
                      a chiefe phiſytion.
                  
                     
                        Archima
                              •
                           nus,
                      chiefe Loke.
                  
                     Architector, aris, ari, to make craftily.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        , the counnyng of diuyſyng of 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           , et architectus,
                      a diuiſer of buil
                     
                        ••••
                     , or a maiſter of the warkes.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        , mayſter of the feaſte.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        , the treaſone of Minumentes 
                        〈…〉
                      belongynge to a kynge or a 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        , to ſtrayne oftentymes.
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           , 
                              •
                           um,
                      ſtreyght.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      
                     
                        •
                     a
                        ••
                     ened lyke a bowe,
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        , a croſſebowe.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        
                     
                     ▪ a lyttell coffer or caſkette.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        , a relle that womenne doo weare 
                        〈…〉
                      beedes, to beare water or mylke 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      a bowe, the rant of a roufe.
                  
                     Ard
                           •
                        a, a by
                        •••
                     e called an heron.
                  
                     
                        Ardei
                              •
                           o,
                      a b
                        •
                     ſy manne medlynge with many thynges.
                  
                     
                        Ardeo, a
                              ••
                           , dere,
                      to burne, to loue ardently, or excedyngly▪ to make haſte, to be cō
                     ſum
                        •
                     d, to deſyre.
                  
                     Ardens, tis, haſty in doinge, quycke witted.
                  
                     Ardeſco, to be haſty.
                  
                     Ardnus, high and difficult, hard to com to.
                  
                     Area, a large place in a Cytie kepte euer cleane, where marchauntes do aſſemble: as I haue ſene in dyuers cyties in Almayne. Alſo it is euerye place marked oute to buyld or to ſet an houſe in. Alſo a floore, where corne is thraſhed.
                  
                     Areator, a threſher.
                  
                     Arefacio, to make drie.
                  
                     Arena, ſande.
                  
                     Arenaceus, ea, eum, ſandy.
                  
                     Arenatus, arenata, natum, pargetted with lyme and ſande.
                  
                     Arenoſus, ſandye.
                  
                     Arenula, fyne ſande.
                  
                     Areo, rui, rere, to be made drie.
                  
                     Areola, a bedde in a garden.
                  
                     Areſco, ſcere, to waxe drye, or to be made drye.
                  
                     Aretalogus, a bragger or a vaunter of his owne vertues, ſometyme a forger of lyes, to make men merye.
                  
                     Argentariā facit, he maketh or occupieth a banke for exchaunge.
                  
                     Argentarius, a banker, with whom men doo make their exchaunge of money.
                  
                     Argenteus, a, um, of ſyluer.
                  
                     Argentum, ſyluer. ſommetyme it ſygnifyeth plate.
                  
                     Argilla, potters claye.
                  
                     Argumentatio, the declaration of an argument.
                  
                     Argumentor, mentaris, mentari, to argue or raiſon.
                  
                     Argumentoſus, ſa, um, that whiche is done with great reaſon.
                  
                     Argumentum, is a raiſon, makyng a profe, wherby one thinge is gathered by an nother, and the whiche confirmeth that, whiche is doubtefulle, by that whiche is not doubtefull. ſomtyme it ſignifyeth a mattier, ſommetyme coiecture, ſometyme a ſhorte expoſition of that whiche foloweth, other while ſentence.
                  
                     Arguo, gui, ere, to reproue, to impute, to accuſe, to ſhewe.
                  
                     Argutiae, ſharpe wordes or ſhrewde.
                  
                     Argutor, aris, ari, to ſpeke ſharply, ſhrewdly, or pertely.
                  
                     Argutulus, ſomewhat perte.
                  
                     Argutus, ta, tum, reproued. ſometyme it ſygnyfyeth ſhrewde, and he that can in ſpeakynge ſharpely inſerche a mans mynd. Alſo ſhryll of voyce.
                  
                     Arguti hommes, they that ſpeake moche in fewe wordes.
                  
                     Argutum, ſ
                        •
                     lender or ſmalle.
                  
                     Ariditas, et aritudo, dryeneſſe.
                  
                     Aridus, drye.
                  
                     Aries, arietis, a Ramme. Alſo a piece of ordynaunce or engyne, made lyke a rammes heed, to beate downe a walle. It is alſo oone of the .xii. ſygnes that the Sunne paſſeth by.
                  
                     Arietinus, of a ramme.
                  
                     Arieto, taui, are, to hytte or throwe downe.
                  
                     Ariſta, the berde of corne, ſometyme it is putte for wheate.
                  
                     Arithmetica, aulgoryme, the ſcyence of noumbrynge.
                  
                     Arma, orum, harneyes and weapon. Alſo the inſtrumentes of all maner of craftes,

Alſo ſtandardes and baners, ſommetyme battayles.
                  
                     Armamenta, tooles, inſtrumentes, all ſtore for warres or ſhyppes.
                  
                     Armamentarium, an armorie or ſtorehouſe for ſhyppes or ordinance.
                  
                     Armarium, a ſtudy where bokes are laide, or a drye larder.
                  
                     Armati, armed men.
                  
                     Armatura, armure.
                  
                     Armator, an armorer.
                  
                     Armentarius, the keper of the armorie,
                  
                     Armentum, ſtore of horſe or nete. ſomtyme it ſygnifyeth cattell.
                  
                     Armiger, geri, proprely an eſquyer for the body, as he, whiche alwaye attendynge about a knyght, beareth his hedpiece, his ſpeare, and his ſhielde, a cuſtrell.
                  
                     Armillae, rynges that gentylmenne vſed to weare aboute their armes, as at this daye ſome men and women do vſe, called bracelettes.
                  
                     Armille neutri generis, a facyon of deceipt.
                  
                     Armillum, a veſſel wherin they vſid in their ſacrifice to put wyne.
                  
                     Armipotens, puiſſant in armes.
                  
                     Armo, aui, are, to arme.
                  
                     Armus, the ſhoulder of a beaſte, or the pynion of a fowle.
                  
                     Aro, aui, are, to eare or plowe lande.
                  
                     Arquatus morbus, the ſyckeneſſe calledde the iaundiſe.
                  
                     Arreptitius, he that is obſeſſed with an ylle ſpyrite.
                  
                     Arrha et Arrhabo, erneſt money.
                  
                     Arrigo, rigi, ere, to water grounde.
                  
                     Aripio, pui, ere, to take.
                  
                     Arrogo, aui, are, to gyue to moche, to preſume, to make myne heyre.
                  
                     Arrogans, arrogant or preſumptuous.
                  
                     Arrogantia, arrogance, preſumption.
                  
                     Ars, artis, a crafte, ſubtyltie.
                  
                     Arteria, a ſynewe lyke to a vayne, wherein the ſpirite of lyfe doth walke, as the blode dothe in vaynes.
                  
                     Articulatim, from ioynte to ioynte.
                  
                     Articulo, aui, are, to ioyne one ioynte to an nother.
                  
                     Articulus, a ioynt. alſo a moment or parcel of tyme. alſo a colour of Rhetorike.
                  
                     Artifex, a craftes man.
                  
                     Aruficium, the practiſe of a crafte.
                  
                     Arto, aui, are, to ſtrayne, to thraſte togyther, to wrynge.
                  
                     Artocopus, a baker.
                  
                     Artoptitius panis, breadde made of wheat, whiche to harde and ſoore dryed, biſkatte.
                  
                     Artuo, aui, are, to cutte a ſonder.
                  
                     Artus, membres.
                  
                     Aruina, talowe.
                  
                     Arundinetum, a place where reedes doo growe.
                  
                     Arundo, a rede, or cane.
                  
                     Aruſpex, he that telleth of thinges to come by lokynge in beaſtes bowelles.
                  
                     Aruum, a falowe felde.
                  
                     Arx, arcis, a fortreſſe or caſtelle, ſpecyally ſtandynge hyghe.
               
            
            
               
                  A ante S.
                  
                     AS, aſsis, a pounde weyghte. In the olde tyme in the partition of lande, or other lyke thynge inherytable, they called the hole, As, and the partes diuided, ounces.
                  
                     Aſaronim, peynted pament, whiche maye not be ſwepte.
                  
                     Aſcendo, di, ere, to clymme, to aſcende, to goo vp.
                  
                     Aſcia, a chyppe axe.
                  
                     Aſcio, aui, to chyppe or cutte with an axe.
                  
                     Aſcio, is, to knowe ſurely.
                  
                     Aſciſco, ſciui, ſcire, to preſume, to take vpon me a thinge.
                  
                     Aſciſco, aſciſci, aſciſcere, to admytte, to take to me.
                  
                     Aſcribo, pſi, bere, to adde to, to attribute, to impute.
                  
                     Aſſcriptitius, he that is added to the nombre of other.
                  
                     Aſſciptor, oris, he that foloweth the example of an other, or he that writeth many copies of others exaumples.
                  
                     Aſella, the arme hole.
                  
                     Aſia, one of the thre partes of the worlde.
                  
                     Aſinarius, an aſſeherde.
                  
                     Aſinus, an aſſe.
                  
                     Aſotus, prodigall, wanton, incontynente.
                  
                     Aſpecto, aſpectaui, aſpectare, to beholde ſtedfaſtely.
                  
                     Aſpectus, ſyght, beholdynge.
                  
                     Aſper, vnpleaſant, as well in ſight and herynge, as in taſte, alſo harde or greuous.
                  
                     Aſpergillus, a holy water ſtycke.
                  
                     Aſpergo, aſperſi, gere, to ſprynge or caſte water.
                  
                     Aſpergo, ginis, a ſpryngynge of lycour.
                  
                     Aſpernabilis, he that is worthy to be diſpyſed, or refuſed.
                  
                     Aſpernor, aris, ari, to deſpyſe, to refuſe, to abhorre.
                  
                     Aſpero, aſperaui, aſperare, to make ſharper or harde.
                  
                     Aſphaltum, the deed ſee. Alſo a certayne claye there founden, whiche ones burning, wyll neuer be quenched.
                  
                     Aſpicio, aſpexi, aſpicere, to beholde, to ſee.
                  
                     
                     Aſpiro, aui, are, to aſpire, to loke to come to a thynge, to blowe, to fauoure, to gyue ayde, to gyue all my ſtudye and wytte to optayne a thynge, to touche, to go to.
                  
                     Aſpis, an adder or ſerpent.
                  
                     
                        Aſpo
                              •
                           to, aui, are,
                      to carie away.
                  
                     
                        Aſſatu
                              •
                           a,
                      roſte meate.
                  
                     
                        Aſſec
                              •
                           a,
                      a page, and he that foloweth in all thynge the wylle of an other man.
                  
                     
                        Aſſector, a
                              ••
                           s, ari,
                      to kepe company.
                  
                     
                        Aſſenſo
                              •
                           , oris,
                      he that conſenteth.
                  
                     
                        Aſſenno, 
                              •
                           i, 
                              •••
                           e, & aſſentior,
                      to conſente, or aſſente.
                  
                     Aſſentor, aris, to flatter in commendyng an other mans actes that be yll.
                  
                     Aſſequor, eris, qui, to folowe, to gette, to optayne.
                  
                     Aſſeres, bourdes.
                  
                     
                        Aſſe
                              •••
                           , 
                              •
                           is,
                      to ſowe, or plante by. Alſo to clayme, to affirme or approue, to manumiſe or make free.
                  
                     Aſſettio, an affyrmaunce.
                  
                     Aſſeſſor, oris, aſſociate to a man in offyce or auctorytie.
                  
                     
                        Aſ
                              •••
                           no,
                      to kepe diligentely, to take heede of one.
                  
                     
                        Aſſe
                              ••••
                           , as, are,
                      to affyrme.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        , 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      lytte with or by an other, or I am aſſocyate.
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           , is, de
                              •
                           e,
                      to reſte me, to ſytte downe, t
                        •
                      ſytte by.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        , centynuall, or ſufficient.
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                            fideraſſores,
                      Sufficient ſureties.
                  
                     Aſsigno, aui, are, to aſſygne or appoint.
                  
                     
                        A
                              •
                           , 
                              •
                           e,
                      to leape forth alſo Aſsilire, is to leape, as a horſe leapeth a mare.
                  
                     Aſsis, is, a ſawen bourde.
                  
                     
                        Aſsino, 
                              〈◊〉
                           , aſsiſ
                              •
                           ete,
                      to be here, to defende a mannes cauſe.
                  
                     Aſſo, aui, are, to laye bourdes, to roſte.
                  
                     
                        Aſſue
                              •
                           ac
                              •
                           o,
                      wonte.
                  
                     Aſſuetudo, wente, or cuſtome.
                  
                     Aſſuetus, accuſtomed.
                  
                     Aſſula, a chyppe.
                  
                     Aſſulatim, in chyppes.
                  
                     Aſſumo, aſſumpſi, mere, to take proprely it ſygnyfyeth to take to moche on me.
                  
                     Aſſuo, ui, aſſuere, to ſowe to, or piece.
                  
                     Aſſurgo, rexi, gere, to ryſe to an other better than my ſelfe, to gyue place, to growe vpwarde,
                  
                     Aſſus, a, um, roſted.
                  
                     Aſt, but. alſo therfore, as well, moreouer.
                  
                     Aſter, a Sterre.
                  
                     Aſteriſcus, a lyttell marke in wrytynge like a Sterre,
                  
                     Aſthmaticus, he that drawethe his wynde ſhorte.
                  
                     Aſtipulor, to leane to, to fauour.
                  
                     Aſto, aſtiti, to ſtande by, to be preſent.
                  
                     Aſtragalizo, to playe at dyſe or tables.
                  
                     Aſtragalus, the play at tables.
                  
                     Aſtringo, to ioyne, or bynde togyther, to bynde by couenant or promyſe.
                  
                     Aſtrolabium, an Aſtrolabe or inſtrumente of aſtronomy.
                  
                     Aſtronomia, the parte of aſtronomye that concerneth iudicials and practiſe.
                  
                     Aſtrologia, the ſpeculation and reaſonyng cōcernyng the celeſtial or heuenly motiōs.
                  
                     Aſtrum, a celeſtial body compacte of many ſterres, as a ſygne.
                  
                     Aſtruo, to buylde, to ioyne oone houſe to an other, to fortifie, to affirme.
                  
                     Aſtus, crafte or ſubtiltie.
                  
                     Aſtu, craftily, or ſubtylly.
                  
                     Aſturiae, ſubtylties.
                  
                     Aſtutus, ta, tum, ſubtyll or crafty.
                  
                     Aſylum, a ſaynctuarie.
               
            
            
               
                  A, ante T.
                  
                     AT, a voyce, whiche ſignifieth in the wordes that do folowe, wrath or indignation. Sommetyme it ſignifieth (but yet) whyche is a diſcrepaunce in the wordes that are ſpoken. Sommetyme it ſygnifyeth Sed.
                  
                  
                     At contra, contrarye wyſe.
                  
                     Attamino, aui, are, to fowle or defyle.
                  
                     At at, ruſſhe, or ſye.
                  
                     Attauus, a greatte graundefather.
                  
                     Atar, tra, trum, blacke or darke.
                  
                     Athleta, a greatte wraſtler, or a great runner at commune games.
                  
                     Athletica, the craft of wraſtlyng or rūnyng.
                  
                     Athletheta, the iuge in games of wraſtling or runnynge.
                  
                     Atomus, a thynge ſo ſmall, that it may not be deuyded or made ſmaller. Alſo Atomi, be motes of the ſonne.
                  
                     At
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , and ſo, as it were.
                  
                     Atqui, ſurely, all be it.
                  
                     Atra bilis, Melancoly.
                  
                     Attramentarium, an ynkehorne.
                  
                     Attramentum, ynke, blache, that ſhowmakers do occupie.
                  
                     Atratus, a mourner that gothe in blacke.
                  
                     Atri dies, dyſmall dayes.
                  
                     Atricus, a porter that kepeth a gate.
                  
                     Atrienſis, an huyſſher of the halle.
                  
                     Atrium, an inner courte.
                  
                     Atrox, atrocis, cruell, terrible, or ſowre in countenaunce.
                  
                     Attendo, di, dere, to take hede, to conſyder, to intende.
                  
                     Attente, intentifely, with a fyxed mynde.
                  
                     Attentio, a mynde ſette or fyxed.
                  
                     
                     Attento, to attempte.
                  
                     Attenuo, to appeyre, to make weaker.
                  
                     Atticiſmus, a peculyare eloquence vſed in Athenes.
                  
                     Atticiſſo, to ſpeake like a man of Athenes,
                  
                     Atticus, ca, cum, of Athenes.
                  
                     Attiguus, by or nigh ioynynge to.
                  
                     Attineo, ui, ere, to pertayne. Attiner, it beſemeth, it is conuement.
                  
                     Attingo, attigi, tingere, to touche almoſte.
                  
                     Attollo, to auaunce, to lyfte vp, to brynge to, to take away.
                  
                     Attonitus, ra, tum, amaſed or abaſhed.
                  
                     Attrecto, aui, are, to feele.
                  
                     Attribuo, bui, ere, to attribute, to put vpon one by blamynge or accuſynge, to aſſygne, to commytte.
               
            
            
               
                  A ante V.
                  
                     AVceps, a fowler or byrder.
                  
                     Auctio, onis, an increaſe, or an open ſale of priuate goodes.
                  
                     Auctio haſtae, porteſale of the goodes of men attaynted for treaſon or felonye.
                  
                     Auctionarius, the ſaleſman.
                  
                     Auctionor, to ſell by porte ſale.
                  
                     Aucto, aui, are, to gayne, to wynne.
                  
                     Autor, he that begynneth any act, or is the fyrſte cauſer or procurer of any thynge.
                  
                     Autoramentum, an indenture or obligation wherby a man is bounden to do ſeruice. Alſo erneſt money.
                  
                     Autorare, to bynde by erneſte or wrytynge to ſerue.
                  
                     Autoratus, he that is bounde to ſerue, ſpecyally in warres.
                  
                     Autoritas, tatis, autoritie. ſometime it ſignifieth power.
                  
                     Auctuarium, uel auctarium, ouer meaſure or weyghte.
                  
                     Aucupatorii, lyme twygges.
                  
                     Aucupium, et aucupatio, byrding or fouling.
                  
                     Aucupor, to go a byrdynge, or a foulyng, or hawkynge. Alſo it ſignifieth, to ſerche by craftye meanes.
                  
                     Audacia, hardyneſſe.
                  
                     Audacter et audaciter, boldly, aduēturouſly.
                  
                     Audaculus, hardye, ſpoken in deriſyon, or contempte.
                  
                     Audax, audacis, bolde or hardy, or truſtyng well in hym ſelfe.
                  
                     Audeo, auſi, audêre, to dare, to preſume.
                  
                     Audio, diui, dire, to bere, to conſyder, to perceyne, to graunt that whiche is aſked, to do the thynge that is cōmanded.
                  
                     Auditio, herynge, or audience.
                  
                     Auditorium, a place where menne do here leſſons, or propoſitions.
                  
                     Auditus, tus, heryng, one of the flue wyttꝭ.
                  
                     Auelio, to carye awaye.
                  
                     Auellana, a fylberde nutte.
                  
                     Auena, otes. Somtime it is put for an ote ſtrawe, or a wheate ſtrawe, or reede.
                  
                     Aueo, uêre, to couaite.
                  
                     Aue, be thou gladde or ioyfull, as the vulgar people ſayth, Reſte you mery.
                  
                     Auerſor, aris, to abhorre, to refuſe.
                  
                     Auerſus, backewarde, or on the backehalf. alſo angrye.
                  
                     Aduerſus et anerſus, forwarde and backewarde.
                  
                     Auerto, ti, tere, to tourne away.
                  
                     Auertor, teris, ti, to diſdayne. ſommetyme it ſignifyeth to tourne away, to tourne fro.
                  
                     Auerunco, aui, are, to tourne away, or putte awaye.
                  
                     Aufugio, gi, ere, to flee henſe.
                  
                     Augeo, auxi, gere, to increaſe.
                  
                     Auctus, ta, tum, increaſed.
                  
                     Augeſco, ſci, ſcere, to waxe greatte, or be great, to be growen.
                  
                     Augmento, mentaui, mētare, to increaſe, or make more.
                  
                     Augur, auguris, he that tellethe by byrdes voyces, or by their flyeng or ſytting, what ſhall happen.
                  
                     Auguro, as et auguror, aris, rari, to telle by ſuche crafte, what ſhall happen.
                  
                     Auguſins, noble, or full of maieſtie, wherfore the emperours of Rome were and yet be called Auguſti. Auguſtus is alſo the moneth nexte after Iuly.
                  
                     Auia, a grandame.
                  
                     Auiarium, a thycke wodde without waye. Alſo a place where byrdes be kepte and nouryſſhed.
                  
                     Auiarius, a keper of byrdes.
                  
                     Auicula, a lyttell byrde.
                  
                     Auidus, a, um, couetyſe.
                  
                     Auis, a byrde.
                  
                     Auitus, ta, tum, that whiche is lefte by auncetours. Auitus ager, Olde inheritance.
                  
                     Auius, a, um, without waye.
                  
                     Aula, a haule. ſomtyme the palaice or court of a prince.
                  
                     Aulêa, tapeſry, hangynges of noble mennes houſes.
                  
                     Auoco, caui, care, to calle away.
                  
                     Auolo, aui, are, to flee away.
                  
                     Aura, ſometyme betokeneth a ſofte wynd, ſomtyme brightnes, ſomtime fauour.
                  
                     Auramentum, gyltynge.
                  
                     Auraria, a golde myne.
                  
                     Aurarii, gylters.
                  
                     Auratus, ta, tum, gylte.
                  
                     Aureae, the hedſtall of a horſe.
                  
                     Auris, an eare.
                  
                     
                     Aureus, a piece of golde in money.
                  
                     Aureus, a, um, of golde.
                  
                     Aurichalcum, latyn mettall.
                  
                     Auricomus, be that hath heare as bryghte as golde.
                  
                     Auricula, the care lappe.
                  
                     Auricularius, a ſecretarye or priuye councellour.
                  
                     Auriferum, that beareth golde.
                  
                     Aurifex, ficis, a golde ſmyth.
                  
                     Aurificina, a golde ſmythes ſhoppe.
                  
                     Aurifin, a thefe that ſtealeth golde.
                  
                     Auriga, a carter or driuer of a cart.
                  
                     Aurigor, aris, to driue a cart or ſome thing lyke. Alſo to gouerne.
                  
                     
                        Auri
                              •
                           calpium,
                      an eare pyker.
                  
                     Auritus, greate eared.
                  
                     Auro, aui, are, to gylte.
                  
                     Aurora, the mornyng, or ſonne riſynge.
                  
                     Aurum, golde.
                  
                     
                        Auſ
                              •
                           ulto. aui, are,
                      to bere diligently, or giue good care.
                  
                     Auſpex. auſpicis. idem quod augur. Alſo it ſignifieth the perſone that maketh the maryage on the mannes parte. Alſo the chiefe capytayne in warres.
                  
                     
                        Auſp
                              •••
                           im,
                      the ſygne or token ſhewed by 
                        •
                     yrdes of thynges that ſhall folowe. Alſo if betokeneth fortune gouernance, or diſpoſition of a capytayn. Alſo it is a token or ſignification of thynges to come.
                  
                     
                        Auſp
                              ••
                           o
                              •
                           , a
                              •
                           is, cari,
                      to take lykelyhode. Alſo to begynne or entre into a buſyneſſe.
                  
                     
                        Auſ
                              •
                           er, in,
                      the ſouthe wynde.
                  
                     Auſterus, ſowre or ſharpe. Alſo ſoore or without pitie.
                  
                     Autho, aui, are, to make moyſte.
                  
                     
                        A
                              ••
                           ,
                      or, either.
                  
                     Autem, verily, but, or els.
                  
                     Autograplium, his owne hande wrytynge.
                  
                     Autumo, to ſuppoſe, to affirme.
                  
                     Autumnus, harueſt.
                  
                     Auunculus, the vncle of the mothers ſide.
                  
                     Auus, the grandfather.
                  
                     Auxihor, aris, ari, to ayde or helpe.
                  
                     Auxiliarius, he that commethe in ayde of an nother.
                  
                     Auxilium, ayde, or helpe,
               
            
            
               
                  A, ante X.
                  
                     AXis mundi, is a lyne imagined to go ſtreight from the north to the ſouth, dyuydynge the worlde as it were in two partes: at the endes are ſuppoſed to be two poyntes in heuen, whiche are called the northe pole and the ſouthe pole.
                  
                     Axungia, ſwynes greaſe.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶B, ante A.
                  
                     
                        BAcca, a berye, as a baye bery, an hawe berye, an eglantine berie.
                  
                     Baccatus, garnyſſhed with precious ſtones.
                  
                     Bacchanal, lis, the place where the ſolemnitie of Bacchus was kepte.
                  
                     Bacchanalia, feaſtes of the paynyms, whiche they dydde celebrate with all abhominations of lechery.
                  
                     Bacchar, a wyne porte. It maye be called a quaxinge potte.
                  
                     Bacchor, aris, ari, to celebrate the feaſte of Bacchus, to runne vppe and downe lyke a madde man.
                  
                     Bacchus, amonge the Paynims the god of wyne or drunkennes.
                  
                     Baculus, a ſtaffe.
                  
                     Balius, a horſe of bay colour.
                  
                     Baiae, arum, a place in the royalme of Naples, where be naturalle bathes of warme water bothe pleſant and holſome: And by tranſlation ſome poetes do ſo call all other naturall hote bathes.
                  
                     Baiulo, aui, are, to beare.
                  
                     Baiulus, a porter or cariar of bourdens.
                  
                     Balaena, a greatte fiſhe, whiche I ſuppoſe to be a thurlepoll.
                  
                     Balanus a kynd of acornes. it is alſo a ſuppoſitorie to helpe them that be coſtife. Alſo a ſwete oyntmēt made of Mirabolanes.
                  
                     Balo, aui, are, to blete lyke a ſhepe.
                  
                     Balbucinor, aris, to maſtle in the mouthe.
                  
                     Balbus, he that can not pronounce well his wordes whan he ſpeaketh.
                  
                     Balburio, iui, ire, to ſtamer or ſtutte.
                  
                     Balinea, a bayne or a bathe.
                  
                     Balius, balia, liū, baye colour.
                  
                     Baliſta, a croſſebowe, or a brake. It may be vſed for a gunne.
                  
                     Balnearia, all thinges belongyng to a bain.
                  
                     Balnearius, of a bayne, Balueatorius.
                  
                  
                     Balneator, the keper of a bayne, or he that ſerueth in a bayne.
                  
                     Balneum, a priuate bayne.
                  
                     Balnea pluraliter, a commune bayne.
                  
                     Baltheus et baltheū, a belt, a ſworde girdel.
                  
                     Bambatium, cotton.
                  
                     Baptiſterium, a bathe or veſſell to waſſhe in the body. A dienge vate, a fonte.
                  
                     Barathrum, a vnmeaſurable depenes.
                  
                     Baratro, an vnthrift that in lechery & glottony deuoureth his ſubſtance.
                  
                     Barba, a berde.
                  
                     Barbari, in the olde tyme were all people, excepte grekes. proprely it be they, which

do ſpeake groſſely, without obſeruynge of congruite, or pronounce not perfectly, ſpecially Greke or latyne. Alſo they that abhorre all elegancie. Moreouer it ſignifieth them, whyche be without letters, fiers or cruelle of maners or countenaunce, barbarouſe.
                  
                     Barbaria, the countreye where dwellythe people rude or beaſtly.
                  
                     Barbaricarii, weauers of cloth of baudekin.
                  
                     Barbaricus, barbarous.
                  
                     Barbariſmus, the corrupte fourme of ſpeakynge or pronouncynge.
                  
                     Barbatus, ta, tum, berded.
                  
                     Barbitium, the berde.
                  
                     Barbitos, an inſtrument of muſyke, whiche I ſuppoſe is that, that men call doulſimers.
                  
                     Bardiacus, a garment.
                  
                     Bardocucullum, a thrummed hatte, or a ſhepardes cloke.
                  
                     Bardus, a foole. Somtyme a mynſtrel that ſyngeth ieſtes or fables.
                  
                     Barrire, to braye lyke an olyphant.
                  
                     Barritus, the brayinge of an oliphant.
                  
                     Barrus, an olyphaunt.
                  
                     Baſia, honeſt kyſſes, ſwete kyſſes.
                  
                     Baſiator, a kyſſer.
                  
                     Baſiatio, a kyſſynge.
                  
                     Baſilica, a place where people do aſſemble for ſuites in the lawe, and ciuile iugementis be exerciſed, and counſayles holden. Alſo it maye be taken for a halle, or other large place, where ſuiters do attende, or men do wayte on rulers, or great feaſtes be kepte. It alſo ſygnifyeth a cathedral churche.
                  
                     Plaut. in Epi.
                     Baſilica nux, a wall nutte.
                  
                     Baſilicon, a kynges robe.
                  
                     Baſilicus, ca, cum, royall.
                  
                     Baſilicé, royally.
                  
                     Baſilicanus, he that kepeth the place called Baſilica.
                  
                  
                     Baſiliſcus, a Cocatrice, whiche is a ſerpent in the deſertes of Aphrica, with a whyte cyrkle aboute his heed, hauynge a ſharpe heed, redde eyen, and is ſomewhat blacke of colour, and is ſo venymous, that he ſleeth men and beaſtes with his breth, & with the ſyght of his eyen.
                  
                     Baſis, the foote of a pylar, or that whiche ſuſteyneth any lyke thynge. Alſo it ſignifieth the foundation or grounde of a matter.
                  
                     Batris, a veſſell with a longe handell.
                  
                     Batillus, a ſyre panne.
                  
                     Battiola, a wyne potte or flagone.
                  
                     Batuo, i, ere, to beate with a rodde.
                  
                     Batus, a meaſure for wyne or oyle.
                  
                     Baubare, to barke lyke a dogge.
                  
                     Baxiae, ſlyppers, proprely of phyloſophers, or ſuche other.
                  
                     Beatus, is he, whiche hath abundaunce of all thynge that is good, and is perfecte in all thynges that be worthy prayſe, or ought to be deſyred of a good man. ſometyme it is taken for noble or fortunate.
                  
                     Beatitudo et beatitas, is a heape of good thynges gathered togyther, of it ſelfe ſufficient without lacke, and a very perfection accordyng to vertue.
                  
                     Bellaria, bankettynge dyſſhes, as tartes, marchepaynes, and other lyke.
                  
                     Bellarius, ia, um, apte for the warre.
                  
                     Bellator, a warryour.
                  
                     Bellatrix, a woman warriour.
                  
                     Bellatulus, bellatula, a wanton worde, whyche is as moche to ſay, as lyttell fayre one, well fauoured chylde, praty mayden.
                  
                     Bellax, acis, vſed or haunted in warres.
                  
                     Bellicoſus, fiers or warlyke.
                  
                     Bellipotens, puiſſant in battayle.
                  
                     
                        Bello, and Bellor, aris, ari,
                      to make warre.
                  
                     Bellus, la, lum, fayre, pleaſant, good.
                  
                     Bellulus, la, lum, ſomewhat fayre.
                  
                     Bellum, ſignifieth al the tyme that the warres do contynue. alſo battayle or warre.
                  
                     Bellua, a great cruell beaſt or a monſter.
                  
                     Beluata, tapeſry, wherin is wrought or painted the fygures of beaſtes.
                  
                     Beluinus, na, num, beaſtely. Beluina rabies, A beaſtly furye.
                  
                     Bene, well, honeſtly, or proſperouſly.
                  
                     Bene de te mereo, I intreate the wel, Thou arte beholden vnto me.
                  
                     Benedico, dixi, cere, to prayſe, to ſaye welle of a manne.
                  
                     Benedicus, a man wel tunged, or faire ſpokē
                  
                  
                     Beneficiarius, he that receyueth a benefitte or good tourne of an other.
                  
                     Beneficus, he that is beneficiall or lyberall.
                  
                     Bene uertere, to turne to good. Precor deū, ut haec res bene uertat tibi, I pray god this thynge may tourne the to good, or maye be for thy profite.
                  
                     Bene uolo tibi, I wolde the good.
                  
                     Beneuolus, fauourable.
                  
                     Beneuolentia, fauour or good wylle, an intente to do well.
                  
                     Benignus, na, num, gentylle, benygne, and bounteouſe.
                  
                     Benignitas, bounteouſenes.
                  
                     Beo, aui, are, to comfort, to make happye.
                  
                     Berillus, is that whiche is commonly called Cryſtalle.
                  
                     Bes, beſsis, a waight of .viii. ounces.
                  
                     Beſtia, a beaſte.
                  
                     Beſtiarii, men whiche in olde tyme faughte with beaſtes in the ſyghte of the people.
                  
                     Beto, to walke forthe.Varro.
                  
                  
                     Bibaculus, he that drinketh often.
                  
                     
                     Bibax, cis, biboſus, a great drynker.
                  
                     Biblia, the wyfe of Duilius the Romayne, whiche was of ſo greate chaſtitie, that ſhe was at that tyme an example, whan it was a thynge monſtrous to here of vnchaſtitie.
                  
                     Bibliopola, a ſtacyoner, or a boke ſellar.
                  
                     Bibliotheca, a lybrary.
                  
                     Bibo, bibi, bere, to drynke.
                  
                     Bibulus, la, lum, that ſouketh vp ſhortly.
                  
                     Biceps, bicipitis, that which hath .ii. heedes
                  
                     Biclinium, a chambre with .ii. beddes.
                  
                     Bicornium, that whiche hath two hornes.
                  
                     Bicorpus, that whiche hath two bodies.
                  
                     Bidental, a place where they vſed to ſacryfyce ſhepe, whan any houſe was bourned with lyghtnynge.
                  
                     Bidentes, ſhepe with .ii. teth, called in ſome place hogrelles, or hogattes.
                  
                     Biduum the ſpace of two dayes.
                  
                     Biennis, bienne, any thing of two yeres old.
                  
                     Biennium, the ſpace of two yeres.
                  
                     
                        Bi
                              •
                           a
                              ••
                           am,
                      in two partes, or two maner of wayes.
                  
                     Bi
                           •••
                        ie, the ſame.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         arbor, that beareth twyſe in a yere.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        , clefte.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        , that hath two doores.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        , he that hath two foreheedes.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        , a double thefe, or he that hath ſtol
                     
                        •••
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     .
                  
                     
                        
                           ••••••
                        atus, ta, tum, double forked.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        , a carte drawen with two horſes.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        , he that hath badde two wyues.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        , beaſtes commen of two ſondry kyndes.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        , cattaylle or beaſtes yoked two togyther.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        , a beame with two balances.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        , a towne in Spayne.
                  
                     Bi
                           •••••
                        s, waying two poundes.
                  
                     Bilinguis, double tunged.
                  
                     Bilis atra, the humour of Melancoly, proprely that whiche bryngeth a man to franſy or madneſſe.
                  
                     Bilioſus, he that hath abundaunce of that humour.
                  
                     Bimaritus, he that hath had two wiues.
                  
                     Bimembris, of two partes, hauynge two membres.
                  
                     Bimeſtris, two monthes olde, or two yere, accompted of the moone.
                  
                     Bimulus, of two yeres age.
                  
                     Bimus, of two yeres.
                  
                     
                        Binus, na, num, two, idem quod duo. Binae litterae, two letters. Bini tabellarii,
                      two meſſangers, bina iuga boum, two yoke of oxen Binarius numerus, the numbre of two.
                  
                     Binominus et binominis, he that hath two names.
                  
                     Bion, the name of a philoſopher.
                  
                     Biothenatus, he that is violently ſlayne.
                  
                     Bipalium, a ſpade to dygge with.
                  
                     Bipara, ſhe that hath had two byrthes.
                  
                     Bipatens, open on bothe ſydes.
                  
                     Bipennis, hauynge twoo wynges. Alſo a twyebyll, wherwith carpenters doo make theyr mortaiſes.
                  
                     Bipertior, iris, tiri, to diuyde in two partes.
                  
                     Bipes, pedis, hauynge two fete.
                  
                     Bipedalis, et Bipedaneus, twoo foote longe or brode.
                  
                     Biremes, ſhyppes with two toppes.
                  
                     Bis, twyſe.
                  
                     Biſaltae, a people in Scythia.
                  
                     Biſellium, a ſeate or fourme, wheron two men onely may ſytte.
                  
                     Biſextus, one day added to, in foure yeres.
                  
                     Biſextilis annus, the leape yere.
                  
                     Biſon, tis, a beeſte hauyng oone horne, and a very longe mane.
                  
                     Biſtonis, a citie, and alſo a greate meare or poole in the countrey of Thrace.
                  
                     Biſulcus, ca, cum, clouen footed.
                  
                     Bythynia, a royalme in Aſia, whiche nowe the turke hath.
                  
                     Bithynium, a citie in Bithynia.
                  
                  
                     Bitumen, a kynde of naturall lyme, wherof the olde walles of the Cytie of Babylon were made.
                  
                     Biuium, a way hauynge two pathes.
                  
                     Bizen, a cytie of Thracia,Plin, li. 4, of Plynie called Bizian.
               
            
            
               
                  B ante L.
                  
                  
                     BLeſus, he that ſtamereth, omittynge ſome letters in ſpeakynge.
                  
                     Blandicus, he that flattereth.
                  
                     Blandidicus, a fayre ſpeaker, or flatterer.
                  
                     Blandior, iris, iri, to flatter, to ſpeake fayre for aduauntage.
                  
                     Blanditiae, flatterynge, fayre ſpeche.
                  
                     Blaſphemia, curſynge, reprochynge, commonly blaſphemy, whiche is nowe onely referred to the deſpite of god.
                  
                     Blaſphemo, aui, are, to curſe, to reproche, to ſpeake in the derogation or deſpyte of an nother.
                  
                     Blatero, aui, are, to bable in vayne, and from the pourpoſe.
                  
                     Blatta, is proprely the longe flye that flyeth in the leame of a candell, and is of the kynde of mothes. It is alſo a ſilke worme: and blatteus, beinge an adiectiue, is purple colour. Veſtis blattea, a purple garment.
                  
                     Blattaria, an herbe, alſo called Verbaſcon.
                  
                  
                     Blax, ſofte, delicate, wanton, that can not decerne thinges, and whiche vaynely boſteth hym ſelfe.
                  
                     
                     Blepharo, onis, he that hath great browes.
                  
                     Bleprae, a people in Aphrike, whiche haue their viſages in their breaſtes.
                  
                     Blittus, an herbe being of the kynde of betes, hauynge no ſente, Blittea meretrix, an vnſauorie queane.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶B ante O.
                  
                     BOa, a ſerpent in Italy, ſo greatte and large, that on a tyme whan one was kylde, there was a chylde all hoole founde in his bealy,Plin. lib. 8. capi. 14. as Plinie writeth.
                  
                     Boarium forum, the markette place, where oxen be ſolde.
                  
                     Bocchyris, a mans name.
                  
                     Bodellium, a kynde of ſweete ſmellynge gumme.
                  
                     Boemia, the royalme of Boeme.
                  
                     Boeotia, a countrey in Grece, wherin was the cytie of Thebes.
                  
                     Baetis, a ryuer in Spayne by the countrey of Granado.
                  
                     Boiae, gyues or fetters.
                  
                     Boii, people of Germany.
                  
                     Boletus, a muſherom.
                  
                     Bolis, idis, a darte with wylde fyre.
                  
                     Bolus, a maſſe or lumpe of mettall, or other lyke thynge.
                  
                     Bombitatio, the noyſe that bees make.
                  
                     Bombus, a great ſowne or noyſe, as it were of a trumpe, or gunne, a bownce.
                  
                     Bombycinus, na, num, of ſylke, Bombycina ueſtis, A garment of ſylke.
                  
                     Bombix, icis, a ſylke worme.
                  
                     Bonae fidei poſſeſſor, a feffee of truſte.
                  
                     Bonaria, calmenes of the ſee.
                  
                     Bona nenia, By your lycence, No diſpleaſure to you.
                  
                     Boni conſulas, take it in good parte.
                  
                     Bonitas, goodneſſe, honeſtie and iuſtyce.
                  
                     Bonum, good, whiche is contrary to yll.
                  
                     Bonus, a good man: Alſo beneuolent, peaſyble, lyberall, playne, eaſye to ſpeake to, worſhypfull, treatable, mercyfull.
                  
                     Boo, oas, are, to belowe lyke a cowe.
                  
                     Bootes, a ſterre whiche foloweth Charles wayne.
                  
                     Boreas, the northeſterne wynd.
                  
                     Boreus polus, the northe ſterre, callyd the lode ſterre.
                  
                     Boriſthenes, a great ryuer in the countreye of Scythia.
                  
                     Borith, a herbe that fullers vſe.
                  
                     Bos, bouis, a rother beaſte, be it bulle, oxe, or Cowe.
                  
                     Boſphorus, the name of a parte of the ſee, whiche lyeth in two ſondry coſtes: one by Conſtantinople, the other more northe.
                  
                     Boſtar, an oxe houſe.
                  
                     Boſtrychites, a precious ſtone lyke to womennes heare.
                  
                     Botrys, a cluſter of grapes.
                  
                     Botrytes, a precious ſtone lyke to a blacke graape.
                  
                     Botulus, a puddinge made of the inwarde of a rother beaſte.
                  
                     Bouatim, lyke an oxe.
                  
                     Bouicida, a ſla
                        •
                     ter man.
                  
                     Bouile, an oxe ſtalle.
                  
                     Bouillae, larum, a town not far from Rome.
                  
                     Bouinator, he that with great noyſe crieth out on a nother man.
                  
                     Bouinor, aris, to belowe out lyke a cowe.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶B ante R.
                  
                     BRabenta, he that is ordeyned a iuge in any game of wraſtlynge, runnynge, or leapynge.
                  
                     Bracca, that kynde of mantell, which nowe commeth out of Irelande, or a longe garment made of rough friſe.
                  
                     Braccharii, the makers of ſuche clothe.
                  
                     Brachiale, the wreſtebone of the hande.
                  
                     Brachialia, bracelettes, whiche ſome gentylmen and gentyll women doo vſe aboute theyr armes.
                  
                     Brachiatus, that whyche lyke an arme holdeth any thinge vp, a proppe, or ſhore.
                  
                     Brachium, an arme.
                  
                     Brachylogia, ſhortenes of ſpeche.
                  
                     Bracmanae, philoſophers of Inde.
                  
                     Bractea, thynne plates of mettalle, horne, or wodde.
                  
                     Bractearius, a worker of plates.
                  
                     Bracteator, the ſame.
                  
                     Bracteola, leaues of golde or ſyluer.
                  
                     Bragada, a ryuer nere to Vtica.
                  
                  
                     Branchiae, the gylles of a fyſhe.
                  
                     Branchos, the rewme or cattarre, whiche falleth downe by the chekes.
                  
                     Braſsica, Colewortes, proprely Cabeges.
                  
                     Brauium, the rewarde for wraſtlynge, runnynge, or leapynge, commonly called the chiefe game.
                  
                     Breno, a capitayne or leader of the frenchemen called Galli, whiche, buylded Verona a citie of Venece.
                  
                     Brephotrophia, an hoſpitalle, where chyldren be kepte and nouryſhed.
                  
                     Brene, Shortly, et breuirer, et breui.
                  
                  
                     Breuiloquus, he that ſpeaketh his mynd a fewe wordes.
                  
                     Breuiloquium, a ſhort fourme of ſpeakyng
                  
                     Breuiloquentia, the ſame.
                  
                     Breuitas, ſhorteneſſe.
                  
                     Breuis breue, Shorte.
                  
                     
                     Breuiarium, a brigement.
                  
                     Briarcus, a gyant, whiche was of an excedynge greatneſſe.
                  
                     Britannia, Brytayne, whiche doth contein Englande, Scotlande, and wales.
                  
                     Britannus, et Brito, a man of that countrey.
                  
                     Bronchus, the inner parte of the throte,
                  
                     Bronchi, they whyche haue their mouthe and tethe ſtandyng farre out, tut mouthed.
                  
                     Bruchus, a flye, whyche eateth corne, as it groweth.
                  
                     Bruma, wynter.
                  
                     Brunduſiū, a citie in the royalme of Naples.
                  
                     Bruſeum, an herbour or hedge made with thornes and briers wounde togither.
                  
                     Brutii, people in the royalme of Naples, ioynynge to Sycile.
                  
                     Brutus, dul and groſſe witted like to a beeſt.
                  
                     Brionia, an herbe called with wynde,
                  
                     Briſſo, aui, are, to bruſe oute.
               
            
            
               
                  B ante V.
                  
                     BVbalus, a beaſte called a bugill.
                  
                     Bubaſtis, a cytie of Aegipte.
                  
                     Bubo, a ſhriche oule. alſo a botche.
                  
                     Bubſequa, a coweherde.
                  
                     Bubulcito, tas, to playe the herdeman.
                  
                     Bubulcus, a herde man.
                  
                     Bubile, an oxe houſe.
                  
                     Babulus, la, lum, that whiche longeth to an oxe or cowe, as Lac bubalum, cowe mylke.
                  
                     Bucardia, a ſtone lyke to a bugles harte.
                  
                     Bucca, the holownes of the cheke.
                  
                     Buccea, a morſell.
                  
                     Buccella, the ſame.
                  
                     Buccellatum, breadde called byſkat.
                  
                     Buccina, a trumpette.
                  
                     Buccino, aui, are, to blowe a trumpette.
                  
                     Buccinum, the ſowne of a trumpette.
                  
                     Buccones, they whiche haue great chekes.
                  
                     Bucculenti, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Buccula, a lytell cheke. Alſo that parte of a helmet, wherby wynde is taken.
                  
                     Bucentarius, a great ſhyppe or carrike.
                  
                     Bucentes, ſtyngynge gnattes.
                  
                     Bucentrum, a goodde prycke.
                  
                     Bucephalus, an oxe heed. and the horſe of Alexander the great was ſo called.
                  
                     Bucera armenta, herdes of nete, Bucolica, the ſame.
                  
                     Bucula, a heckfar.
                  
                     Buculus, a bullock, or ſteere.
                  
                     Bufo, onis, a tode.
                  
                     Bugloſſa, an herbe called langedebefe. Alſo a fyſhe called a ſole.
                  
                     Bugones, bees.
                  
                     Bulbito, aui, are, to caſte durte on one: proprely it is of chyldren, whiche nouryſſes do name cackynge.
                  
                     Bulbus, wyld garlyke hauynge a leafe lyke to a lylly. it is taken generally for all rotes that be rounde.
                  
                     Bulga, a male of lether, wherin clothes be caried.
                  
                     Bulimia, great famyne or hunger.
                  
                     Bulis, a name of a citie.
                  
                     Bulla, a tablette or other thynge hanged aboute ones necke, proprely whan it is holowe. A bobell of water, ſomtyme the heed of a nayle, otherwhyles ſtuddes in girdels or other thinges.
                  
                     Bullatus, he that is garnyſhed with tablettes or ſtuddes.
                  
                     Bullio, iui, ire, to boyle, or ſethe.
                  
                     Bullare, to bubble, as water whan it boyleth.
                  
                     Bumaſtos, a great teate.
                  
                     Bumelia, a kynde of aſhe.
                  
                     Bupina, great thurſte.
                  
                     Bupodes, great feete.
                  
                     
                        Bura, or Buris,
                      the hynder part of a plough whiche is croked.
                  
                     Burcana, an ile in the occean of Germany.
                  
                     Burdo, onis, a mulette.
                  
                     Burgundia, Burgoyne.
                  
                     Buſyris, a tyraunt, whyche was kynge of Aegypte.
                  
                     Buſtum, a place where deade bodyes haue ben brente.
                  
                     Buteo, a kynde of hawkes, whyche hathe thre ſtoones.
                  
                     Buthyſia, was called a great ſacrifice, ſuche as Hecatombe is.
                  
                     Butyrum, butter.
                  
                     Buxentum, a towne that the grekes calle Pyxunta.
                  
                  
                     Buxeta, a place where boxe trees growe.
                  
                     
                        Buxus, or Buſſus,
                      box tree.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶B ante Y.
                  
                     BYrſa, a hyde of a beaſte.
                  
                     Byſſus, fyne ſylke.
                  
                     Byzantium, a citie of Thrace now called Conſtantinople, whiche was ſomtyme buylded by a kynge of Spartane, called Pauſania, wherof the people and inhabitantes were called Byzanta
                           •
                        . Afterward it was augmented by Conſtantine the emperour. and was the chiefe and heed of all the empire orientall.
                  
                     Byzari, fantaſticall men, and of ſtraunge inuentions.
                  
                     Byrſeus, a tanner, or cordynar.
                  
                     Byſſus, a maner of fyne flaxe or lynnen. I ſuppoſe it to be cotten.
               
            
            
               
               
                  C ANTE A.
                  
                     
                        CABALLI, peple of Aſia.
                  
                     
                        Caball
                              •
                           s,
                      an horſe, yet in ſome partes of Englande, they doo calle an horſe a cable.
                  
                     Cabyle, a cite in Thracia
                  
                     Cabytin, a cytie of the lower Aſia, all thoughe Cabytli, be people in India.
                  
                     Cacabus, a pot or cauldron, wherin meate is ſodden.
                  
                     Cacus, a gyant, whome Hercules dyd ſlee.
                  
                     Cacabo, as, are, to calle lyke a pertryche.
                  
                     Cacodaemon, an yll ſpirite.
                  
                     Cachinnus, a ſcorne, or a lowde lawghter in deryſyon.
                  
                     Cachinnor, aris, ari, to laugh immoderately and with a loude voyce.
                  
                     Caco, cacaui, care, to ſhyte.
                  
                     Cacaturio, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Cacoethes gen. neut, an yll maner.
                  
                     Cacoſyntheton, an yll or defourmed compoſytion.
                  
                     Cacula, a page.
                  
                     Cacumen, the toppe of a hylle.
                  
                     Cado, cecidi, cadere, to falle, to dye.
                  
                     Cadere to happen.
                  
                     Cadere cauſa, to be nonſuite in an action.
                  
                     Cadere formula, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Cadauer, eris, a dead body, or carrayn.
                  
                     Caducus, ca, cum, fallynge, decayinge. Caducus morbus, the fallynge euyll.
                  
                     Caducarii, men hauyng the fallyng euyll.
                  
                     Caducor, ceris, duci, to be ouerthrowen.
                  
                     Cadulae guttae, drypyng of roſted meate.
                  
                     Cadiuus, ua, uum, that whiche falleth by it ſelfe, as Cadiua folla, leaues fallyn downe by them ſelfe. Cadiua poma, appulles fallen from the tree.
                  
                     Cadꝰ, a wine veſſel, it may be takē for a pipe.
                  
                     Caduceus, et Caduceum, a rodde, whiche poetes ſuppoſid that Mercury bare in his hande, as meſſanger of Iupiter.
                  
                     
                        Caduceato
                              •
                           ,
                      an ambaſſatour or Herault ſent for peace, or to take a truſe.
                  
                     Cadurcum, a keuerlede of lynnen, mooſte proprely a quilte.
                  
                     Cadiſcus, a veſſell wherin lottes for election or conſent of a multitude be put.
                  
                     Cadinus, the name of a Prynce, whyche browghte oute of Phaenicia into Greece ſyxetene letters, and was the fyrſte that wrate in profe, and founde out the fuſynge and caſtynge of mettalles.
                  
                     Caecias, the eaſte northeſt wynde.
                  
                     Caecus, ca, cum, blynde, alſo darke.
                  
                     Caeci morbi, ſyckeneſſes which be not apparant▪ the cauſes wherof, be hydde from phiſitions.
                  
                     Caecilia, a ſloworme that is blynde.
                  
                     Caecutio, tiui, tire, to ſe but lyttell, to be half blynde.
                  
                     Caeculto, aui, are, to haue a tymme ſight.
                  
                     Caeco, caui, are, to make blynde▪
                  
                  
                     
                        Caede
                              •
                           ,
                      dethe, ſlaughter or murder.
                  
                     Caedo, dis, caecidi, cedere, to beate, or whyp▪ to cutte, to ſtryke, to kylle, to me
                        •
                     ke. Caedere ianuam ſaxis, to breake the doore with ſtoones.
                  
                     Cedo, to departe, to gyue place, to obeye.
                  
                     Cedere bonis, to leaue the goodes.
                  
                     Cedere iuri, to gyue ouer a ryght or tytle.
                  
                     Cede manum, gyue me thy hande.
                  
                     Cedere, to ſuccede.
                  
                     Cedo, ſay, Cedo cuium puerum, Tel or ſay, whoſe chylde or ſeruant.
                  
                     Cedo, gyue, Quin tu mihi argentum cedo, But yet gyue thou me thy money.
                  
                     Caedua ſylua, woddes vſed to be cutte, Copeyſes.
                  
                     Caeſim, edgelinge. Alſo at one cutte or choppe.
                  
                     Caelum, heuen or the firmament. alſo a granynge yron.
                  
                     Coeleſtis, caeleſte, heuenly, or of heuen.
                  
                     Caelicus, ca, cum, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Caelitis, heuenly.
                  
                     Caelitus, heuenly creatures.
                  
                     Caelicola, he that inhabiteth heuen.
                  
                     Caelebs, a ſyngle man or woman. Alſo euery chaſte perſone.
                  
                     Caelibatus, a ſingle lyfe without mariage.
                  
                     Celſus, a, um, hygh.
                  
                     Celius mons, a mountayne in Rome.
                  
                     Caelo, aui, are, to graue in mettall.
                  
                     Caementū, morter, or any other groſſe matter, wherwith walles be made.
                  
                     
                        Caemen
                              •
                           arii,
                      daubers, pargetters, rowghe maſons, whiche do make onely walles.
                  
                     Caementitius, a, um, of morter.
                  
                     Caene, a citie.
                  
                     Caepe, an oynyon.
                  
                     Caepula, a chybboll.
                  
                     Caepi, the preter perfect tenſe of Capio, I haue taken.
                  
                     Caeruleus, a blewe colour.
                  
                     Caera, waxe. Alſo Caere were writynge tables couered with waxe.
                  
                     Caero, aui, are, to laye waxe on any thinge.
                  
                     Caeratura, the waxinge.
                  
                     Caereus, caerea, caereum, of waxe. Alſo fatte or tydye.
                  
                     Caeratum, a ſeared clothe.
                  
                     Caerefolium, an herbe callyd cheruyll.
                  
                     Caerrus, a taper, or waxe candell.
                  
                     Caereolus, a ſize candell.
                  
                     
                     Caerulus, la, lum, et Caeruleus, lea, leū, blewe of coloure.
                  
                     Caeroſus, a, um, that whiche is myxte with waxe.
                  
                     Caerium, a ſoore, whiche is lyke to a honye combe.
                  
                     Caeroma, an oyntment made with oyle and netes dunge, wherwith men that wraſtlyd vſed to anoynte their bodies. Alſo it ſygnifyeth the place where wraſtlers were annoynted.
                  
                     Caerete, an ancient citie in Tuſkay.
                  
                     Caerinthe, thre leaued graſſe, whiche bringeth furth whyte hony ſuckles, called clyuer graſſe.
                  
                     Caeſar, the emperour.
                  
                     Caeſarea, a citie in the coūtrey of Paleſtina.
                  
                     Caeſarauguſtana, a citie in the realme of Arragon.
                  
                     Caeſareus, ea, eum, pertaynynge to the emperoure.
                  
                     Caeſaries, heare, or a buſhe of heare.
                  
                     Caeſenna, a citie in Italy.
                  
                     Caeſa, a waipon, ſomtyme vſed in Fraunce. it is alſo a parte of an oration, not concludynge a ſentence: as it were a pyece of a ſentence.
                  
                     Caeſura, a piece as it were cut of from the remenaunt, proprely of a verſe.
                  
                     
                        Caeſ
                              ••
                           um,
                      an inſtrumente, wherwith iuorye 
                        ••
                     e bored. Alſo a weapon lyke a dagger.
                  
                     Caeſirium, a ſheete.
                  
                     Caeſius, gray of colour or blunket. Alſo he whiche hath grey eyen.
                  
                     Caeſones, they whiche be cutte oute of the mothers or dames belyes.
                  
                     Caeſpes, ceſpiris, a turfe.
                  
                     Caeſpititius, a, um, made of turfes.
                  
                     Caeſpito, taui, tare, to ſtumble.
                  
                     Caeſtus, tus, a weapon hauyng great plummates hangyng at the ende of a clubbe.
                  
                     Caeſius, caeſti, a gyrdell or corſe, whiche the huſbande dydde putte aboute his wyfe, whan he was maried, and at nyght dydde plucke it of.
                  
                     Caeter, caetera, caeterum, the remenaunt or reſydewe.
                  
                     Caeterum, et caetera, be aduerbes ſygnyfyenge, ſometyme moreouer, ſomtyme from hensforthe, ſometyme Caeterum, is a coniunction, and ſignifieth ſed, but.
                  
                     Caycus, the name of a ryuer in Phrigia.
                  
                     Cain, in hebrewe ſignifieth enuie.
                  
                     Caius, a propre name of a man.
                  
                     Cala, a byllette.
                  
                     Calabra, a conuocation place, where matters concernynge deuotion were treated.
                  
                     Calabria, a countrey ioynynge to Naples.
                  
                     Calaber, bra, brum, of Calaber.
                  
                     Caladrius, a byrde.
                  
                     Calae, arum, a cytie in India.
                  
                     Calagurium, a towne in Biſkay.
                  
                     Calamintha, an herb called calamēt or nep.
                  
                     Calanus, a philoſopher of Inde, whiche in the preſence of the greate Alexander, beinge of the age of .lxxiii. yeres, felynge hym ſelfe ſycke, made a bonefyre, and wente into the toppe therof, and bourned hym ſelfe.
                  
                     Calaris, a citie in Sardin
                        •
                     .
                  
                     Calamus, a rede, or wheate ſtrawe, Alſo a penne. It is alſo taken for a pype, or whyſtell. Alſo a fyſhynge rodde, and a twigge, wheron birde lyme is put. Alſo ſmall branches of trees, alſo it is a pole to mete with, conteynynge ſyxe cubytes and a ſpanne, a mette polle.
                  
                     Calamarium, a pennar.
                  
                     Calamitas, generalle dyſtruction, or myſerye.
                  
                     Calamitoſus, myſerable or ful of aduerſitie.
                  
                     Calamiſtrum, a pynne of wodde or iuorye, wherwith men and womē do ſet or trimme vppe their heare.
                  
                     Calantica, a tyre or burlette for a woman.
                  
                     Calones, boyes and knaues, which do folowe hoſtes, and do either carye the weapons of ſouldiours, or ſerue them of wode or water.
                  
                     Calathis, the name of a citie.
                  
                     Calathus, a baſkette or hamper.
                  
                     Calx, hic, calcis, the heele. it ſometyme ſignifieth the ende of a matter. ſommetyme a ſtroke with the heele.
                  
                     Calx, haec, lyme made of burned ſtones.
                  
                     Calcatus, cata, catum, pergetted or whyte lymed.
                  
                     Calcaria fornax, a lyme pytte.
                  
                     Calcarius, a lyme burner.
                  
                     Calcaneus, et calcaneum, the heele.
                  
                     Calceus, a ſhowe.
                  
                     Calcearium, a ſhowmakers ſhoppe.
                  
                     Calceolarius, a ſhowmaker.
                  
                     Calceo, aui, are, to putte on ſhoen.
                  
                     Calceamen, et calciamentum, a ſhowe, pynſon, or ſocke.
                  
                     Calcar, a ſpurre.
                  
                     Calcitro, aui, are, to kycke or wynſe.
                  
                     Calcitro, tronis, a horſe that dothe flynge or kycke.
                  
                     Calcitroſus, a, um, that oftentimes flyngeth or kycketh.
                  
                     Calculus, a peble ſtone. Alſo the ſtoone in the body. Alſo a cheſſe man. alſo accompt. alſo the leſte weight or poyſe that may be. Moreouer a knyfe made of a ſtone.
                  
                     Calculoſus, he that is moche diſeaſed with the ſtone. Calculoſus locus, a ſtonye place.
                  
                     
                     Calculo, aui, are, to caſte accompte.
                  
                     Calco, aui, are, to treade or preſſe downe.
                  
                     Caliga, a hoſe, or legge harnayſſe.
                  
                     Caligatus, hoſed.
                  
                     Caligo, ginis, darkenes.
                  
                     Caliginoſus, darke.
                  
                     Caligo, aui, are, to make darke, or be darke.
                  
                     Calor, er caliditas, heate, Caldor idem.
                  
                  
                     Caleo, calui, calere, to be hotte or warme.
                  
                     Caleſco, to waxe hotte.
                  
                     Calefacio, to make hotte.
                  
                     Calefio, I am made hotte.
                  
                     Calidus, da, dum, hotte.
                  
                     Calorificus, ca, cum, that whiche makethe hotte or warme.
                  
                     Callus, brawn, or hardnes of the fete made with goinge.
                  
                     Callidus, ſlye, or craftye.
                  
                     Calliditas, ſlyeneſſe.
                  
                     Calleo, ui, ere, to be harde as drawne. Alſo to knowe perfectly.
                  
                     Calendae, the firſte day of euery monthe.
                  
                     Callis, a way moche vſed.
                  
                     Callimachus, the name of a poete.
                  
                     Caliſthenes, the name of a philoſopher.
                  
                     Cales, a towne in Fraunce.
                  
                     Caliſtho, the mother of Archias, whiche gaue the name to the countreye of Archadia, whom poetes fained to be tranſformed into a beare.
                  
                     Calypſos, the name of an yle, alſo of a woman, whiche receyued Vlyſſes whanne he eſcapyd drownynge.
                  
                     Calyptra, a womans cappe or bonette.
                  
                     Calliope, oone of the vyrgines, whiche be named Muſae.
                  
                  
                     Calix, a cuppe to drynke wyne in. Alſo a potte, wherin potage is ſodden.
                  
                     Calyx, the parynge or ſkynne of an apple, or other lyke fruite. Alſo a keueryng made of clay. Alſo that parte, wherout ſpringeth a floure, whiche is grene.
                  
                     Calliblepharon, a medycyne to make the eyen fayre.
                  
                     Callirohè, a fountayne in Grece.
                  
                     Calydon, et Calydonia, a citie in Grece, alſo it was a great foreſt and wodde in Brytain, nowe called Englande.
                  
                     Calypſo, the doughter of Athlas, a Nimph or woman of the ſee.
                  
                     Calopodium, a patyn, or ſlypper.
                  
                     Calopus, a beaſte in Syria, which with his hornes throweth downe great trees.
                  
                     
                        Calaen
                              ••
                           ,
                      a citie in the countrey of Naples.
                  
                     Calpae, a mountayne in the ſouthweſt part of Spayne.
                  
                     Calua, the ſculle.
                  
                     Caluities, et caluitium, baldneſſe.
                  
                     Caluo, aui, are, to make balde.
                  
                     Calueo, I am balde.
                  
                     Calueſco, to waxe balde.
                  
                     Caluaria, all the heed, whanne the fleſſhe is awaye.
                  
                     Caluo, ui, ere, to deceyue or diſapoynt.
                  
                     Calumnia, a falſe or crafty accuſation.
                  
                     Calumniator, he that accuſethe or ſeweth a many vniuſtly.
                  
                     Calumnior, aris, ari, to accuſe or ſue a man vniuſtely.
                  
                     Caluinarius porcus, a ſwyne fed with graines, and ſuche other vyle thynges.
                  
                     Calaſtri pueri, ſyngynge boyes.
                  
                     Calta, an herbe growynge amonge corne, hauynge a yelowe flowre.
                  
                     Cambio, iui, ire, to chaunge. In the olde tyme it ſignified to fyght, to begyn a iournay, or to tourne in a iourney.
                  
                     Campſo, aui, are, to tourne an other way.
                  
                     Cambyſes, a kynge of Perſia, grandfather of Cyrus. It is alſo the name of a ryuer in the countrey of Hyrcania.
                  
                     Camera, the falſe roufe of a houſe, ſollar, or chamber.
                  
                     Camerare, to make a fauce roufe of a hous, or to make a ſolar, or to ſylde.
                  
                     Camerium, a towne of Italy in the countrey of Picenum.
                  
                  
                     Camertes, the inhabitauntes of Camerine, a towne in Sycile.
                  
                  
                     Camerina, an herbe, whiche beinge bruſed, prouoketh a man to vomite: wherof camme this prouerbe, Ne moueas camerinam, for, procure not harme to thy ſelfe.
                  
                     Camillus et Camilla, was in old tyme a boy, or a wenche that ſeruyd the byſhop, whan he dydde ſacrifyce. Alſo the name of a man or womanne.
                  
                     Chamamelum, et Camomilla, an herbe callyd Camomyll.
                  
                     Caminus, a chymnay or fournayſe.
                  
                     Caminatus, ta, tum, made lyke a fournayſe or chymney.
                  
                     Camaenae, idem quod Muſae.
                  
                  
                     Campana, a belle.
                  
                     Campania, the royalme of Naples.
                  
                     Campus, a felde.
                  
                     Campeſtria loca, playne countreys.
                  
                     Camparius, the keper of the feldes.
                  
                     Campſores, exchaungeours.
                  
                     Campe, a worme which eateth herbes, & is rough with many fete, & is callyd a palmer.
                  
                     Camus, a bytte or ſnaffyll. alſo a rayne or corde, wherwith men beinge condempned were bounde.
                  
                     Canabus, a wyne ſellar.
                  
                     Canna, a cane, alſo an oyle pot or canne.
                  
                     Canales, pipes, wherby water doth runne into a cundyte.
                  
                     
                     Canalicula, a lyttell pipe.
                  
                     Canaliculatus, facioned lyke a pipe.
                  
                     Cannabis, hempe.
                  
                     Cannabinus, na, num, made of hempe.
                  
                     Cancelli, latteſes, or any thynge made latteſe wyſe. Alſo ſecrete places to looke oute. Alſo windowes made with barres of wodde or yron with dyuers holes.
                  
                     Cancello, aui, are, to raſe or put out, to cut or teare any thyng that is written.
                  
                     Cancer, cri, a kynd of fyſhe called a crabbe, alſo a ſigne in heuen.
                  
                     Cancer, eris, a diſeaſe called a canker.
                  
                     Cancti, is the ſame that Cancelli be.
                  
                     Canctis, a pylle in medicine.
                  
                     Candax, acis, a quene of Aegypte.
                  
                     Candifacio, to make whyte, to bleache, to make to glowe lyke a burnyng cole.
                  
                     Candela, a candell.
                  
                     Candelabrum, a candelſtycke.
                  
                     Candeo, ui, dere, to glowe lyke a burnynge cole. Alſo to be white.
                  
                     Candico, aui, are, to be whyte, or to make whyte.
                  
                     Candidatus, was be amonge the Romains whiche laboured for ſome of the great offyces in the publyke weale: and they were ſo named by cauſe they dydde weare in the tyme of their election white apparayle. It maye be taken by tranſlation at this tyme, for them that in vniuerſities be called incep
                        •
                     oars, or regent maiſters. Alſo for theym that be lately chriſtened, or newely entred into ſome honorable or worſhypfull ſtate.
                  
                     Candido, aui, are, to make whyte.
                  
                     Candidus, da, dum, whyte. It is ſomtymes taken for gentyll or eaſye: as Candidus lector, a gentyll reder, whiche dothe not openly reproue that which he redeth. Candidus index, A gentyll or eaſy iuge.
                  
                     Candide, gentylly or eaſily.
                  
                     Candidus, ſometyme ſygnifyeth fortunate, and it ſygnifyeth more than Albus, as oryente whyte.
                  
                     Candifico, aui, care, to make whyte.
                  
                     Candor, oris, bryghtneſſe.
                  
                     Canentae, were of the olde Romaynes named the apparayle pertainyng to the heed.
                  
                     Caneo, et caneſco, ſcere, to be hore, or gray heared.
                  
                     Canephora, a mayden, whiche bare on her heed a baſket or cofer, wherin were iewels or images of the goddes.
                  
                     Cangrena, a ſore called a canker.
                  
                     Cani, be taken for white heares for age.
                  
                     Canica, branne, gurgeons.
                  
                     Caniceps, a beaſte, whiche hathe onely the face of a dogge.
                  
                     Canicula, a lyttell dogge or bytche. Alſo a ſterre, wherof canicular or dogge days be named Dies caniculares.
                  
                  
                     Caniculus, a whelpe.
                  
                     Caninus, doggiſſhe, or of a dogge.
                  
                     Caninum prandium, a dinar without wyne.
                  
                     Canis, a dogge, a kynd of fyſhe called dogfiſhe, a play at tables, a ſigne in heuē, wherof there be two ſterres, oone called Canis maior, the other canis minor.
                  
                  
                     Caniſtrum, a baſkette.
                  
                     Canities, grayneſſe of heares.
                  
                     Canna, a poete whiche was in the tyme of Martialis.
                  
                  
                     Canna, a cane or rede. alſo a canne or pot. alſo a village in the countrey of Galilee.
                  
                     Cannae, narū, a towne in the countrey of Apulia, where a greatte hooſte of Romayns was ſlayne by Hanniball.
                  
                     Cannetum, a place where kanes or reedes do growe.
                  
                     Cannitie, thatched houſes.
                  
                     Cano, cecini, nere, to ſynge, to playe on the ſhalme or other inſtrument. Alſo to praiſe, to prophecye.
                  
                     Canere receptui, to blowe the retraicte in battayle.
                  
                     Canon, a rule, alſo the inner parte of a targate, whiche keuereth the hande.
                  
                     Canopus, a citie in Aegypte.
                  
                     Canor, oris, melody, lowde.
                  
                     Canoroſus, a, um, full of melody.
                  
                     Cantabri, people in Spayne.
                  
                     Cantabria, a countrey in Spayne.
                  
                     Cantharia, a ſtone whiche hath the prynte of a blacke flye called a byttell.
                  
                     Cantharis, idis, uel Cantharida, cantharidae a greene worme ſhynynge with a gloſſe of golde, whiche is bredde in the toppe of aſſhes, and laide to a mannes body, maketh it to blyſter.
                  
                     Cantharus, a pot or a iugge. Alſo a beaſte, whereof there is founde noo female. Alſo a kynde of fyſſhe. alſo the blacke flye called the bytill.
                  
                     Cantherium, a maner of a charyot or wagen. alſo a perche or a rayle.
                  
                     Cantherius, a geldynge. Alſo a traunſome of timber.
                  
                     Canthus, the yron wherwith the extremytie of wheeles be bounden, the ſtraake of a carte.
                  
                     Canthes, organ pipes.
                  
                     Canticum, a pleaſant or mery ſonge.
                  
                     Cantilena, the melody of the ſonge.
                  
                     Cantio, a ſonge.
                  
                     Cantiuncula, a lyttell ſonge.
                  
                     Cantiro, aui, are, to ſynge often.
                  
                     Canto, aui, are, to ſynge or to charme.
                  
                     Cantus, tus, a ſonge.
                  
                     
                     Canus, an olde man.
                  
                     Canus, na, num, graye or hore.
                  
                     Canuſtum, a towne in the countreye of Apulia.
                  
                  
                     Capax, acis, that taketh or conteyneth any thynge, able to receiue.
                  
                     Capedo, the greatneſſe of a veſſell, or lyke thynge that contayneth.
                  
                     Capena, a towne by Rome.
                  
                     Caper, a gelded gote. ſometyme it is taken for the bucke gote. it alſo was the name of an olde grammarion.
                  
                     Capero, aui, to frowne or lowre.
                  
                     Capeſſo, ſi, ſere, to take, or to goo aboute to take, to receyue. ſommetyme it ſygnifyeth to brynge in.Plautus.
                  
                  
                     Caperus, the name of a kynge.
                  
                     Caphareus, a mountayne in Grece.
                  
                     Capharnaum, the chiefe citie in Galſlee.
                  
                     Capillamentum, the heare of a mans heed. ſomtyme the toppes of herbes, where the ſeedes do growe.
                  
                     Capillo, are, to make heare.
                  
                     Capillatus, a, um, that hath heare.
                  
                     Capillitium, the heare of the heed.
                  
                     Capillotenus, iuſte to the heare.
                  
                     Capillus, the heare.
                  
                     Capillus ueneris, an herbe callyd Mayden heare.
                  
                     Capio, coepi, capere, to take wyllyngely, or vnwyllyngly. Sommetyme it ſygnifieth to delyte, to mitigate, to deceyue, Capti dolis, deceyued with cautels. ſomtyme to cō
                     teyne. Du boni, quid turbae? aedes noſtrae uix capiunt, Good lorde, what a company? vſieth our houſe woll conteyne theym. Alſo to make.
                  
                     Capri o ciuis, blynde, alſo great louers be named capti.
                  
                     Capis, dis, a cuppe.
                  
                     Capiſtro, are, to halter, or putte on a rope, or corde.
                  
                     Capiſtrum, a haltar.
                  
                     Capitale, et capital, an offence punyſhed by deathe.
                  
                     Capitalis homo, a man that deſerueth deth. Alſo that is prone and redy to murder.
                  
                     Capitalis ira, mortall wrathe.
                  
                     Capitalis locus, the place of execution.
                  
                     Capitatus, ta, tum, that growethe greatte in the heade.
                  
                     Capite cenſi, were amonge the Romaynes the poore▪ ſorte of the people, whiche were diſcharged of all exactions, and remayned in the citie onely for generation.
                  
                     Capitellum, a lytell heed or top of a thing. Alſo the hygheſt parte of a pyllar.
                  
                     Capitili, any thing that couereth the heed, commonly they do call it a hoode.
                  
                     Capitis diminutio, a condemnation, wherby a man loſeth either libertie of his perſon, 
                        •
                      is made bond: or is baniſhed his countrey, or put out of the kynges protection, or renouncynge his owne familie, is adopted or take into an other, whiche is not now vſed.
                  
                     Capitolinus, was the ſurname of hym, that found the heed, whan the Capitole ſhulde be buylded.
                  
                     Capitoliū, the palaice of the citie of Rome.
                  
                     Capito, tonis, he that hath a great heed, alſo heddy or obſtinate in opinion.
                  
                     Capitoſus, he that hath a great heed, or a dull heed.
                  
                     Capitulatum, any thynge that is growen to a heed.
                  
                     Capitulū, a lytle heed, alſo a chapiter.
                  
                     Cappa, the name of a greke letter, for whiche the latins vſe C.
                  
                  
                     Cappadocia, a countrey in the leſſe Aſia.
                  
                     Cappadox, docis, a man of that countrey.
                  
                     Capparis, a frute called Capers, wherwith we do make ſalates & ſauce for mutton, whiche eatē before meles, be very good for the ſtomake, & ageinſt diſeaſes of the ſplene.
                  
                     Capra, a goote.
                  
                     Capella, a lyttell goote.
                  
                     Capreolus, a kydde.
                  
                     Capraria, an yle in the ſee called Liguſticū.
                  
                  
                     Caprarius, a goote herde.
                  
                     Caprea, a beaſte whiche doth ſee wonderfull quickly. It is alſo a kynde of vynes ſoo named. Moreouer an yle by Naples.
                  
                     Capreolus, a beaſte called a roo. It is alſo the tendrell of a vyne, whiche wyndeth diuers ways, called alſo Pampinus.
                  
                  
                     Capreus, a, um, that whiche is of a gote. Caprillus, a, um, idem.
                  
                  
                     Capricornus, a ſygne in heuen, conteininge xx. ſterres.
                  
                     Caprificacio, the paryng away of the barke of a tree.
                  
                     Caprificus, a wylde fygge tree, which runneth vp by walles.
                  
                     Caprigenus, na, num, that whiche is of the kynde of a goote.
                  
                     Caprile, a ſtable or pen, where got▪ be kept.
                  
                     Caprimulgi, birdes like to gulles, which appere not by day, but in the night they come into gote pennes, and do ſouke the gotes, wherby the vdders of them be mortified.
                  
                     Caprinus, na, num, of a gote.
                  
                     Caproneae, the coppe of lyttel mane, that is in the forheed of a horſe, or other beaſt.
                  
                     Caprunculum, a greatte veſſell.
                  
                     Capſa, a coffer or cheſte.
                  
                     Capſaces, a veſſell wherin oyle is kept.
                  
                     Capſariꝰ, he that kepith cheſtis, or apparel.
                  
                     Capſus, a couered cart.
                  
                     
                     Captio, nis, the acte of takynge or deceyuynge, or that wherby any thynge is taken.
                  
                     Captiuncula, the diminutiue of Captio.
                  
                  
                     Captioſus, captious or deceytfull.
                  
                     Captiuus, a pryſoner taken in warres, or a ſclaue.
                  
                     Captiuitas, captiuitie or bondage.
                  
                     Capto, aui, are, to gette the fauour of oone with tayre wordes, pleaſant dedes, or rewardes. Alſo to deceyue or take quyckely.
                  
                     Captator, oris, he that vſeth that crafte.
                  
                     Captatio, the acte or crafte to gette fauor. alſo deceyte or ſubtyltie.
                  
                     Captura, the apprehendynge or gettyng.
                  
                     Captus, ta, tum, taken.
                  
                     Captus, tus, chaunce. alſo deceyte, perceyuynge of a thinge, or capacitie. Captus hominum, Mens capacitie. ſometyme dilectation, Non poſſum adduci et ſuſcipere è pecunia captum, I may not be brought therto, and take dilectation of the money.
                  
                     Capua, a citie in the royalme of Naples.
                  
                     Capula, a cuppe with a handell.
                  
                     Capularis ſenex, an olde manne redye to be layde in his beere.
                  
                     Capulum, a rydynge knotte.
                  
                     Capulus et Capulum, what ſo euer may receyue any thynge into it: proprelye it is a beere, wherin deed corpſis are borne: alſo the hyltes or handell of a ſworde.
                  
                     Capus, a capon.
                  
                     Caput, a heed. Alſo the begynnynge of euery thynge. Alſo a chapiter of a boke.
                  
                     Caput tacere, to gather a ſoore to a heed.
                  
                     Capys, a mans name that buylded Capua.
                  
                  
                     Carabus ſeu Caramus, a fyſſhe calledde a Crabbe.
                  
                     Caraxus, was the brother of Sapphus.
                  
                     Carbaſus ī plurali Carbaſa, a kynd of lynnen cypres: alſo the ſaylle clothe of a ſhyppe. Moreouer it is a ſyne garment of women of ſylke or lynnen.
                  
                     Carbo, a cole. It was alſo the name of a Romayne.
                  
                     Carbunculare, to haue a Carbouncle or botche.
                  
                     Carbunculus, a botche, whiche commeth of inflamation. it is alſo a kynde of precyouſe ſtones, whiche do ſhyne lyke a bournynge cole. Moreouer a defaulte in a vyne, and other trees, wherby they ar burned, whiche happeneth about the canicular dayes. Alſo it ſignifyeth erthe, wherin is founde blacke ſlatte ſtones.
                  
                     Carcer, ceris, a pryſon. Alſo Carceres were ſtables, wherin horſes were ſette, whanne they ſhulde runne.
                  
                     Carcerarius, ria, rium, of a pryſon.
                  
                     Carcheſium, a ſtandynge cuppe with handelles.
                  
                     Carchoquios, a kynde of frogges, hauyng on their bealyes yelowe ſpottes.
                  
                     Carcina, a cytie.
                  
                     Carcritoma, atis, a ſoore called a canker.
                  
                     Cardamomum, a kynde of ſpice.
                  
                     Cardiacus morbus, a ſyckenes which hapneth by weakenes of the body, with moch ſweatte and febleneſſe of the ſtomake.
                  
                     Cardinalis, le, chiefe or principall.
                  
                     Cardineus, the ſame.
                  
                     Cardinum, an herbe, whiche ſome do ſuppoſe is Creſſis.
                  
                     Cardo, dinis, the poſte, whereon the doore hangeth, and is moued. Alſo a mere or boū
                     des, whiche paſſith through the felde from the ſouthe to the northe.
                  
                     Cardo rei, the effect of the matter or thing: the chiefe poynte of the matter.
                  
                     Cardo cauſae, the matter in lawe.
                  
                     Carduelis, a byrde called a goldefinche.
                  
                     Carectum, a place full of ſedges.
                  
                     Careo, rui, rere, to lack proprely thoſe good thynges, which ones were had. Somtyme it ſygnifieth to be without a thyng: as Careo culpa, I am without faute. Careo febre, I am without feuer.
                  
                     Cares, the name of a caruer, the ſcholar of Lyſyppus.
                  
                     Carex, ricis, an herbe harde and prickinge.
                  
                     Caria, a region in Aſia the laſſe.
                  
                     Caries, a lyttel worme that eateth wodde: It is alſo putrifaction or fylthe growen by age or contynuance.
                  
                     Carina, the keele or bottom of the ſhyppe.
                  
                     Carinae, narum, a ſtrete in Rome, wherein Pompey dwelled.
                  
                     Carino, aui, are, to make a thyng of the facion of a ſhyppes bottome. Alſo to ſpeake to a mannes reproche.
                  
                     Caritas, tatis, ſcarcitie, proprely of that whiche ſerueth for the ſuſtinance of man.
                  
                     Carius, the name of Iupiters ſonne.
                  
                     Carmania, a countrey of the laſſe Aſia.
                  
                     Carmelus, the name of two ſondry hylles in Iudea.
                  
                     Carmen, minis, a verſe or metre. Alſo the hole warke whiche is made in verſis. Somtyme it ſignifieth a charme.
                  
                     Carmenta, the name of a lady, whiche had the ſpirite of prophecy, and gaue aunſwere in verſes.
                  
                     Carminare, to carde wulle, or other lyke thynge.
                  
                     Carminarii, they that do pike or make clene wulle, or carde.
                  
                     Carmon, a place in Meſſenia, and the temple of Appollo in Laconia.
                  
                     Carnarium, a larder, wherin hangeth ſalte

fleſhe, ſometyme it ſygnifyeth a bowchers ſhambles.
                  
                     Carnarius, a boucher.
                  
                     Carnarius, a, um, that pertayneth to fleſſhe.
                  
                     Carneus, a, um, that whiche is of fleſhe.
                  
                     Carni, the name of certain people in Italy.
                  
                     Carnifex, ficis, a boucher of men, or hangman, that cutteth theym in pieces.
                  
                     Carnifleina, the place where ſuche execution is doone. Alſo the offyce or acte of a hangemanne.
                  
                     Carnificium, the ſame acte.
                  
                     Carnificinus, na, num, pertaynynge to the ſayde acte.
                  
                     Carnificor, aris, ari, to playe the hangmannes part.
                  
                     Carniuorum, any thynge that deuourethe fleſſhe.
                  
                     Carnoſitas, abundance of fleſhe.
                  
                     Carnoſus, fleſſhye.
                  
                     Carnotum, the mydle region of al France.
                  
                     Carnuntum, a towne in the border of Germanye.
                  
                     Donatus.
                     Caro, carnis, fleſhe, proprely of that whiche is deade.
                  
                     Carpatinae, plowghemens bootes, made of vntāned lether, they may be called cokers.
                  
                     Carpathos, an Ile agaynſte Aegypte, the myddes betwene Rhodes and Candy.
                  
                     Carpentarius, a carte wright, or carpentar.
                  
                     Carpentarius equus, a carte horſe, or charyotte horſe.
                  
                     Carpentum, a chariot or wagen.
                  
                     Carpinus, a kynde of trees.
                  
                     Carpio, a fyſhe called a carpe.
                  
                     Carpo, pſi, pere, to gather or plucke. Alſo to cheſe, to reproue, or taunt, to vſe .i. fruor. Alſo carpere uires, is to make feble.
                  
                     Carpere uiam, to walke.
                  
                     Carpere uirales auras, to lyue.
                  
                     Carpere lanam, to toſe woll.
                  
                     Carpere cibum, to eate.
                  
                     Carptim, pykynge out here and there.
                  
                     Carra, re, a citie of Arrabie.
                  
                     Carruca, a carte.
                  
                     Carrucarius, a, um, pertaynynge to a carte.
                  
                     Carrus, a charyotte.
                  
                     Carreia, a towne in Spayne.
                  
                     Carthaginenſis, pertaynynge to Cartage.
                  
                     Carthago, thaginis, the cytie of Cartage in Affryke.
                  
                     Caruncula, a lyttell fleſhe.
                  
                     Carus, a, um, deere.
                  
                     Carya, the name of a citie in Grece.
                  
                     Caryatides, the images of women holding garlandes, or other lyke thynge ſette vp to garnyſhe howſes.
                  
                     Caryca, a fygge, ſpecially drye.
                  
                     Caryota, a date.
                  
                     Caſa, a cotage.
                  
                     Caſaria, the woman that kepeth the cotage
                  
                     Caſcus, a, cum, olde.
                  
                     Caſeus, cheſe.
                  
                     Caſeus muſieus, Rowen cheſe.
                  
                     Caſius, a hyll, in the borders of Aegypte.
                  
                     Caſia, a ſpice, whiche hathe the vertue of Cynamome, and is wonderfull ſoote in ſauoure.
                  
                     Caſito, aui, are, to fal or droppe oftentimes.
                  
                     Caſpiae porrae, certain Mountayns in Aſia.
                  
                     Caſpium mare, the ſee whiche ioyneth to the ſayde hylles.
                  
                     Caſſes, ſis, nettꝭ which may be called hays. Alſo an helmette, but than it hath Caſsidis in the genitife caſe.
                  
                     Caſsiculus, a lyttell haye.
                  
                     Caſsida, ae, an helmette.
                  
                     Caſsiope, a ſigne in heuen, that hathe .xiii. ſterres, and is figured lyke to a woman, ſittynge in a chayre.
                  
                     Caſsita, a larke.
                  
                     Caſsitias, the gumme that droppeth out of afirre tree.
                  
                     Caſſo, aui, are, to put oute, or make of none effecte.
                  
                     Caſsius, a propre name of a man.
                  
                     Caſſus, a, um, voyde and of none effecte.
                  
                     Caſtalius, a fountayn in the fote of the hill of Pernaſſus, whiche was dedicate to the Muſis.
                  
                     Caſta mola, was a kynde of ſacrifice, that the vyrgins Veſtales made.
                  
                     Caſtaneum, a cheſten, or cheſte nutte.
                  
                     Caſtellani, the inhabitauntes of a lyttelle walled towne.
                  
                     Caſtellarim, one lyttelle walled towne after an other.
                  
                     Caſtellum, a lyttell walled towne. It is alſo a cundyte, oute of the whyche water rounnethe.
                  
                     Caſterium, a docke where ſhippꝭ be laid vp.
                  
                     Caſtigo, aui, are, to chaſtiſe with wordis. alſo to correcte or amende▪
                  
                  
                     Caſtiras, taris, chaſtitie.
                  
                     Caſtor, a Beuer, whiche hath the taile of a fyſhe, in the reſidue is like to an ottar.
                  
                     Caſtor et Pollux, were bretherne both atte one byrth, which were honored for goddi.
                  
                     Caſtra, caſtrorū, an armie of men of warre, whan they lye or abyde in any place. Alſo the place where the hoſte lodgethe. Alſo the Pauilions beinge pyched.
                  
                     Caſtrametor, to lay or lodge an army.
                  
                     Caſtro, aui, are, to gelde. Sometyme to cut of generally.
                  
                     Caſtrenſis, caſtrenſe, that which pertaineth to an hooſte or armye.
                  
                     Caſtrum, a caſtell or fortreſſe.
                  
                     
                     Caſtula, lynnen clothe, wherwith maidens dyd gyrde them ſelfe vnder their pappes.
                  
                     Caſtus, ta, tum, chaſte, honeſte, and contynent, or vncorrupted.
                  
                     Caſura, a falle a decay.
                  
                     Caſus, happe, ruyne, myſfortune, or myſerie. alſo a caſe.
                  
                     Cattabathmus, a towne in Aphrica.
                  
                     Catecheſis, inſtruction or informacyon to hym that begynneth any thynge.
                  
                     Catechiſo, aui, are, to inſtructe, to infourme or teache.
                  
                     Cataclyſmus, an vnyuerſall fludde.
                  
                     Catadromum, the place where horſes be courſed.
                  
                     Catalecticum merrum, a verſe wherein one onely ſyllable lacketh.
                  
                     Catalogus, ſpeche or writyng where thinges be recyted in order and numbre, a reherſalle.
                  
                     Cataphractus, armed at all pieces.
                  
                     Cataphracti equites, horſemenne on barbyd horſes.
                  
                     Cataphractae naues, keuered ſhyppes.
                  
                     Cataphrygae, Certayne heretikes, whiche ſayde that the holy goſte was not in the apoſtels, but onely in them ſelfes.
                  
                     Cataplaſma, a playſter made with herbes and ſewet.
                  
                     Catapotia, pylles in medicine.
                  
                     Catapulta, an arowe.
                  
                     Catarthaera, a portculious, Alſo cloudes. ſomtyme caues in the erthe.
                  
                     Catarthactae, gret courſes of water, falling downe from highe places. Alſo the places from whens they do falle.
                  
                     Catarthus, a rewme or ſtyllynge downe of water or fleme from the heed.
                  
                     Cataſcopium, a ſhyppe that watcheth or eſpieth for other.
                  
                     
                        Cata
                              •
                           ta,
                      a cage, wherin men be ſette, whiche are to be ſolde. alſo wherin they were punyſſhed.
                  
                     Cataſtroma, parte of a ſhyppe or pauemēt.
                  
                     Cataſtrophe, a ſubuerſion, or a volume.
                  
                     Catechumenus, he that is newly inſtructid.
                  
                     Categoria, accuſation.
                  
                     Catellus, catella, a lyttell hounde.
                  
                     Catena, a chayne.
                  
                     Cateno, aui, nare, to chayne togither.
                  
                     Catenula, a lyttell chayne.
                  
                     Caterna, a company of men of warre. ſome tyme a multitude of people.
                  
                     Cateruarii, they that doo aſſemble in companyes.
                  
                     Cateruatim, by companyes.
                  
                     Catharctica, purgatiue medicines.
                  
                     Cathedra, a benche or ſtoole.
                  
                     Cathinea, a kynde of erthe, wherof latyne mettall is made.
                  
                     Catholicus, vniuerſalle. nowe it is vſed for hym that kepeth the faithe, as the vniuerſall churche hath obſeruyd it.
                  
                     Catillatio, a great reproche layde to gentylmen, whiche had robbed the countreis, that were alied to the Romaynes, and had riottouſly conſumed the goodes.
                  
                     Catillones, lycke dyſhes, glottons.
                  
                     Catillus, the ouer ſtone of a mylle, callyd the runner.
                  
                     Catina, a citie in Sicile.
                  
                     Catinus, a potage dyſhe.
                  
                     Catillus, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Cathortoma, the righte worke of vertue, a ryght dede.
                  
                     Cathortoſis, a right affection.
                  
                     Catus, wyſe, or wytty. Alſo the name of a noble and wyſe familye in Rome.
                  
                     Catularia, one of the gates of Rome.
                  
                     Catulire, the deſyre of female kynd, to cō
                     pany with the male kynde, proprely to goo aſſaute, to rudder, to horſynge, or to blyſſonynge.
                  
                     Catulitio, the goinge aſſaulte. &c.
                  
                     Catullus, the name of a poete.
                  
                     Catulus, a kytten or yonge catte. Alſo it is putte generally for the yonge kynde of all beaſtis. alſo for a dogge.
                  
                     Catus, a catte.
                  
                     Caua, a hole, wherin byrdes do brede.
                  
                     Cauedium, is a place at large, hauyng many porches, whiche ſerueth to a commune, lyke a market place.
                  
                     Caucaſus, a very hygh mountayne in Inde.
                  
                     Cauda, a tayle of a beaſte. ſomtyme a mans priuye membre.
                  
                     Caudacus, gentyll and pleaſant.
                  
                     Caudax, dacis, the lower part of a tree next the roote. Alſo a table, hauynge many leaues or tables.
                  
                     Caudicariae naues, a ſhyppe whyche caryeth vytayles.
                  
                     Caudis, a towne of Samnie.
                  
                     Cauea, a caue or darke place in the groūd. Alſo a cage or cowpe, wherein byrdes be kept. Moreouer a place where a comedy or enterlude is playde.
                  
                     Caueo, caui, cauêre, to beware, to eſchue: alſo to prouyde diligently, to take hede. Caue tibi, Take hede of thy ſelfe.
                  
                     Cauerna, a caue or holowe place in the grounde.
                  
                     Cauilla, uel Cauillum, a mocke or a ieſte.
                  
                     Cauillo, aui, are, uel cauillor, ari, to ieſte to mocke, to bourde.
                  
                     Caula, a ſhepe houſe, but proprely a folde.
                  
                     Cauleſcere, to growe into ſtalke.
                  
                     Cauliculus, a tender ſtalke.
                  
                     
                     Caulis, a ſtalke or ſtem of an herbe or tree. Alſo it is an herbe called colewortes. It is ſomtyme taken for all pot herbes, the rūpe of a beaſte, and for a ſhafte or iauelyn.
                  
                     Caulon, a towne, whiche of Plinie is ſituate in the fyrſte region of Italy.
                  
                     Cauma, aris, heate.
                  
                     Caunus, an yle in the occean ſee.
                  
                     Cauo, aui, are, to make holowe.
                  
                     Caupo, onis, a howkſter that ſelleth meare and drynke.
                  
                     Caupona, a woman that ſelleth wyne. Alſo the tauerner.
                  
                     Cauponaria, tauerners crafte.
                  
                     Cauponius, ia, iū, ptaynyng to the tauerne.
                  
                     Cauponor, to ſell as howkſters do.
                  
                     Cauros, was an yle, whiche afterward was called Andros, and after that Antandros.
                  
                  
                     Caurus, a weſterne wynde.
                  
                     Cauſia, a hatte or cappe after the facion of Macedonye.
                  
                     Cauſon, nis, a burnynge feuer.
                  
                     Cauſſa, a cauſe or matter in ſuite.
                  
                     Cauſſarii milites, ſouldiours, which for cauſes reaſonable, were diſcharged oute of the armye.
                  
                     Cauſſaria miſsio, a diſcharge of a ſouldiour for a reaſonable cauſe.
                  
                     Cauſſatio, an in warde ſyckenes.
                  
                     Cauſatiuus, tiua, tiuum, that is cauſe that a thynge is done.
                  
                     Cauſsidicus, a man of lawe.
                  
                     Cauſsificor, aris, to complayn me of a thing that dothe greue me.
                  
                     Cauſſo, aui, are, to cauſe.
                  
                     Cauſſor, aris, to fynd the matter, or to bring for excuſe.
                  
                     Cauſtica medicamenta, medicines, whiche do burne the ſkynne or the fleſhe.
                  
                     Cauréres et cautéria, is a markynge yron, or an inſtrument, wherwith ſoores ar burned.
                  
                     Cauteriatus, ta, tum, marked or burned with that inſtrument, or marked with an yron.
                  
                     Cautes, a ragged rocke, or hylle fulle of greatte ſtoones.
                  
                     Cautum eſt, It is ordeyned or prouided by an acte of parlyament or counſayle.
                  
                     Cautio eſt, it is nede to prouide or beware.
                  
                     Cautus, a man that is circumſpecte.
                  
                     Cauus, a, um, holowe.
                  
                     Cauus, an holowe place.
                  
                     Cauſter, a fludde of Lidis.
                  
                     Cayſtrus, foem. gen. a citie of Cilycie.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶C ante B.
                  
                     CEcrops, pis, the fyrſte kynge of Athenes.
                  
                     Cecropius, a, um, of Cecrops.
                  
                     Cecropidis, a man or womanne, commynge of hym.
                  
                     Cecropide, men of Athenes.
                  
                     Cecriphalea, a rocke in the ſee, or an yle.
                  
                     Cedar, a region of Arabie.
                  
                  
                     Cedo, ceſsi, dere, to gyue place, to goo away, to voyde, to withdrawe, to graunte, to gyue.
                  
                     Cedo bonis, I leue my goodes to an other.
                  
                     Cedere interceſsioni, to procede no further, to admytte the contrary.
                  
                     Cedo iuri, I releaſe my ryghte.
                  
                     Cedunt mihi ea bona, thoſe goodes ar com or happened vnto me.
                  
                     Cedite manus, gyue me your handes.
                  
                     Ceſsit, it hapned.
                  
                     Cedo, in the imperatiue mode, Tell thou.
                  
                     Cedir dies, amonge lawyers is, The tyme is come, that the dette is due to be payde.
                  
                     Cedria, the firſt ſwearyng of the pitche tre.
                  
                     Cedrides, the fruite of the cedre tree.
                  
                     Cedropolis, a towne in Caria.
                  
                     Cedros, an yland in the coſtis of Germany.
                  
                     Cedroſis, a whyte vyneyarde.
                  
                     Cedrus, a kynde of trees, whiche is excellent for buyldinge, foraſmoche as the tymbre therof is great, & very lyght: alſo it dureth longe, and is neuer eaten with wormes, and is ſoote in ſauour, hauyng leaues lyke to a cypreſſe tree.
                  
                     Celebreſco, I am in greate fame, or am renoumed.
                  
                     Celebris, bre, famous. Alſo ſwifte, honourable.
                  
                     Celebritas, tatis, renoume. Alſo a great aſſemblye.
                  
                     Celebriter, honourably.
                  
                     Celebro, aui, are, to celebrate or brynge in renoume, to make good reporte. Alſo to haunte, to honour, or worſhip.
                  
                     Celer, eris, ſwyfte, quycke.
                  
                     Celero, aui, are, to doo a thynge quyckely, to make haſte.
                  
                     Celeres, runnynge horſes.
                  
                     Celeuſtes, he that calleth on the mariners, to rowe or labour.
                  
                     Celeuſma, the ſhoute or crye that ſhypmen or botemen do make, whan the maſter doth whyſtell or calle.
                  
                     Cella, a cellar, wherin any thyng is kepte. Alſo where we be pryuily waſſhed. Alſo a ſecrete place in the temple.
                  
                     Cellaria, a wyne ſellar.
                  
                     Cellarium, a ſtorehouſe.
                  
                     Cellarius, he that hathe the charge of a cellar or ſtorehouſe.
                  
                     Celatim, priuily.
                  
                     Celo, aui, are, to hyde, or wyll not knowe.
                  
                     Celox, a ſwyfte ſhyppe, or barke.
                  
                     
                     Celſus, hygh.
                  
                     Celtae, Frenche men.
                  
                     Celtiberi, a people in Spayne, of Celtis, Frenche men, and Iberis Spayniardes aſſocyate togyther.
                  
                     Celtis, a kynde of ſweete trees growynge in Affryke.
                  
                     Celydrus, a womannes apparayle.
                  
                     Cemellio, a towne in Ligurſa.
                  
                     Cenchris, a byrd lyke an hauke, which maketh a great ſowne whan he crieth. Alſo it is the name of a town or coūtrey in Grece.
                  
                     Cenina, a citie of Italy.
                  
                     Cenomani, people in Lombardy.
                  
                     Cenodoxia, vayne glorye.
                  
                     Cenotaphium, a tombe, where no manne is buryedde.
                  
                     Cenſio, ſui, ere, to ſuppoſe, to ſhewe myne opinion or ſentence, to determyne, to be diſcontent, to numbre people, to the intent to take them, whiche be apte for the warres, or to leuye or taxe a ſubſidie.
                  
                     Cenſio, nis, a chaſtyſement.
                  
                     Cenſor, a iudge of mens maners. Alſo ſuche as was appoynted to valewe mennes goodes.
                  
                     Cenſorius uir, he that hath bene a Cenſour, or is worthy for his grauitie to iuge and correcte other mens maners.
                  
                     Cenſualis, he that dothe aſſiſte or accompany the iuges of maners called cenſors.
                  
                     Cenſui agri, were thoſe fieldes, whiche by the lawe ciuile mought be boughte & ſolde.
                  
                     
                        Cenſu
                              •
                           a,
                      the authoritie or iudgement of a cenſour. Alſo correction of maners, lawe, or decree, concernynge maners.
                  
                     Cenſus, ſus, yerely reuenues. Alſo valuation of goodes. Alſo a ſubſidie, the numbring of the people.
                  
                     Cenſus, ſi, he that is aſſeſſed or taxed, capite cenſi, taxed by the polle, or he that payeth heed ſyluer.
                  
                     Centaurea, a kynde of herbe called Cētory
                  
                     Centauri, a people in the coūtrey of Theſſaly, whom the poetes dyd fayne to be the one half lyke a man, the other halfe lyke a hors. Alſo they be certayne great ſhyppes.
                  
                     Centaurus, a ryuer, whiche was fyrſte called Euenus.
                  
                  
                     Centimanus, hauynge a hundred handes.
                  
                     Centipeda, a worme called a Palmer, whiche is heary, and hath many feete.
                  
                     Cento, a quylte, or a iakke, or other lyke thynge ſtuffed with linnen, floxe, or cotten, or a cuſhyn made of pieces of cloth of dyuers colours.
                  
                     Centrum, the poynt, whiche is in the very myddes of a thynge.
                  
                     Centum, a hundred.
                  
                     Centies, a hundred tymes.
                  
                     Centum uiri, certayne iudges in Rome, beinge of the numbre of a hundred and fiue. And their iugementes were called Centum uiralia iudicia.
                  
                  
                     Centunculus, a vyle garment.
                  
                     Centuria, a parte of an hoſte, conteynynge an hundred men. Alſo a porcion of ground in the felde, contayning an hundred acres.
                  
                     Centuriatim, by a hundred togyther. Alſo plentuouſely, or in a great numbre.
                  
                     Centurio, nis, a capitayn ouer one hundred of foote men.
                  
                     Centurio, aui, are, to diuide men into a company, contaynyng an hundred perſons: or feldes into a hundred acres of lande.
                  
                     Centuſsis, a hundred pounde weyghte, or a hundred pieces of that money that were called Aſſes.
                  
                  
                     
                        Cephale, or lis,
                      ſygnifieth the heed.
                  
                     Cephalea, the heed ache, whan al the heed dothe ake.
                  
                     Cephalus, the name of a man, and of a fiſhe.
                  
                     Cepheus, the name of a kynge of Ethiope.
                  
                     Cephiſia, the region Attica.
                  
                     Cephiſis, a laake nere to the ſee Athlanticū
                  
                  
                     Cepites, a precious ſtoone, hauynge manye whyte ſtrikes.
                  
                     Ceporus, a gardyner.
                  
                     Ceramicus, a place in Athenes, where men beinge ſlayne in battayle, were buryed. Alſo an nother place, where commune women dwellyd.
                  
                     Ceraſtes, a ſerpente, whiche hathe hornes lyke a ramme.
                  
                     Ceraſus, a chery tree.
                  
                     Ceraſum, a cherye.
                  
                     Cerates, a ſmalle weight or poyſe, whyche is the fourth part of a ſcrippule, the .xlviii. parte of an vnce.
                  
                     Ceratinae, is of Quint. called a ſpece of reaſonynge inexplycable.
                  
                     Cerberus, the porter of hell. Alſo a dogge with thre heedes, which Hercules drewe out of Helle.
                  
                     Cercopithecus, a beaſt called a Marmoſet.
                  
                     Cerdo, nis, a cobblar.
                  
                     Cereale, pertaining to Ceres the goddeſſe.
                  
                     Cerebrum, the brayne.
                  
                     Cerebroſus, a mā being braynſycke, or wild brayned, truſtynge onely to his owne wyl.
                  
                     Ceres, the goddeſſe of corne. ſometyme it is vſed of Poetes for the ſelfe corne, or breadde.
                  
                     Ceretani, a people in Spayne.
                  
                     Ceretum, a towne in Italye.
                  
                     Cerinthe, es, an herbe called a honyſuckle.
                  
                     Cerinthus, a thynge which is founde in hony combes, wheron bees do feede.
                  
                     
                     Ceritus, madnes or frenſy.
                  
                     Cice. Dolobelle. & ad Attic.
                     Cerno, creui, cernere, to ſee or perceyue alſo to conſyder: ſometyme to iuge, or determine. ſomtyme to trie out. Alſo to ſyght in battayle, to entre into lande, which is happened vnto me by inheritance or gifte.
                  
                     Cernuus, ſtowpynge or lookynge downewarde.
                  
                     Certamen, a conflycte or byckerynge.
                  
                     Certatim, oone contendynge or ſtryuynge with an other.
                  
                     Certiſſo, aui, are, to be certified or ſure.
                  
                     Certitudo, dinis, certaintie or ſuretie.
                  
                     Certo, aui, are, to contende or ſtryue.
                  
                     Certus, ta, tum, certayn, ſure without dout. ſometyme it ſygnifyeth euen as we wolde haue it.
                  
                     Certé et certò, ſurely.
                  
                     Ceruus, a harte, or a forke, wherwith cotages be propped vp.
                  
                     Ceruinus, na, num, of a harte.
                  
                     Ceruicale et ceruical, a bolſtar.
                  
                     Ceruiſia, ale or beere.
                  
                     Ceruix, uicis, the hynder part of the necke.
                  
                     Cerunina, eare waxe.
                  
                     Cerus, a kynde of oken trees.
                  
                     Ceruſſa, Ceruſe, or whyte leade, wherwith ſome women be paynted, and colde playſters be made of it.
                  
                     Cerix, cis, a purſyuant or bedyll.
                  
                     Ceſpes, ceſpitis, a tirfe. ſome do call theym ſottes, graſſe and erthe togither.
                  
                     Ceſsim ire, to recule or go backe.
                  
                     Ceſim ferire, to ſtryke edgelynge.
                  
                     Ceſſo, aui, are, to ceaſſe, to leaue warke, to abyde.
                  
                     Ceſſator, he that is ſlowe in dooinge his dewtie.
                  
                     Ceſtrum, an inſtrument, wherwith iuorie is made holow. alſo a dagger, or a wunbyl. alſo an herbe, whiche is called Berayne.
                  
                     Cetariae, places nyghe the ſee ſyde, where Tunye and other greatte fyſſhes be taken and ſaltyd.
                  
                     Cetarius, a fyſhemonger, or taker of great fyſſhes.
                  
                     Cetra, a lyghte tergate.
                  
                     Cetrati milites, Sowldyours with lyghteter gates.
                  
                     Cetus, a great fyſhe called a whale.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶C ante H.
                  
                     CHabrias, the name of a noble philopher & capitayne of Athenes, which vſed to ſay, that more terrible was an hoſte of hartes, hauynge to their capitayn a lyon, than an hoſte of lyons, hauyng an harte their capitayne.
                  
                     Chalame, a citie of Perſe, whiche nowe is called Aetiſiphon.
                  
                  
                     Chalaza, a gatherynge vnder the ſkynne lyke the diſeaſe called Bubo.
                  
                  
                     Chalaſtra, a certayne apparayle.
                  
                     Chalcedonia, a citie in Aſie agaynſte Conſtantynople.
                  
                     Chalcis, dis, the name of a citie in Grece. alſo of an yle, and of a byrde.
                  
                     Chalcites, a ſtone of the colour of braſſe, but more blacke.
                  
                     Chaldaea, a region in Aſia, ioyning to Arabie, wherin was the great cite of Babylon.
                  
                     Chaldei, be taken for greate aſtronomers of the contrey of Aſſiria.
                  
                     Chaleſtra, a citie of Theſſaly on the ſe coſt.
                  
                     Chalyx, a flynte ſtone, oute of the whiche fyre is ſtryken.
                  
                     Chalybes, a people in the laſſe Aſia, in the countrey called Pontus, whiche people do dygge greatte plentie of yron naked. It is proprely taken for ſteele. And alſo it is the name of a fludde in Spayne.
                  
                     Chamaeciſſos, an herbe called grounde iuy.
                  
                     Chamaedaphne, an herbe whiche groweth in length wynding togither in dyuers partes, and hath leaues lyke to lawrel or bays, and hath a floure lyke to a vydlette, and is called of ſome men perwyncle.
                  
                     Chamaedreos, an herbe called Germander.
                  
                     Chamaeleon, ontis, a lyttell beaſte, hauynge his ſkynne ſpotted lyke to a lybard, whych chaungeth into dyuers colours, according to the thynge that he ſeeth. They be ingendred in Inde, and is of the quantitie and figure of a lyſard, but that his legges be lenger, and goeth vpryght, and hath a ſnoute lyke a ſwyne, a longe tayle, and ſmall at the ende, his eyen be neuer cloſed, he doth neuer eate or drynke, but is nouriſſhed onely by ayre. Chameleon is alſo an herbe.
                  
                     Chamaemelon, an herbe called camomylle.
                  
                     Chamaeterae, maydens whiche were wonte to ſytte at their mayſtreſſes feete.
                  
                     Chamelopardalis, a beaſte whyche is as great as a camel, of ſkynne and colour lyke Panther, hauynge ſpottes of ſondrye colours, and hath his forelegges and necke longe, and the heed lyke a camell, his fete and legges lyke an oxe.
                  
                     Chamelus, a beaſte called a camelle, communely knowen.
                  
                     Chania, the countrey callyd Epirus, Chaones, men of that countrey.
                  
                     Chaos, a confuſe matter without fourme, made fyrſt of nothyng, wherof poetes ſuppoſed all other thynges to procede.
                  
                     Characote, a frame, aboute the whiche vynes be wounde and tourned.
                  
                     
                     Characias, an herbe callyd Spourge.
                  
                     Character, a token, a note made with a pen, a fygure, a ſtyle or fourme of ſpeakynge.
                  
                     Characteres, letters.
                  
                     Charadrius, a greatte deuowrynge byrde of the ſee.
                  
                     Caraxes, the brother of Sapphus.
                  
                     Chariſtrium, a grene marble ſtone.
                  
                     Carriſius, the name of a grammarion.
                  
                     Chariſtia, the plurell numbre, is as it were a Chriſtmas feaſte, or a wake, where kynneſfolke do reſorte togither, bryngyng or ſendynge preſentes mutually.
                  
                     Charitas, charitie or loue, proprely toward men, or a mans countrey.
                  
                     Charites, the graces, whiche were ſuppoſed to be the doughters of Iupiter, which were thre in noumbre, whoſe names were Aglaia, Thalia, Euphroſyne: And where in ſpeakynge or writinge appered to be a meruaylous dilectation or ſwetenes, ir was ſaid that therin was a grace, in latine, Charis.
                  
                  
                     Chariophilon, a kynde of ſoote ſpyce that groweth in India.
                  
                     Charon, tis, was named of the Paynyms, the booteman, that caried ſowles ouer the three ryuers of Helle, Acheron, Stix, and Cocytus.
                  
                  
                     Catopus, amyable, pleaſant, gratious.
                  
                     Charta, paper. Alſo a leafe of paper, or other lyke thyng, wherin we do write. alſo a mayden that had neuer chylde.
                  
                     Chartaceus, of paper.
                  
                     Chartilago, ginis, a gryſtell.
                  
                     Chartophylacium, a coffer, or other lyke thynge, wherin papers and rolles be kept.
                  
                     Charundas, the name of a man, which gaue lawes to the Atheniens.
                  
                     Charus, well beloued.
                  
                     Charybdis, a gulf of the ſee by Sicyl, wher in is daungerous ſaylynge, by reaſone of ſtremes flowynge contrarye eche agaynſt other, wherby ſhippes be therin deuourid.
                  
                     Chaſma, a gapynge. or openyng of the firmament, or of the erthe.
                  
                     Chelae, the klees of a Crabbe, Crauaiſe, or Scorpyon.
                  
                     Chelonophagi, eaters of ſnayles.
                  
                     Cheledonia, an herbe callyd Selandine. alſo a weſterne wynde.
                  
                     Chelys, a ſnayle. ſomtyme it is taken for an harpe or lute.
                  
                     Chelydros, a ſee ſnayle.
                  
                     Chemites, a maner of tombe, like to yuorie.
                  
                     Chemiſcus, a parte of the foreſhyp, wherby the ancre doth hange. ſometyme it is taken for all the ſhyppe.
                  
                     Chennis, is an yland, as Pompon. writeth.
                  
                     Chenoboſcion, a place where geeſe be fed.
                  
                     Chenopus, a gooſe foote.
                  
                     Cheoſpes, a kynge of Aegypte.
                  
                     Cherroneſus, the parte of Grece callydde nowe Morea. It is ſometyme taken for the north part of the great Aſia, it is alſo callid Cherſoneſus.
                  
                  
                     Cherſina, a kynde of lande ſnayles.
                  
                     Cherſydros, a ſerpent, whiche abydeth as well in water, as on londe.
                  
                     Cherubin, one of the holy orders of aungelles, wherein is the ſcience dyuine and myſtycalle.
                  
                     Cheruſci, a people of Germany.
                  
                     Chibis, an herbe.
                  
                     Chilorus, a ryuer of Macedonic.
                  
                     Chiliarchus, a capitayne of a thouſand me.
                  
                     Chilias, adis, the numbre of a thouſande.
                  
                     Chilon, one of the .vii. wyſe men of Grece.
                  
                     Chilones, men hauynge great lyppes.
                  
                     Chimaera, a gote. Alſo a mountayne in Lycia. Alſo a monſter, hauynge thre heedes, one lyke a lyon, an other lyke a goote, the thyrde lyke a dragon.
                  
                     Chimerinos, a cerkle of heuen, into the whiche whan the ſonne cometh, the days be at ſhorteſt.
                  
                     Chymus, the iuyce procedynge of meate digeſted, whiche by the vaynes commeth into the membres, and reſtoreth that whiche is conſumed by heate.
                  
                     Chios, an yle in the ſee callyd Eous, whiche was ſomtyme called Aeolia, where maſtix growith.
                  
                     Chirâgra, the goute in the fyngers.
                  
                     Chiragricus, he that hath ſuche a diſeaſe.
                  
                     Chiridota, a cote with longe ſleues.
                  
                     Chirographum, et chirographus, an obligation or lyke inſtrumente, wherby a man is bounden, and hath put to his hande.
                  
                     Chiromantia, palmeſtry.
                  
                     Chiron, nis, the name of a man, whom poetes doo fayne to be the one halfe of a man, the other halfe lyke a hors: who fyrſt dyd fynde the vertues of herbes, and taughte Aeſculapius phiſike, and Apollo to harpe, and Aſtronomy to Hercules, and was maſter to Achylles, and excelled all other mē of his tyme in vertue and iuſtyce.
                  
                     Chironium, is a ſore in the legges or fete, which is hote, & ſwelleth by the two ſydes.
                  
                     Chironia, wylde vyne.
                  
                     Chironomia, a facyon of geſture with the handes vſed in daunſynge, or in keruynge of meate.
                  
                     Chirotheca, a gloue.
                  
                     Chirurgia, ſurgerye.
                  
                     Chirurgus, a ſurgion.
                  
                     Chaena, a cloke.
                  
                     Chlamis, idis, a cloke, whiche proprely is

worne by men of warre.
                  
                     Chlamidatus, cloked.
                  
                     Chobar, ſignifieth all the greatte floodes, which be in the region of Caldee.
                  
                     
                        Choenix, ici
                              •
                           ,
                      a certayne meaſure, contaynynge foure tymes the meaſure callyd Sextarius.
                  
                     Cholera, an humour callyd choler. Alſo a ſyckenes callyd the colyke.
                  
                     Choliambi, a certayne kynde of verſes.
                  
                     Chondros, a grayne of frankenſence.
                  
                     Choragium, ſtuffe, proprely wherwith that place is adorned, where as ſhall be enterludes or diſguyſynges.
                  
                     Choragus, he that kepethe ſuche ſtuffe or apparayle.
                  
                     Chorannel, certayn men that lyue in woddes in Perſia, whiche are ſoo ſwyfte, that they take hartes with runnynge.
                  
                     Choraula, the crafte to blowe trumpettes, or to playe on ſhawlmes, or other lyke pypes.
                  
                     Choraules, players on the ſayde Inſtrumentes.
                  
                     Chorda, a corde or rope.
                  
                     Chorea, a daunſe.
                  
                     Choriambus, a fote in meetre, which hath the fyrſte ſyllable, and the laſte longe, and two in the myddell ſhort.
                  
                     Chorius, a fote in meter, whiche by an other name is called trochaeus, & is but of .ii. ſyllables, the fyrſt longe, the ſeconde ſhort.
                  
                     Chorobates, a meaſure to meete grounde with, or a maſons rule.
                  
                     Chortos, hay, or graſſe mowen.
                  
                     Chorus, the company of players or dauncers. alſo a quyar.
                  
                     Chreſis, is vſe, & carachreſis is abuſyon.
                  
                     Chreſton, an herbe called cycorie.
                  
                     Chytrapus podis, a treuytte.
                  
                     Columella
                     Chreſtus, the name of a noble authour of Athenes.
                  
                     Chria, a notable ſentence ſpoken ſhortly, to exhorte to vertue, or diſſwade from vyce.
                  
                     Chriſis, vnction.
                  
                     Chriſtus, annoynted.
                  
                     Chromaticus, whoſe colour neuer chaungeth, but is alway one.
                  
                     Chronica, corum, an hiſtorie of actes done, with the tymes expreſſed, Cronicles.
                  
                  
                     Chronicus, ca, cum, temporal, or pertayning to tyme.
                  
                     Chryſia, a cytie in Phrigie, and an ylande in Indie.
                  
                     Chryſendeth, any thing boūden with gold.
                  
                     Chryſes, the name of a Prophete amonge the gentiles. Alſo of a maiden giuen by the grekes to kinge Agamēnon at the battayle of Troye.
                  
                     Chryſippus, the name of a famous and noble phyloſopher.
                  
                     Chryſoaſpides, knyghtes that hadde ſhyldes of golde.
                  
                     Chryſocolla, a ſtone with the pouder wher of paynters do make a golden colour, alſo goldſmythes do vſe it to ſowder golde.
                  
                     Chryſocoma, golden heare.
                  
                     Chryſocomus, he that hath golden heare.
                  
                     Chryſogonum, that bryngeth forth golde.
                  
                     Chryſolampis, a ſtone of fyrye coloure by nyghte.
                  
                     Chryſomela, apples of the colour of gold. by an other name callid apples of Armeny.
                  
                  
                     Chryſolitus, a precious ſtone of the colour of golde.
                  
                     Chryſopaſtus, a ſtone with golden ſpottes.
                  
                     Chryſothemis, the doughter of Agamemnon and Clytemneſtre.
                  
                     Chryſoſtomus, the name of a byſhoppe of Conſtantinople, and alſo of an hyſtoryen, whiche were ſo called for their eloquence. for Chryſoſtomus is in englyſſhe a golden mowthe.
                  
                     Chus, a certayne meaſure conteynynge ſyx tymes the meaſure called Sextarius.
                  
                  
                     Chytra, a pot with feete, or a tryuette.
               
            
            
               
                  C. Ante I.
                  
                     CIbâle, pertaynyng to meate.
                  
                     Cibarium, meate. cibarius, a, um, vyle.
                  
                     Cibarius homo, a vyle perſone.
                  
                     Cibarium uinum, yll wyne.
                  
                     Cibo, aui, are, to feede.
                  
                     Ciborium, a kynd of appuls of Alexandry.
                  
                     Cibus, meate.
                  
                     Cicada, a graſſehopper.
                  
                     Cicatricoſus, he that hath many tokens of woundes.
                  
                     Cicatrix, icis, a token or ſcarre, where a wounde hadde ben.
                  
                     Cicer, eris, a grayne lyke to peaſon.
                  
                     Cicercula, differeth frome Cicer oonely in coloure.
                  
                     Cicero, onis, the name of the mooſte noble Romayne, whyche was the father of latyne eloquence.
                  
                     Cichorea, & Cichorium, an herbe callydde Succorye.
                  
                     Cicina, a nyght crowe.
                  
                     Cicindula, a fly whiche ſhineth by nyghte.
                  
                     Cicinia, a lyttell leane ſerpent in Italy.
                  
                     Cicones, a people of Thrace.
                  
                     Ciconia, a byrde called a ſtorke. alſo it is a certain rule or meaſure.
                  
                     Ciconiꝰ, the name of him that buildid Brixis
                  
                     Cicorium, an herbe that groweth euery where.
                  
                     
                     Cicum, the thyn rynde of Pomegranates.
                  
                     Cicur, uris, tame.
                  
                     Cicuro, aui, are, to make tame.
                  
                     Cicuta, a venomous herbe, which groweth two cubytes in height, with a grene ſtalke full of knottes, buſhy in the toppe, hauing leaues ſmaller than Coriander, and ſeedes greatter than anyſe ſede, and is horrible in ſauour: Some dothe nowe vſe that name for Hemlocke.
                  
                     Cidaris, a cappe, which the kyngꝭ of Perſia dydde vſe, and alſo the byſhoppes in the olde lawe.
                  
                     Cieo, & cio, ciui, to moue a thyng, or to cal. Bellum ciebam, They dydde ſette forth to battaylle.
                  
                     Cileo, lui, ere, to moue or ſtirre a thyng.
                  
                     Cilicia, a countrey ioynynge to Syria.
                  
                     Cilicium, any clothe or garmente made of heare.
                  
                     Cilium, the ouer ſkynne wherwith the eye is cloſed.
                  
                     Cilix, licis, an inhabytant of Cilicia.
                  
                     Cillibe, & cilliba, a rounde table.
                  
                     Cilones, men hauynge great rounde foreheedes.
                  
                     Cima, the tēder part of the ſtalk of herbis.
                  
                     Cimana, thinges that be foure ſquare.
                  
                     Cimbri, a people called Danes. In the old tyme they inhabyted not onely Denmarke, but alſo all the yles frome Selande to the northe ſee.
                  
                     Cimerii, people of Scythia, they that doo dwell in the countreys, where as is continuall colde and moche darkenes.
                  
                     Cimex, a ſtynkynge worme bredynge in wodde or paper.
                  
                     Cimolia creta, fullers klaye.
                  
                     Cinediae, ſtones founde in a fyſhes heed.
                  
                     Cinedus, a wanton boy without ſhamefaſtnes. Alſo a daunſer of galyardes and wanton maſkes. It is alſo taken for a tumblar.
                  
                     Cincinni, heares that be trymmed. Cincinnati, men hauynge their heare trymmed.
                  
                     Cincticulus, a ſhort cote called a ierkyn.
                  
                     Cinctus, tus, a ſhorte garment, whiche the Conſulle dydde weare, whan he profered battaylle.
                  
                     Cinis, neris, aſſhes.
                  
                     Cineraceus, & Cinereus, a, um, of the colour of aſſhes.
                  
                     Cinericius, a, ū, bakē or roſted vnder aſhes.
                  
                     Ciniflo, nis, he that maketh hote the inſtrumentes, wherwith men or womenne dydde trymme their heare.
                  
                     Cingo, cinxi, cingere, to gyrde or compaſſe aboute.
                  
                     Cingria, a ſhorte pype, hauynge a ſmalle ſownde.
                  
                     Cingula, a gyrthe for beaſtes.
                  
                     Cingulum, a gyrdell for men.
                  
                     Cinna, a citie of Theſſaly. alſo the name of a Romayne, whiche exceded in crueltie.
                  
                     Cinnabaris, a ſtone callyd a Sanguinary. it is alſo callyd in latyn Sanguis draconis, dragons bloudde. it is put into ſondrye medycynes to ſtaunche bloudde.
                  
                     Cinnamomum, & Cinnamum, a ſpyce callyd Cynnamom.
                  
                     Cinniligium, a gyrdell, whiche a bryde or newe wedded wyfe weareth, a corſe.
                  
                     Cinnus, a heare of a man or womans heed, or a medly of dyuers thinges togither.
                  
                     Cipetum, a ſoote plante or herbe, whiche is good to breake and expulſe the ſtone.
                  
                     Cippus, a payre of ſtockes. Alſo a lyttelle hylle, whiche menne calle a barowe. Alſo a tombe, a pyllar.
                  
                     Circa, aboute, nyghe.
                  
                     Circe, the name of a woman, by whome a citie in the countrey of Campania, callyd Circium, was buylded. Alſo a wytche, whiche tourned the companye of Vlyſſes into beaſtes.
                  
                     Circēſes ludi, were certain games in Rome wherin horſes ranne with chariottes.
                  
                     Circerus, a greate ſhyppe, whiche they of Aſia vſed.
                  
                     Circino, aui, are, to compaſſe, to make a cerkle.
                  
                     Circinus, an inſtrument called a compaſſe.
                  
                     Circiter, about: and it is referred ſomtime to tyme, as Circiter calendas Iunias, About the fyrſte day of Iune. ſometyme it is referred to the place. Circiter in media arce, Aboute the myddes of the caſtell. ſomtime to the thynge. Circiter duo millia hominum caeſa ſunt, There were nygh two thouſande men ſlayne.
                  
                     Circites, hoopes of braſſe or yron.
                  
                     Circitores, officers in cities, whiche do go aboute to ſee that good rule be kepte.
                  
                     Circius, a ſowtherne wynd, which is wonderfulle vehement.
                  
                     Circuitores, the ſerchers of watches. Alſo they whiche do go about the ſtretes to ſell garmentes or lynnen clothe.
                  
                     Circulo, aui, are, to compaſſe or cloſe with a dyche, or other lyke.
                  
                     Circulatim, by cerkles, or in the fourme of a cerkle.
                  
                     Circulator, he that gothe aboute to ſhewe hym ſelfe, or what he can do, or to deceyue the people.
                  
                     Circulatorius, ia, ium, pertaynyng to ſuche auaunters or deceyuers.
                  
                     Circulatrix, ſhe that gothe aboute to gette money with daunſynge or tumblynge.
                  
                     
                     Circulus, a cercle or compaſſe.
                  
                     Circum, aboute.
                  
                     Circumago, egi, agere, to leade aboute, to tourne about.
                  
                     Circumiaceo, ieci, iicere, to put about.
                  
                     Circumlitio, onis, bourniſhinge, klenſynge, or poliſhinge.
                  
                     Circummitio, to ſende about.
                  
                     Circummunio, iui, ire, to incloſe, walle in, or dyche in.
                  
                     Circumnaſcor, to growe aboute,
                  
                     Circumplector, to imbrace or cloſe in.
                  
                     Circumſcribo, pſi, bere, to wryte, or drawe aboute with a lyne. Alſo to deceyue one in bargaynynge with him. Fratrē circumſcripſit in diuiſione haereditatis, He deceyued his brother in particion of the inheritaunce. Alſo to gather, comprehende, or deſcryue throughely. Cuius ſcientiae ſummam breuiter circumſcribo, The effecte of whoſe lernynge I wylle comprehende or deſcryue ſhortely.
                  
                     Apulcius.
                     Circumſecus, on bothe ſydes.
                  
                     Circumſedeo, ceſsi, ſedere, to beſiege.
                  
                     Circumſido, ſedi, ſidere, to go aboute to beſiege.
                  
                     Circumſiſto, ſtiti, ſiſtere, to ſtande about one, to defende hym.
                  
                     Circumſpectus, Circumſpect.
                  
                     Circumſpicio, exi, cere, to looke about.
                  
                     Circumſpicuus, a, um, that maye be beholden on all partes.
                  
                     Circūſto, ſteri, ſtare, to ſtande about.
                  
                     Circumuado, to inuade, or perce on al partꝭ.
                  
                     Circumueho, uexi, uehere, to cary about oftentymes.
                  
                     Circumuenio, to compaſſe a man, to deceiue hym, to cloſe him ī, as in warres, to opp̄ſſe. Foenore circūuentus, Oppreſſed with vſury.
                  
                     Circumuolito, aui, are, to flee about.
                  
                     Circumcelliones, tauerne haunters, or raylers aboute.
                  
                     Circūcido, cidi, cidere, to cut about a thing.
                  
                     Circumcolo, colui, colere, to dwel now here nowe there.
                  
                     Circumcolumnium, a place ſette about with pillars.
                  
                     Circundare, to go aboute as a rynge dothe about a mās finger, or a diche about a cloſe.
                  
                     Circumeo, iui, ire, to go about any thynge.
                  
                     Circumfero, to cary or beare about. Alſo to clenſe. Idem ter ſocios pura circumtulit vnda,
                     Vergil. 6. Alſo be clenſed his company thre times with cleane water.
                  
                     Circumflexus, bowed.
                  
                     Circumfluo, to abounde.
                  
                     Circumfluere, is alſo to flowe or rounne aboute, as water aboute a cytie or Countreye.
                  
                     Circumfluus, a, um, that floweth aboute.
                  
                     Circumforaneus, a, um, that maye be, or is often caryed aboute.
                  
                     Circumforanei, malaperte gueſtes and tellars of tydynges in markettes.
                  
                     Circuo, iui, ire, to go aboute.
                  
                     Circus, a Cercle. Alſo a rounde place walled aboute, of the whiche there were thre in Rome, where there was made certayne games.
                  
                     Circius, the name of an yle in Myſia.
                  
                     Cirnea, a cuppe.
                  
                     Cirri, heares curled, or fethers that doo growe on the toppe of abyrdes heed, as a larke or an heron.
                  
                     Cirracus, a kynde of baume.
                  
                     Cis, a worme amonge corne, which I ſuppoſe to be called weuyls. Alſo it ſygnifieth on this ſyde: as Cis Rhenum, on this ſide the Ryuer of Rhyne: Cis Alpes, on this ſyde the mountaynes callyd Alpes. Some tyme it ſygnyfyeth laſſe. Cis naturae leges, Leſſe than the lawes of nature may ſuffre. Saluſt vſeth it ones for beyonde. Cis Rhenū at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         intra mare noſtrum er oceanum, Beyonde the ryuer of Rhine, and within our ſee, and the occean ſee.
                  
                     Ciſalpina Gallia, was ſomtyme that countreye, whyche is frome the mountaynes callydde Alpes, vnto the Ryuer of Rubycon.
                  
                     Cicium, a carte.
                  
                     Ciciarius, a cartar.
                  
                     Ciſpius, a mountayne in Rome.
                  
                     Ciſſeus, a kynge of Thrace, father of Hecuba, quene of Troy.
                  
                     Ciſſybium, a cuppe or bolle made of iuy.
                  
                     Ciſsites, a precious ſtone lyke an yuy leafe, bright of colour.
                  
                     Ciſta, a cheſte, coffer.
                  
                     Ciſterna, a ceſterne,
                  
                     Citatus, called, ſommoned, or cited.
                  
                     Cithara, a harpe.
                  
                     Citharis, a byſhopes myter.
                  
                     Cithariſta, an angle of Fraunce by Marcile, lyinge out to the ſee.
                  
                     Cithariſtria, a woman harper.
                  
                     Cithariro, aui, are, to harpe.
                  
                     Citharoedus, a harper.
                  
                     Cytiſus, an herbe called chickwede.
                  
                     Citimus, ma, mum, the laſte.
                  
                     Cito, aui, are, to cite, to ſommon, or call.
                  
                     Citorus, a mountayne where groweth plē
                     tie of boxe trees.
                  
                     Citra, on this ſyde. ſometȳme without. Citra adulationem, without flatterye.
                  
                     Citreum, an orenge.
                  
                     Citrus, a tree called a citron tree.
                  
                     Citrum, a fruite callyd pome citron.
                  
                     
                     Cittium, a towne of Cyprus.
                  
                     Citus, quycke, haſty, ſwyfte. Sommetyme deuided or parted.
                  
                     Cito, ſoone, ſhortly.
                  
                     Ciuicus, ca, cum, is the ſame that ciuilis is.
                  
                     Ciuica corona, a garlande of oken leaues, vſed to be gyuen to them that had ſaued a citeſyn in battayle.
                  
                     Ciuilis, le, that pertayneth to a cyteſyn.
                  
                     Ciuilis homo, a man experte in thoſe thinges, that appertayne to the miniſtration of a common weale.
                  
                     Ciuilitas, tatis, courteyſy, ciuilitie.
                  
                     Ciuis, a citeſyn or demſen. Alſo Ciuis meus my countrey man.
                  
                     Ciuitas, tatis, a citie, proprely it is the multitude of cyteſens gathered togyther, to lyue accordyng to lawe and ryght.
                  
                     Cius, a ryuer of Thrace.
                  
                     Cizicus, a citie in Aſie the leſſe.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶C ante L.
                  
                     CLades, dis, a diſcomfyture in battaile, a diſtruction of men.
                  
                     Clam, priuilye, vnwares. Clam me profectus eſt, vnwaares to me, he wente his waye.
                  
                     Clamo, aui, are, to crye, to calle.
                  
                     Clamor, oris, a crye, a clamour, a noyſe.
                  
                     Clamoſus, a, um, clamorous or ful of noyſe.
                  
                     Clandulum, ſecretely.
                  
                     Clandeſtino, priuily, or ſecretly.
                  
                     Clandeſtinus, a, um, priuie, or ſecrete.
                  
                     Clango, xi, gere, to ſowne a trumpette.
                  
                     Clangor, oris, the ſowne of a trumpet. ſomtyme the crie that geeſe or other lyke byrdes do make.
                  
                     Clanius, a citie of Champayne, nere to the citie Acerras.
                  
                     Clarco, ui, ere, to appere, to be wel knowē, and to be clere.
                  
                     Clare, clerely, apparantly.
                  
                     Clarifico, eci, cere, to make clere or apparāt
                  
                     Clarigatio, a clerynge, a ſubſydie or taſke graunted by a commune conſent.
                  
                     Clarigo, aui, are, to aſke clerely.
                  
                     Claritas, tatis, clerenes, ſometyme nobylitie, or honourablenes.
                  
                     Claro, aui, are, to make noble or honorable.
                  
                     Claros, a citie in Grece.
                  
                     Clarus, a riuer, whiche rounneth from the high mountaynes of Alpes, into the ryuer callyd Danubium.
                  
                  
                     Clarus, ra, ū, clere, noble, honorable, famous
                  
                     Claſsiarius, diligent.
                  
                     Claſsicus, an officer, which with a trūpette or tabore called people togither. ſometime a man beinge in reputation.
                  
                     Claſsicum, a people or noyſe of trumpettes, or belles to calle menue togither, or to goo to battaile.
                  
                     Claſsicus, ca, um, pertaynynge to nauyes.
                  
                     Claſsis, a nauie of ſhyppes. ſometyme it is taken for one ſhyppe. ſomtyme companyes or ſortes of people, ordered in a citie alter the value of their ſubſtaunce. Alſo Claſſes be degrees or formes in ſcholes: as prima claſsis, the fyrſte degree or fourme. &c.
                  
                     Clatro, aui, are, to ſhutte a wyndowe, ſpecially a lattyſe wyndowe.
                  
                     Clatrum et clatrus, a lattyſe wyndowe, or any thynge made lyke a lattyſe.
                  
                     Claua, a clubbe.
                  
                     Clauarius, an offycer appoynted to deale the emperours gyfte of money or coine amonge the ſouldiours.
                  
                     Clauator, he that vſeth a clubbe.
                  
                     Clauatus, ſette with nayles.
                  
                     Claudeo, to halte. ſomtyme to erre.
                  
                     Claudianus, the name of a poete.
                  
                     Clauditas, haltynge, lameneſſe.
                  
                     Claudius, the name of an emperor of Rome
                  
                     Claudo, ſi, dere, to ſhytte. ſomtyme to compaſſe: alſo to put of: alſo to halte.Saluſtius.
                  
                  
                     Claudus, a, um, lame.
                  
                     Clauicula, a lyttell kay or clubbe.
                  
                     Clauicularius, he that beareth the kayes.
                  
                     Clauiculus, the tendrelle of a vyne.
                  
                     Clauiger, idem quod clauicularius.
                  
                  
                     Clauis, a kaye.
                  
                     Clauſtrarius, a maker of kayes and lockes.
                  
                     Clauſtrinus, a keper of the cloyſter, or of any other place, wherin any lyuyng thyng is incloſed.
                  
                     Clauſtrum, a cloiſter, or other place, where any lyuynge thinge is incloſed.
                  
                     Clauſula, a lyttell ſentence, or a parte of a ſentence.
                  
                     Clauſura, a ſhuttynge in.
                  
                     Clauus, a nayle. Alſo the ſterne of a ſhippe. Alſo a corne on a mans toe or fingar. Moreouer, Claui be lyttell ſwellynges of harde fleſhe in the corner of mens eien. Alſo puffes growing in the ſtemmis of great trees. Alſo in harneys, that whiche is callyd the ryuer. Moreouer Clauus is a garment pirled or powdred with ſpangles, lyke nayles heedes. wherfore the propre garmente of a Senatour was callyd Iatus clauus.
                  
                  
                     Clazomenae, a citie of Iome, whiche Paralus buylded.
                  
                     Clazomenia, an ylande, whiche is called Marathuſa.
                  
                  
                     Cleantes, the name of a philoſopher, whiche ſucceded Zeno in his ſchole.
                  
                     Clearchꝰ, the name of a philoſopher. there was a noble capytayne of the ſame name,

of whom Xenophon wryteth in the expedition of Cyrus the leſſe.
                  
                     Clemens, tis, mercyfull.
                  
                     Clemencia, mercy.
                  
                     Clementer, mercyfully.
                  
                     Cleobulus, the name of oone of the ſeuen wyſe men of Grece.
                  
                     Cleodamas, the name of a geometrician in the tyme of Plato.
                  
                     Cleombrotus, the ſonne of Pauſanias, capitayne of the Lacedemons.
                  
                     Cleopatra, the name of a lady quene of Egypte.
                  
                     Clepo, pſi, pere, to ſtele.
                  
                     Clepſydra, a dyall, which dyuided the houres by the rounnynge of a certayne meaſure of water. It was alſo the name of a fountayne in Athenes.
                  
                     Cleronoma, herytage.
                  
                     Cleronomos, an heyre.
                  
                     Clerus, choſen by lotte. Alſo a worme, whiche diſtroyeth and corrupteth hony cōbes.
                  
                     Clibanarius, he that fyghtethe in iuſtynge harnayſe.
                  
                     Clibanus, an ouē, or the mouth of a furneis.
                  
                     Cliens, tis, a clyent or ſeruant reteyned.
                  
                     Clientela, the nombre of clyentes or of ſeruantes retayned, alſo their offyce or dutie.
                  
                     Clientularium, an yerely fee, for counſayle, or aſſyſtence.
                  
                     Clima, tis, is a porcion of the worlde betwene ſouth and north, wherin is variacyon of tyme in the lengthe of the daye, the ſpace of halfe an houre, whiche is ſet oute in the tables and chartes of Coſmography
                  
                     Climacterius, ca, cū, ſignifyeth the degrees of mans lyfe by ſeuen yeres, in the whyche he is in daunger of death or myſfortune.
                  
                     Climactericum tempus, the ſayde daungerouſe tyme.
                  
                     Climacterum, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Climax, a ladder, and the fygure callydde gradation.
                  
                     Clinicus, a phiſition, that healeth with medicines. Alſo he that is ſo ſyck, that he can not aryſe out of his bedde.
                  
                     Clinopodion, an herbe.
                  
                     Clinopale, wraſtlynge in the bedde.
                  
                     Clio, the name of one of the mu
                        ••
                     s.
                  
                     Cliſis, declynation.
                  
                     Clitellae, a packeſaddell. Alſo the name of a place in Rome.
                  
                     Clitellarii, packehorſes of mules, that doo ſerue for caryage.
                  
                     Clitomaclius, the name of a phyloſopher.
                  
                     Clitorius, a fountayne in Grece.
                  
                     Clitumnus, a ryuer in Italy.
                  
                     Cloaca, a ſynke, whereby water paſſethe, or gutter.
                  
                     Cloris, a mayden or nymphe, whiche was maryed to Zephyrus, vnto whome was aſſygned for her dower, to haue reuie ouer flowers.
                  
                     Clotho, one of the fatall ladyes, hauynge power ouer mannes lyfe, in dyſſoluynge thereof.
                  
                     Cludo, ſi, dere, to ſhytte.
                  
                     Cluo, ui, ere, to contende or fyght.
                  
                     Clumae, the huſke of barley.
                  
                     Clunaculum, a bowchers choppyng knife.
                  
                     Clupea, a cyte of Affrike, next to Cartage.
                  
                     Clunes, the buttockes or haunehes.
                  
                     Clymene, the moder of Promotheꝰ, daughter of Oceanus.
                  
                     Clypeus, a ſhielde or targate of fotemen,
                  
                     Cliſmus, a pourgation or waſhynge.
                  
                     Clytemneſtra, the wyfe of Agamemnon.
                  
                     
                        Clyſter, eris, and Clyſterium,
                      a glyſter.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶C ante N.
                  
                     ¶Cneus, the name of a man.
               
            
            
               
                  &C ante O.
                  
                     COaceſco, coaceſci, coaceſcere, to waxe all ſowre.
                  
                     Coaetaneus, of one age.
                  
                     Coagmento, taui, rare, to ioyne togyther, or make lyke.
                  
                     Coagulo, aui, are, to gather into a kourde or creame.
                  
                     Coagulum, curde or creame.
                  
                     Coaleſco, coalui, coaleſcere, to gather togither, to increaſe.
                  
                     Coarcto, aui, are, to ſtrayne or preſſe togyther.
                  
                     Coaſſo, to planke or bourde.
                  
                     Coaxare, to make a noyſe lyke a frogge or tode.
                  
                     Cocalus, a kynge of Sycile, to whom Dedalus fledde out of Creta, whome Minos kynge of Crete purſued.
                  
                     Coccentum, a meate made of honye and popye ſede.
                  
                     Cocceus, a, um, et Coccineus, a, um, of ſcarlette colour.
                  
                     Coccina, a ſcarlette veſture.
                  
                     Coccinus, et Coccus, ſcarlette colour.
                  
                     Coccum, grayne wherwith cloth and ſilke is grayned.
                  
                     Cochlea, a ſnayle, ſomtyme the ſhelle, ſomtime cokles. Alſo a winding ſtaire or vyſe.
                  
                     Cochleare, a ſpone.
                  
                     Cochlium, a wyndynge ſtayre.
                  
                     Cochlides, rounde ladders.
                  
                     Coclites, a man, hauynge but one eye.
                  
                     Coctie, a parte of the mountayns of Alpes.
                  
                     Coctilis, hoc coctile, ſoden or baken.
                  
                     
                     Coctito, aui, are, to boyle.
                  
                     Coctiuus, a, um, eaſy to be boyled.
                  
                     Coctonum, cotten.
                  
                     Coctus, ta, tum, ſodden ynough.
                  
                     Coculum, a potte to boyle in. ſommetyme cocula doo ſygnyfie ſtyckes, whyche wyll ſoone be on fire.
                  
                     Cocus, a Cooke.
                  
                     Cocynthum, a mountayne in Italy, that diuideth two ſees.
                  
                     Cocytia, ſacrifices that were doone in honour of Proſerpine.
                  
                     Cocytus, a ryuer of Helle.
                  
                     Coccis, igis, a byrde called a cocowe.
                  
                     Coda, a tayle.
                  
                     Codarremula, a byrde callydde a wagge tayle.
                  
                     Codex, icis, the body of a tree, or a greate boke or volume.
                  
                     Codicillus, a lybell.
                  
                     Codiculus, a dyminutife of codex, whan it is put for a boke.
                  
                     Codonia, an yland, that the almayns kepe.
                  
                     Codius, the propre name of a kynge of Athenes, which to ſaue his coūtrey, willingly loſte his lyfe.
                  
                     Coeliacus, he that is ſycke of the colycke.
                  
                     Coemeterium, a churche yarde.
                  
                     Coena, a ſoupper.
                  
                     Coenacularia, the way or crafte to ordayne a ſupper.
                  
                     Coenaculariam facere, to lette a houſe in diuers partes to ſondry perſones, wherein are many parlers or drynkynge houſes.
                  
                     Coenacularius, he that doth lette ſuch houſes to hyre. Vlp. de pignor. act. l. Solutum.
                  
                  
                     Coenaculum, a parler, or other place where men do ſoupe.
                  
                     Coenaticus, ca, cum, pertayning to ſuppers. Apparatus caenaucus, ordinance for ſupper. Sermo caenaticus, communication mete for ſuppers.
                  
                     Coenatio, a lowe parler for to ſoupe in, a ſommer parler.
                  
                     Coenatorius, a, um, bilongynge to ſuppers.
                  
                     Coenaturio, ii, ire, to labour or endeuour my ſelfe to ſoupe.
                  
                     Coenipera, a goer about to ſuppers vnbodē.
                  
                     Coeno, aui, are, to ſoupe.
                  
                     Coenobium, a Monaſterye or other place, where men lyue in commune.
                  
                     Coenula, a lyght ſoupper.
                  
                     Caenum, myer.
                  
                     Coéo, iui, ire, to come togither with other, to ioyne to, to drawe togyther, to gather togither, to do the acte of generation.
                  
                     Coerceo, cui, cère, to reſtrayne, to bynde harde or ſtraight, to compell or conſtrayn.
                  
                     Coetus, an aſſembly of people.
                  
                     Cogitatim, aduyſedly.
                  
                     Cogito, aui, are, to thynke.
                  
                     Cogitatio, onis a thought.
                  
                     Cognati, kynneſmen.
                  
                     Cognitor, oris, he that pleadeth an nother mannes cauſe, his clyent beinge preſent.
                  
                     Cognobilis, knowen.
                  
                     Cognomen, a ſurname, whiche a man hath of his auncetours.
                  
                     Cognomines, dyuers men of one ſurname.
                  
                     Cognomino, aui, are, to gyue a ſurname.
                  
                     Cognoſco, noui, noſcere, to knowe, to conſyder, to vnderſtande, to lye with a woman, to iuge a matter, or here a mattier to iudge it.
                  
                     Cogo, coégi, cogere, to conſtrayne, to gather to gyther, to mylke a beaſte, to make lycour thycke or harde, to preſſe into, to ſet or brynge in order.
                  
                     Cohibeo, ui, ere, to reſtrayne, to keepe of, to lette.
                  
                     Cohors, tis, a company of men of warre, a courte wherin pultrie is kepte.
                  
                     Cohortor, aris, ari, to exhorte.
                  
                     Cohum, a thonge or lyngell, wherwith the oxe bowe & the yoke are bounden togider.
                  
                     Coinquino, aui, are, to ſoyle, or make foule.
                  
                     Cois, a garment of fyne ſylke.
                  
                     Colaphizo, aui, are, to buffette.
                  
                     Colaphus et colaphum, a buffette.
                  
                     Colaſis, a kynde of punyſſhemente that is done for chaſtiſemente.
                  
                     Colax, a flatterer.
                  
                     Colchis, an Ile in Aſia, where Medea was borne.
                  
                     Coleus, the codde of a man.
                  
                     Coliculus, a tender ſtalke of an herbe.
                  
                     Colidos, an Ilande in the occean of Inde.
                  
                     Coliphium, a kynde of breadde.
                  
                     Colis, the braunche of a vyne.
                  
                     Colitia, a great furrowe for water to runne into, for ſauynge of the corne.
                  
                     Colla, a kynde of glewe.
                  
                     Collabello, aui, are, to ioyne lyppes in kyſſynge.
                  
                     Collactimo, aui, are, to wepe with other.
                  
                     Collare, a coller for a hounde.
                  
                     Collactaneus, he that ſouketh with me one noriſe, a foſter brother.
                  
                     Collatina porta, the name of a yate in Rome
                  
                     Collatinus uenter, a great ſwollen bealye.
                  
                     Collario, onis, a conferrynge togither.
                  
                     Collatis ſignis pugnare, to fyght in a fielde pyghte.
                  
                     Collectanea, thynges writen, gathered out of many warkes.
                  
                     Collectitius, a, um, that which is gathered.
                  
                     Collega, a felowe or companyon in offyce.
                  
                     Colliculus, a hyllocke.
                  
                     
                     Collido, ſi, ere, to beate togither.
                  
                     Colligo rationem, I make accompt.
                  
                     Colligo, legi, ligere, to gather togyther, to take a way, to bryng togither. Seipſum colligere,
                     Ci. Tuſ. 4 to brynge home agayne the partes of the mynde, that were diſperſed. Alſo to prepare.Virgilius. 
                     Se colligit in arma, he made hym redy to fyght.
                  
                     Colligo, aui, are, to bynde togither.
                  
                     Collimare, to wynke with one eye.
                  
                     Collina porta, a yate at Rome.
                  
                     Collino, to lyne, or lay by lyne.
                  
                     Collis, a hylle. alſo colles the backe.
                  
                     Coloſſus, an ymage as hygh and great as a towre.
                  
                     Colluco, aui, are, to make a glade in a thycke wodde.
                  
                     Collum, a necke.
                  
                     Colluuiarium, a ſynke or gutter.
                  
                     Colluuies, whan the erthe is couered with water by greatte floodes.
                  
                     Collutilo, aui, are, to defyle.
                  
                     Collyrida, a cake.
                  
                     Collyrium, a medicine for ſoore eyes.
                  
                     Colo, aui, are, to ſtrayne out lycour.
                  
                     Cola, a ſtreynour.
                  
                     Colo, ui, ere, to worſhyp, to loue, or fauour, to haunte, to inhabyte or dwelle, to leade, Hanc uitam colo, I leade this lyfe. to tylle, or huſbande grounde.
                  
                     Colobium, a iacket or cote without ſleues.
                  
                     Colocaſia, a beane of Egypte.
                  
                     Colochynta, a frute whiche purgeth fleme.
                  
                     Colon, a gutte, whiche goth from the left ſyde vnto the right, in the which the dunge taketh his fourme, and there is the diſeaſe called Colica, the colyke. It is alſo a membre or parte of a ſentence.
                  
                     Colonia, people ſent to dwell in a place, whiche is not inhabyted. Alſo a houſe of huſbandrye.
                  
                     Colonicus, ca, cum, pertaynynge to houſbandrye.
                  
                     Colonus, a huſbandemanne. alſo coloni be they, whiche are ſent to inhabyte a countrey or towne. Alſo a hygh place in Athenes, where Neptune was worſhypped.
                  
                     Colophon, onis, the name of an yle: and alſo of a citie in Grece.
                  
                     Colophonem addere, to make an ende, or fyniſhe a warke.
                  
                     Color, oris, colour.
                  
                     Coloriae ueſtes, garmentes made of wolle vndyed.
                  
                     Colorificus, he that maketh colour.
                  
                     Coloro, aui, are, to gyue or make a colour.
                  
                     Colos, the fundement.
                  
                     Coloſtrum, creame of mylke.
                  
                     Colotes, the name of a manne that was a peynter. Quint. li. 2.
                  
                     Coluber, a ſerpent, which lyeth in the ſhadowe of woddes.
                  
                     Colum, a ſtrayner.
                  
                     Columbar, aris, a pyllory.
                  
                     Columbaris, et hoc columbare, of a doue.
                  
                     Columbarium, uel columbaria, a douehouſe or culuerhouſe.
                  
                     Columbatim, in the maner of doues.
                  
                     Columbarius, he that taketh doues.
                  
                     Columbaria, an ylande in the Tuſkayn ſee.
                  
                     Columbus, et columba, a culuer or doue.
                  
                     Columbinus, a, um, of a culuer.
                  
                     Columella, the name of oone that wrate of huſbandry moſte eloquently.
                  
                     Columellares dentes, cheke tethe.
                  
                     Columen, luminis, the ſuccour or ſtaye, the wynde beame of a houſe.
                  
                     Columis et hoc colume, hole.
                  
                     Columna, a royall citie in Bruce.
                  
                     Columna, a pyllar.
                  
                     Columnus, was in olde tyme that we calle nowe culmus.
                  
                     Coluri, certayne cerkles in the celeſtialle Sphere.
                  
                     Colus, a diſtaffe.
                  
                     Colymbades, olyues, or oyle beries.
                  
                     Collybus, an exchange of money.
                  
                     Collybiſtes, an exchaunger.
                  
                     Collybia, fygge tartes, fartes of Portyngall, or other lyke thinges.
                  
                     Coma, al the heare togyther called a buſhe
                  
                     Comagena, a countrey in Syria.
                  
                     Comare, to haue moche heare, or a greate buſſhe.
                  
                     Comatus, ta, he or ſhe that hathe a greatte buſhe. By tranſlation it is ſayde of trees or herbes, that haue longe leaues or floures.
                  
                     Comata, a ſhepardes name in Theoer.
                  
                     Comata Gallia, all Fraunce, a this half the mountaynes.
                  
                     Comatulus, a boye with a fayre buſſhe of heare.
                  
                     Combino, aui, are, to combyne or confederate togyther.
                  
                     Comburo, buſsi, burere, to burne or cōſume with fyre.
                  
                     Come, an herbe callyd gotes bearde.
                  
                     Comedo, edi, edere, to eate.
                  
                     Comedo, donis, he that conſumeth his own goodes ryotrouſly.
                  
                     Comes, mitis, a companyon or felowe. Alſo a name of dignitie, which we cal an erle.
                  
                     Comeſſatio, a bankette after ſoupper.
                  
                     Comeſſari, to bankette.
                  
                     Comeſſabundus, vſyng to bankette.
                  
                     Cometes et cometa, a blaſynge ſterre.
                  
                     Comis, gentyll, full of good humanitie.
                  
                     Comiter, gentylly.
                  
                     Comitatus, tus, a felowſhyppe.
                  
                     
                     Comitialis dies, the daye whan people aſſēbled at Rome, for the election of officers.
                  
                     Comitialis morbus, the fallynge ſycknes.
                  
                     Comitium, a congregation or aſſemble of the people for election of officers. Alſo the place where the election is made.
                  
                     Comitor, aris, to accompanye or goo with one, or kepe felowſhyp with other.
                  
                     Comma, a poynt ending a ſentence, where many ſentences be: as, Nihil tibi profuit nocturnum praeſidium palacii, nihil urbis uigiliae, nihil timor populi, nihil concurſus omnium bonorum: There is Comma foure tymes.
                  
                     Commanducatus cibus, chewed meate.
                  
                     Commanducate, to chewe meate.
                  
                     
                        Commeat
                              •
                           s, tus,
                      a ſaulfe conduct, or leaue to departe. ſometyme vytailes for an army or multitude of menne. ſommetyme for a paſſage of men.
                  
                     Commemoro, aui, are, to remembre.
                  
                     Commendaticius, a, um, that wherwith a man is remembred or recommended.
                  
                     Commendo, aui, are, to commend or praiſe, ſometyme to recommende.
                  
                     Commentaculum, a marſhals or huyſhers rodde.
                  
                     Commentor, tatis, to thynke on, to make mencyon, to diſpute, to write cōmentaries, or bokes for remembrance.
                  
                     Commentarium, uel commentarius, a brigement or other boke, conteynynge thynges briefely writen. Alſo it ſignifieth a cōment. Alſo a boke of remembrance or a Regiſter or expoſition.
                  
                     Commenticius, a, um, fayned, or deuyſed for the tyme.
                  
                     Commentum, a comment or expoſytion, a matter fayned.
                  
                     Commeo, aui, are, to go hither and thider, or to go to, or with an other.
                  
                     Commertium, an entercourſe or lybertie to cary marchandyſe from one place to an other. Alſo a commutation or forme of bieng and ſellynge togither. Alſo a famylyarytie or cuſtome.
                  
                     Commereo, ui, ere, to commytte. Si ſenſerit 
                           •
                        e timidum pater, arbitrabitur commeruiſſe culpam, If thy father doo perceyuethe to be aferde, he woll ſuppoſe, that thou arte gyltie,Terent. in Phor. or haſte committed the offence. Alſo commerere, to deſerue.
                  
                     Q. Curtiꝰ
                     Commeſſari, to feede more than ynough.
                  
                     Commigro, to goo with one to a place.
                  
                     Cōmilitones, felowes togyther in warres.
                  
                     Commilitium, felowſhyp in warres.
                  
                     Comminiſcor, ſceris, to cal to remēbrance.
                  
                     Comminus, forthewith atte hande, hande to hande.
                  
                     Commiſſura, a ioynt of any thynge that is cloſed and opened, as proprely of tables, whiche be ioyned.
                  
                     Commitigo, gaui, gare, to knocke.Terētius. 
                     Tibi uti cōmitigari uideam ſandalio caput, That I may ſee the knocked on the heed with his ſlypper.
                  
                     Committo, miſi, mittere, to commyt, or inioyne, to offende, to ioyne togither. Alſo to do and begynne.Saluſtius. 
                     Quibus dictis mox praeliū commiſere, That ſpoken, they began batayle. Alſo to delyuer, to compare, to bring in contencion, to put togither, to confiſcate or ſeaſe for a forfayture.Ci. in Ver. act. 3.
                  
                  
                     Commodata res, a thynge lende withoute aduauntage.
                  
                     Commodatarius, he that taketh a thynge of lone, he that boroweth.
                  
                     Commoditas, tatis, a commoditie.
                  
                     Commodo, aui, are, to do for an other mannes commoditie. Alſo to lende.
                  
                     Commodum, profite or commoditie. Alſo good, apte, or conueniente. ſometyme it is an aduerbe, and than it ſygnifieth the ſame tyme, in good tyme, ſcarſely. Commodum diſceſſeras heri, cum Trebatius uenit, Thou were ſcaſely departed, whanne Trebatius was come.
                  
                     Commodus, a, um, profitable, or apte.
                  
                     Commoereo, rui, rère, to be all heuy or ſory.
                  
                     Commonefacio, feci, facere, to warne.
                  
                     Commoneo, nui, ére. 
                     Idem.
                  
                  
                     Commotria, a mayden that dothe araye or apparayle her mayſtreſſe.
                  
                     Commoueo, ui, ére, to trouble, to turne or change a mans mynde. to hurt. ſomtyme to depart. Tu et cura, ut ualeas, et te iſtinc ne temerè commoueas. Farwell, and take hede that thou departe nat henſe to haſtily.Ci. Ty
                           ••
                        ,
                  
                  
                     Communico, aui, are, to cōmunicate or departe ſome thynge with an nother, whyche I haue.
                  
                     Communis, commune, common.
                  
                     Commuto, aui, are, to chaunge one thynge for an other.
                  
                     Commutare uerba, to chyde, or to gyue a ſhrewde worde for a good.
                  
                     Como, pſi, ere, to apparayle gorgiouſly, to trymme, proprely it belongeth to womē.
                  
                     Comoedia, an enterlude, wherin the common vices of men and womenne are apparantly declared in perſonages.
                  
                     Comoedice, gentylly and pleaſantly.
                  
                     Comoedior, aris, to ieſte, or ſcoffe.
                  
                     Comoedus, a player in enterludes.
                  
                     Comicus, a maker of enterludes.
                  
                     Compactum, an agreement or appoyntmēt
                  
                     Compagino, aui, are, to put or ioyne togyther a thynge that is lowſed.
                  
                     Cōpago, ginis, a ioining togither of thingꝭ.
                  
                     
                     
                        Compa
                              •
                           , aris,
                      equall, or euen lyke,
                  
                     Comparatiuus, a, um, comparatiue, wherin begynneth exceſſe incomparyſon.
                  
                     Comparo, aui, are, to compare or make equall, or more, to ordeyne, to prepare, to ioyne, to deuyſe, to bye.
                  
                     Comparatio, comparyſon, preparation, or byenge,
                  
                     Compaſco, to fede or kepe cattell.
                  
                     Compaſcuus ager, a common fielde.
                  
                     Compedes, gyues or fetters.
                  
                     Compeditus, a, um, fettred or gyued.
                  
                     Compello, pull, pellere, to compelle or conſtrayne, to ioyne or brynge togither.
                  
                     Compello, aui, are, to ſpeake to, to accuſe.
                  
                     Compendiarius, a, um, cōpendious or brefe.
                  
                     Compendioſus, a, um, very profitable.
                  
                     Compendium, a ſauynge or ſparyng, or aduauntage, a compendious or ſhorte fourme in wrytinge or other acte.
                  
                     Compendifacio, to make compendious.
                  
                     Compenſo, aui, are, to make recompenſe, or amendes.
                  
                     Compenſatio, onis, a recompenſe, or ſatisfaction.
                  
                     Cōperendino, to deferre, or put of, or delay.
                  
                     Comperendinatio, a delaye.
                  
                     Comperendinaria dies, a daye ouer in matters of lawe.
                  
                     Comperio, ii, ire, to knowe of an other mā.
                  
                     Comperior, iris, to fynde, or imagin in myn owne opinion.
                  
                     Compertus furti, founden gyltie of felony.
                  
                     Compertum habeo, I knowe or perceyue.
                  
                     Compernis, he that hath his knees nyghe to gither, or longe fete.
                  
                     Compeſco, ſcui, ſcere, to aſſuage, to mitigate
                  
                     Competo, tii, tere, to aſke, or ſue for an offyce, or other lyke thinge agaynſt an other that dothe the ſemblable. Competit, It is mete or couenient. Hoc illi competit, That is mete or conueniente for hym. Alſo it is ſuffycyent.
                  
                     Compilo, aui, are, to take by extorcyon or wronge, or as the vulgare ſpeche is, Compilare is to polle and ſhaue.
                  
                     Compilati, polled by extorcion.
                  
                     Compingo, pegi, pingere, to thruſte. Quid faciam nunc, ſi tres uiri me in carcerem compegerint? Howe ſhall I do nowe, if the officers thruſte me into priſon. Sommetyme Compingere is to compact, or put togider.
                  
                     Compita, many pathes goynge into oone waye,
                  
                     Compitalia, feaſtes or drynkynges, made where as be many pathes.
                  
                     Compitalicius, cia, um, belongynge to the ſayde feaſtes.
                  
                     Complector, eris, to imbrace or hold ſtraite
                  
                     Complector te amore, I loue the ba
                        •
                     ttlye.
                  
                     Complector cogitatione, I beare in mynd.
                  
                     Complector animo, I conſyder.
                  
                     Compleo, eui, are, to fulfylle, or fyll to the toppe, to fynyſhe, or performe, to make vp. or ſupply that lacketh.
                  
                     Complex, plicis, partener, cōpanyon in act.
                  
                     Complexus, imbracynge or collynge. Alſo agrement in wordes or ſentences.
                  
                     Complico, aui, are, to folde or wrappe togyther.
                  
                     Complodo, ſi, dere, to clappe togyther the handes for ioye.
                  
                     Complura, ryght many.
                  
                     Compluries, very often.
                  
                     Compluuium, a gatter, wherin fallyth rain from many houſes.
                  
                     Compono, to put or ioyn togither, to make ordeine, or diſpoſe. Alſo to compare, to adorne, to gather, to recreate, to appeaſe, to conclude, to accorde or agree, to redeme, to diſſemble or fayne.
                  
                     Compos, potis, he that hath his purpoſe or deſyre. alſo euer content.
                  
                     Compos animi, of ſownde remembraunce, not madde.
                  
                     Compos uoti, he that hath his own deſire or appetite.
                  
                     Compoſitio, onis, a makynge, an ornament, a compoſition or agrement.
                  
                     Compraedes, ſureties or pledges togither.
                  
                     Cōprimo, preſsi, primere, to preſſe or thruſt togither, to holde or refrayne. Alſo to defloure a woman.
                  
                     Compreſſus, a defloration or rauyſhement.
                  
                     Comptus, tus, freſhe apparayle.
                  
                     Compulſus, a, um, compellyd or hytte with any thynge.
                  
                     Compunctus, a, um, marked, or ſpotted.
                  
                     Compungo, xi, gere, to punche, or prycke, or ſtryke.
                  
                     Computo, aui, are, to deme, to accounte, to decerne, to impute.
                  
                     Comum, a cytie of France on this ſyde the mountaynes, the inhabytantes wherof are called comenſes.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶C ante N.
                  
                     COncateno, aui, are, to bynde togither with chaynes.
                  
                     Concauus, a, um, holowe.
                  
                     Concedo, ceſsi, dere, to graunt, to permitte or ſuffre, to departe away, to go to a place, to conſente.
                  
                     Concentus, tus, a conſente, many voyces in one tune, or accorde in muſyke.
                  
                     
                        Concept
                              •
                           culum, or conceptab
                              •
                           ilū,
                      any thing holowe and apte to receyue or holde, as a veſſell.
                  
                     
                     Concepta uerba, wordes expreſſed and pronounced.
                  
                     Conceptus, ta, tum, conceyued.
                  
                     Conceptus, tus, a conception of a chylde within a woman. And alſo a conceyte or thyng conceyued in thought.
                  
                     Concernere, to concerne.
                  
                     Concertatum, debated in reaſonynge.
                  
                     Concha, proprely a muſkle. ſometyme the ſhell of a muſkle, oyſter, or cockle. Alſo euery veſſell that is holow, and open aboue, proprely a bolle, wherin lynnen clothes be waſhed. ſomtyme a wyne veſſel. Alſo a trū
                     pet, as it ſemethe made of erthe, lyke to ſuche as the poore men do vſe, which haue the fallyng ſycknes, and do come from the place in Ducheland, called ſaint Corneliꝰ.
                  
                     Conchis, a meate made of beanes.
                  
                     Conchon, is called a veſſell of the grekes, or the holownes of the eies.
                  
                     Conchus, a perle.
                  
                     Conchile, & conchilium, a kynde of ſhelle fyſhe, out of the whiche a lycour is taken, wherwith ſylke is dyed purple. it is ſometyme taken for the purple colour.
                  
                     Conchiliata ueſtis, a purple garmente.
                  
                     Concido, cidi, ere, ciſum, to cutte in pieces, to die. Caeſar.
                  
                  
                     Concido, concidi, ere, concaſum, to falle downe all togither. Et muri ciuitatum concidem,
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        . And the walles of all cities ſhal fall all togither.
                  
                     Conciliabulum, a counſell houſe.
                  
                     Conciliabundus, he that is redye to gyue counſayle.
                  
                     Conſiliatrix, a woman that endeuoureth hir to make agreemente betwene menne and their wyues.
                  
                     Concilio, aui, are, to accorde or make frendes togither.
                  
                     Conciliare affinitatem, uel pacem, to make alyance or peace.
                  
                     Conciliare odium, uel inimicitias, to get hatred or diſpleaſure.
                  
                     Concilium, counſayle, or the aſſemblye of counſaylours.
                  
                     Concinnitudo, dinis, aptenes, or proprenes.
                  
                     Concinno, aui, are, to make apte, or propre, or fytte.
                  
                     Concinnus, a, um, apte, fytte, propre.
                  
                     Concinere, to agre in one ſong, or one tune.
                  
                     Concio, ciui, cire, to call togyther a multitude.
                  
                     Concio, onis, a pulpet or ſtage, wherein he ſtandeth that exhorteth people. Alſo an aſſembly or congregation of people, callyd togyther, to here the commaundement of the kynge, or other in authorytye in the weale publyque. Alſo it is the oration or ꝓpoſition made vnto them, called a cōcion.
                  
                     Concionalis, he that is wont to make orations or propoſitions to the people.
                  
                     Concionatorius, ria, rium, pertayninge to a Concyon.
                  
                     Concionor, aris, ari, to preache or purpoſe a matter to the people.
                  
                     Concionator, oris, he that preachethe or purpoſeth an oration.
                  
                     Concipio, coepi, cipere, to conceyue or apprehende, to delyberate, or determyne in mynde.
                  
                     Concipere iusiurandū, to ſwere in recyting the othe, as it is miniſtred.
                  
                     Concito, aui, are, to ſteere.
                  
                     Conclamatum eſt, it is at a poynte, or paſte remedy.
                  
                     Conclaue, a priuy or ſecrete chambre. ſometyme a bankettynge chambre.
                  
                     Concludo, cluſi, dere, to conclude or make an ende.
                  
                     Concluſio, onis, a concluſyon or ende of a mattier.
                  
                     Concordare, to be at a cōcorde or agremēt.
                  
                     Concoquo, coxi, concoquere, to digeſt.
                  
                     Concordia, concorde or agrement.
                  
                     Concorporo, aui, are, to make one thynge of dyuers.
                  
                     Concors, dis, of one wyll or mynde.
                  
                     Concrepare, to make a greatte noyſe, or to creke, as a doore dothe in the openyng.
                  
                     Concretum, congeled or conglutinate.
                  
                     Concubitor, oris, he that medlethe with a womanne.
                  
                     Concubium, the fyrſte ſlepe in the nyghte, or the depeſt of the nyght.
                  
                     Concumbo, bui, concumbere, et concubo, aui, are, to lye togither, to accompany togither, in the acte of generation.
                  
                     Concupiſco, piui, piſcere, to coueyte or deſyre feruently.
                  
                     Concupiſcentia, a feruent deſyre or appetite carnall.
                  
                     Concutio, tii, tere, to ſhake.
                  
                     Condecet, it well becommeth.
                  
                     Condecenter, agreably.
                  
                     Condecentia, a beſemynge.
                  
                     Condemno, aui, are, to condemne.
                  
                     Condecoro, aui, are, to make cleanly, or honeſte, to polyſhe.
                  
                     Condico, xi, cere, to appoynt, to ordeyn, to promiſe, to aſke agayn, to denye, to aſſigne by mouthe, to denounce, or declare.Tit, 
                           ••
                        . 
                           ••
                        .
                  
                  
                     Condictio, onis, an action in the law, or appoyntment to a day certayne.
                  
                     Condictum, a promyſe.
                  
                     Condio, iui, uel dij, dire, to ſeaſon meate, to pouder, or otherwiſe order it, to preſerue it from corruption.
                  
                     
                     Condimentum, that wherwith thynges be preſerued from corruption, or elles made dilectable in taſt.
                  
                     Conditaneus, a, um, that whiche is to be preſerued.
                  
                     Conditio, onis, Condicion, fortune, eſtate, election, or choyſe.
                  
                     Conditionem accepit, He toke the bargain or promiſe, or he agreed.
                  
                     Condititia cibaria, powderid meate, or other wiſe preſerued.
                  
                     Conditiuus, a, um, that which may be powdered or kepte.
                  
                     Conditor, oris, A maker.
                  
                     Conditorium, a Sepulchre, a place wherin ordinaunce for warre is kepte.
                  
                     Condo, didi, dere, to laye ſaulfe, or hyde. ſometyme to make, or buylde.
                  
                     Ci. Tuſ. lib. 5.
                     Condocefaceo, foeci, facere, to make to knowe.
                  
                     Condris, an herbe, called falſe dittayn, by cauſe it is lyke dyttayne, but it hathe leſſe leaues.
                  
                     Conducibile, profitable.
                  
                     Conduco, xi, cere, to brynge with me, to hyre, to take a houſe or lande. alſo to gather, to conuert.
                  
                     Conducere, to profyte.
                  
                     Conducit, it is profytable.
                  
                     Conductitius, a, um, that whiche may be hired or taken, or is vſed to be hyred.
                  
                     Condalium, a rynge.
                  
                     Condyloma, atis, a ſwellynge in the fundement, ſomtyme harde, ſomtyme ſofte.
                  
                     Condylos, the knuckle of a fynger.
                  
                     Confecta, thynges voyded or concluded by reaſon.
                  
                     Confercio, to ſtuffe, or porre.
                  
                     Confertus, ta, tum, gathered as people be gathered in a preaſe, thycke ſette.
                  
                     Confertiſsima turba, in the thyckeſt preaſe.
                  
                     Confero, tuli, ferre, to put togither, to ſette forthe,Plautus. to prepare, to put in. Ne poſterius in me culpam conferas, Put not at the laſt the defaut in me. Conſilia conferunt, They kepe their counſels togither. To lay to, or ioyne. Nouiſsima conferam primis,
                     Terentius I wyll lay to, or ioyne the laſte to the fyrſte. Conferre, to profyte. Conferre in pauca, To conclude ſhortly.Columella Alſo conferre, to lay togither. Sit
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         utti
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         proximum horreum, quo conferatur ruſticum inſtrumentū, To bothe, next there muſte be a barne, wherin maye be layde vp togyther inſtrumentes longyng to huſbandry. Alſo Confero, I gyue. Multa contuli in Catonem, I haue gyuen or attribute moch to Cato, I haue fauored moche Cato. Contuli me domum, I went home. Contuli me ad Catonem, I went vnto Cato.
                  
                  
                     Conferua, an herbe whyche groweth in freſhe waters lyke to a ſpunge.
                  
                     Confeſſor, oris, a confeſſour.
                  
                     Confeſtim, efteſoones.
                  
                     Conficio, eci, ficere, to performe or finyſhe,Lactātius. to periſhe or be conſumed, to diſtroy or ſle, to explicate or declare. Honeſtatis pars cō
                        fecta eſt, quā tibi cupio eſſe notiſsimam, The part of honeſtie is declared, which I wold ſhulde be vnto the perfitely knowen.Cic. offic. Alſo to bring to paſſe, Si me amas, cōfice, If thou loueſt me, bryng it to paſſe. Alſo to gather money. Permagnam dices ex illa re pecuniā confici poſſe, Thou wylt ſay, that a greate ſomme of money mought be made of that thynge. Conficere to breake.Plinius. 
                     Nucem dentibus conficere, To breake a nutte with his tethe. Alſo to cōſume or waſte.Terentius 
                     Qui cum hic non uideant me, credant me conficere argentum ſuum, who bicauſe they ſe me not bere they beleue I waſte their money. Alſo Confici, to be made. Quomodo poteſt ex multorum deorum aceruo unus deus confici? By what meanes maye there be of a heape of goddes one only god made?
                  
                     Cōfido, di, dere, to truſt, to be ſure, to dare.
                  
                     Confidens, tis, he that regardeth no lawes, nor feareth any thynge. ſomtyme it ſygnyfieth conſtant, aſſured.
                  
                     Confidenter, conſtantly, aſſuredly, ſomtime hardily, boldly, aduenturouſly.
                  
                     Confinis hoc confine, next to or adioyning.
                  
                     Confinium, a border or marche of a countrey or lande.
                  
                     Confit, it is made to gither.
                  
                     Confiſcare, to ſeaſe for a forfaiture.
                  
                     Confiteor, eris, to confeſſe.
                  
                     Conflages, places, wherinto many wyndes do blowe.
                  
                     Conflare, to blowe togither, to blowe lyke as one bloweth the fyre.
                  
                     Conflata pecunia, money coyned.
                  
                     Conflare mendacium, to imagine a lye.
                  
                     Conflare inuidiam, inimicitias, odium, to ſtire or procure enuy, hoſtilitie, hate.
                  
                     Conflauit aes alienum, he is runne in dette. Alſo Conflare, to gather. Conflauit ex his omnibus populum, Of all thoſe he gathered a great multitude. Alſo to make. Et cur uae rigidum falces conflantur in enſem,
                     Vergilius. And the croked ſithe into the harde ſworde is made.
                  
                     Conflatile, that which is apt to be wrought lyke mettall.
                  
                     Conflicto, aui, are, to fight often.
                  
                     Conflictor, aris, ari, to be vexed or troubled, to fyghte.
                  
                     Confligo, fligi, gere, to fyght as men doo in battayle.
                  
                     
                     Confluere, to come or runne to gether, or flowe.
                  
                     Confluges, places, in to the whiche many riuers do flowe.
                  
                     Conformis, hoc conforme, of a conformitie or lyke in facion, conueniente.
                  
                     Conforto, aui, are, to comforte.
                  
                     Confugio, fugi, gere, to flee with other.
                  
                     Confundo, fudi, dere, to confounde, to meddel together.
                  
                     Confuto, aui, are, to reproue or vaynquyſhe by wordes. Alſo to ſteere.
                  
                     Congedus, a Ryuer in Spayne, nere to a towne called Bilbilis.
                  
                     Congenulo, aui, are, to knele.
                  
                     Congero, geſsi, ere, to gather to gyther, or heape vppe.
                  
                     Congiatium, An almes, or other lyberalle gyfte, giuen by the prince vnto his people, be it in money corne or vitayles.
                  
                     Congius, a certayne meaſure, wherin Sextarius is ſyxe tymes, and the lycour therin conteyned wayeth tenne pounde.
                  
                     Conglobare, to brynge or come rounde together.
                  
                     Congratulor, aris, ari, to reioyce with a nother man of his good fortune.
                  
                     Congredior, eris, gredi, to go with an other to fight, or diſpute.
                  
                     Congreſſus, us, A batayle.
                  
                     Congrex, of the ſame flocke.
                  
                     Congruo, grui, ere, to agree.
                  
                     Congruum, Agreable.
                  
                     Cōgrus, & Cōger, A fiſhe called a Conger.
                  
                     Coniectarium, effectuall, or parfyte.
                  
                     Coniecto, aui, are, to ſuppoſe, to iudge.
                  
                     Coniector, oris, an interpretour of dremis, A Coniectour, that dothe coniecte what ſhall happen.
                  
                     Coniectura, A coniecture.
                  
                     Coniecturale, that whiche is coniectid, or gathered by coniecture.
                  
                     Coniectus, us, a certayne direction of rayſon vnto the trouthe.
                  
                     Conifera arbor, a tree whiche beareth fruites beinge ſmaller at the one ende than at the other, lyke a pyne appull.
                  
                     Conijcio, ieci, ijcere, to caſte to coniecte.
                  
                     Coniecit ſe in fugam, He put him to flyghte.
                  
                     Coniicere in uincula, To caſt into priſon, or to laye a man in the ſtockes or gyues.
                  
                     Coniecit ſe intro, He went his way in.
                  
                     Coniecit ſe in pedes, He toke hym to flight, he toke hym to his legges.
                  
                     Coniicere tela, to caſt dartes, or to ſhoote.
                  
                     Coniicere in letitiam, to bringe to a gladnes.
                  
                     Coniugalis thorus, the chamber where the buſbande and wyfe do lye.
                  
                     Cōiugo, aui, are, to yoke together, or mary.
                  
                     Coniugium, mariage.
                  
                     Coniungo, xi, ere, to ioyne together.
                  
                     Coniunx, iugis, A wyfe.
                  
                     Coniugus, a, um, that whiche ioyneth.
                  
                     Coniuro, aui, are, to cōſure or conſpire with other for an yll pourpoſe.
                  
                     Coniuiatio, a Conſpiracye.
                  
                     Conniueo, & Cōniuo, is, iui, uel xi, to winke, and is vſed to be ſpoken, when men wol let thynges paſſe, that ought to be loked on.
                  
                     Connubium, matrimony.
                  
                     Conoides, the female of the Cipreſſe tree.
                  
                     Conon, nis, the name of a kyng of Athenes.
                  
                     Conopoeum, A Canapy, proprely ſuche one as hangeth ouer beddes, and is wroughte lyke a net, to kepe out gnattes, whiche do ſtynge men in theyr beddes.
                  
                     Cōquiniſco, cōquexi, cōquiniſcere, to ducke with the heed.
                  
                     Conſalutare, to ſalute one an other.
                  
                     Conſanguineus, Coſeyne.
                  
                     Conſanguinitas, tatis, Kynred.
                  
                     Conſcendo, di, dere, to klyme.
                  
                     Conſcientia, Conſcience.
                  
                     Conſciſco, ſci, ſcere, to conſent, determyne, or graunt to a mattier wyllynglye.
                  
                     Conſciſcere mortem, To kill wylfully.
                  
                     Conſcius, conſcia, that knowith wt an other.
                  
                     Conſcius ſceleris, partie or priuy to the offence, acceſſarye.
                  
                     Conſcribo, pſi, bere, to wryte thynges together.
                  
                     Conſcripti, they whoſe names be writen or regiſtred to ſupply a numbre, whiche doo lacke: or ſuche as be newe choſen or added vnto the other.
                  
                     
                        Conſecranei,
                        Tertullianus.
                      ſuche as be dedycate to one ſecte or opinyon.
                  
                     Cōſecro, craui, are, to dedicate or cōſecrate.
                  
                     Conſectanei, they whiche be of one ſecte.
                  
                     Conſector, aris, to folowe all together.
                  
                     Conſenſio, A Cōſent or accord of one mind or pourpoſe.
                  
                     Conſentio, tii, tire, to Conſente.
                  
                     Conſentaneus, a, um, agreable.
                  
                     Conſeptum, An incloſure or place incloſed,
                  
                     Conſeptus, ta, tum, incloſed.
                  
                     Conſequentia, thynges whiche do folowe or inſue.
                  
                     Conſequiae, ſequeles.
                  
                     Conſequor, to folow immediatly, to optain, or get, to expreſſe. Verbis conſequi non poſſunt, They may not be expreſſed in wordes.
                  
                     
                        Conſerere manu
                              •
                           ,
                      to fyght hand to hande.
                  
                     Conſero, ſeui, ſerere, to ſowe or ſette herbes togither.
                  
                     Conſeſſus, ſus, Men ſyttynge togyther. It may be taken for a ſeſſyons or ſyttynge of men, whiche be commiſſioners.
                  
                     
                     Conſido, ſidi, dere, to ſytte or abyde togyther. It may be vſed to ſytte at a ſeſſyons.
                  
                     Conſiliarius, a counſellour.
                  
                     Conſilio, iui, uel, lui, lire, to leape togyther.
                  
                     Conſilior, aris, to take counſayle.
                  
                     Conſilium, a counſayle. It may be taken for commyſſioners or iudges aſſigned.
                  
                     Cic. pro Roſ
                           •
                        .
                     Conſiſto, ſtiti, ſiſtere, to ſtande faſte or ſure, to abyde boldly by a thynge.
                  
                     Conſiſtorium, a counſell houſe, ſpecially in a princis palays.
                  
                     Conſobrini, couſyns germains of two bretherne or two ſyſters.
                  
                     Conſolabundus, he that comforteth a man.
                  
                     Conſolida, the name of an herbe, callyd Confery.
                  
                     Conſolor, aris, ari, to gyue comforte, or take comforte.
                  
                     Conſono, nui, are, to make one ſowne togither. Alſo to accorde or agree.
                  
                     Conſors, tis, a felowe or companyon, ſome tyme it ſygnifieth lyke.
                  
                     Conſortium, felowſhyp or company.
                  
                     Conſpicio, ſpexi, cere, to ſee or beholde.
                  
                     Conſpicilium, a lowpe to looke oute of a howſe, or walle.
                  
                     Conſpicilia, ſpectakles.
                  
                     Conſpico, ſpexi, ere, & Conſpicor, aris, ari,
to beholde.
                  
                     Conſpicuus, a, um, circumſpect, wytty, or of a ſharpe and quycke witte. Alſo apparant or playne to perceyue.
                  
                     
                        Conſpi
                              •
                           o, aui, are,
                      to conſpire or conſente. Alſo to blowe togyther.
                  
                     Conſpiratio, nis, a conſpiracye.
                  
                     Conſtantinopolis, Conſtantinople, a cytie in Thrace.
                  
                     Conſternium, a place where men, whanne they were bayned, layde their garmentes.
                  
                     Conſterno, aui, ſternere, to throwe downe, or ouerthrowe.
                  
                     Conſternati, men ouerthrowen, ſometyme abaſhed.
                  
                     Conſternatio, tionis, an abaſhement.
                  
                     Conſterno, ſtraui, ſternere, to ſtraw, to paue.
                  
                     Conſtituo, ſtirui, ſtituere, to ordeyne, to gouerne, to prouyde, to couenant, to fourme.
                  
                     Cicero.
                     Corpus bene conſtitutum, A body well cō
                     plexioned.
                  
                     Conſtitutio corporis, the complexion. Conſtitutio cauſae, whiche our lawyers do calle the matter in lawe.
                  
                     Conſtitutus, ta, tum, ordeyned.
                  
                     Conſto, ſtiri, ſtare, to perſyſte or abyde in a thynge.
                  
                     Conſtat animo, He is of a ſtedfaſte mynde.
                  
                     Conſtat pedibus, He is ſure of his feete, or hoole.
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        iſ
                           •
                        ania.
                     Conſtat, it coſteth, it is ſolde for.
                  
                     Conſtare, to ſtande togyther, to be manyfeſte or knowen, to agree.
                  
                     
                        Conſtan
                              •
                           , tis,
                      conſtant or ſtedfaſte.
                  
                     Conſtanter, conſtantly.
                  
                     Conſtantia, conſtance, or ſtedfaſtenes.
                  
                     Conſtruo, ſtruxi, ſtruere, to buylde, to ordayne.
                  
                     Conſueſco, ſueui, ſueſcere, to be wonte.Terentiu
                           •
                        
                      ſomtyme to vſe carnallye. Cum eius conſueuit matre clanculum, He hadde company with his mother priuelye. Alſo to vſe for a cuſtome. ſometyme to lyue.Columel
                           •
                        . 
                     Nec magis humo 
                           
                              
                           
                           quam
                         ſtagno conſueuerunt, They lyue as welle on lande, as on water.
                  
                     Conſuetudo, dinis, cuſtome or vſage. Alſo carnall company.
                  
                     Conſuêfacio, to accuſtome.
                  
                     Conſul, lis, a chiefe officer among the Romaynes.
                  
                     Conſularis, He that hadde ben conſulle, or were mete to be conſull.
                  
                     Conſulatus, tus, the offyce of Conſull.
                  
                     Conſulo, lui, ſulere, with a datyue caſe, to gyue counſayle: with an accuſatiue caſe, to aſke counſaylle. Alſo with a datiue caſe, it ſygnifieth to prouyde, to helpe to. Grauiter de ſe conſulere, To doo ſomme hurte to hym ſelfe.
                  
                     Conſulto, taui, tare, to gyue or aſke counſayle often, to delyberate or ſhewe myne aduyſe often.
                  
                     Conſulto, delyberately, or aduyſedly.
                  
                     Conſultor, toris, he that gyueth counſayle, ſomtyme he that aſketh counſayle.
                  
                     Conſultus, ta, tum, a wyſe man.
                  
                     Conſultus, tus, & Conſultum, the thing that is conſulted. Sometyme an acte of counſaylle.
                  
                     Conſummo, aui, are, to ſumme vp in a recknynge, to fyniſhe or performe, or make vp, or make perfite.
                  
                     Conſummatus, ta, tum, perfyte, at a pointe.
                  
                     Conſumo, ſumpſi, ſumere, to conſume, or diſtroye.
                  
                     Conſuo, ui, ere, to ſowe togyther, or ioyne.
                  
                     Conſyderate, with a conſyderation.
                  
                     Conſyderatus, he that dothe a thinge with conſyderation.
                  
                     Conſydero, aui, are, to conſyder.
                  
                     Contabulari, to bourde, or to laye bourdes on a roufe or floure.
                  
                     Contagium, & Contagio, Contagionis, & Contages, an infectiue ſyckeneſſe.
                  
                     Contamino, taminaui, taminare, to vyolate, or defyle, with myxtynge thynges togyther, to diſhoneſte.
                  
                     Contemno, contempſi, contemnere, to diſpyſe, or contempne, whyche is laſſe than deſpyſynge.
                  
                     
                     Contemptus, tus, deſpyte.
                  
                     Contemplatio, onis, a beholdynge, ſpecially in the mynde with deuocion to god.
                  
                     Contemplo, aui, & contemplor, aris, to beholde intentifely with great affection.
                  
                     Contemporanei, they which be at one time.
                  
                     Contemptibilis, bile, he that is to be deſpiſed, or not regarded.
                  
                     Contemptor, aris, to ſette lyttell by.
                  
                     Contendo, di, dere, to contende, or reſyſte, or ſtryue, to caſte or ſhote a darte or arow: to contynue, to make haſte, to inforce.
                  
                     Contentio, onis, reſyſtence, ſtryfe, or debate. Alſo a ſharpe oration apt to confirme or repreue, a continuance, an inforcement or ſettynge forth with vehemence.
                  
                     Contentus, ta, tum, that whiche is contayned. alſo content or ſatisfied.
                  
                     Contineo, nui, ere, to contayn, to withhold, to lette.
                  
                     Conterraneus, countrey man.
                  
                     Conteſtari, to aſke togither wytneſſe.
                  
                     Conticeo, ticui, ceére, to hold my peace with other. Conticeſco, idem.
                  
                  
                     Conticimum, bedde tyme, or the fyrſt part of nyght, whan men prepare to take theyr teſt, and all thing is in ſilence.
                  
                     Contigno, aui, are, to raufter a houſe.
                  
                     Contignatio, onis, the raufterynge.
                  
                     Continens, tis, firme lande, that is none ile. alſo centynuall.
                  
                     Continenter, continually, contynentely, or fyrmely.
                  
                     Continentia, continence, a vertue, refuſing thinges that are pleaſaunt. Alſo reſiſtence of ylle.
                  
                     Contineo, nui, ere, to refrain, to kepe back, to contayne, to kepe togither.
                  
                     Contingo, tigi, tingere, to touche.
                  
                     Contigit, It hath hapned.
                  
                     Continuo, aui, are, to contynue.
                  
                     Continuus, a, um, contynuall.
                  
                     Continue, contynually.
                  
                     Contor, aris, to abyde.
                  
                     Contorie res, thinges wounden and twyſted. Alſo ſuche matter, as oone parte can not agree with an other.
                  
                     Contra, agayn a place, a perſon, or a thing on the other parte.
                  
                     Contracto, aui, are, to attayne, or comprehende.
                  
                     Contradico, dixi, dicere, to contrary in wordis, to ſaye contrary.
                  
                     Contraeo, to goo contrarye or agaynſte a thinge.
                  
                     Contraho, traxi, trahere, to gather togither. Contrahere aes alienum, To be indetted, to commytte, to make a contracte or bargayne, to drawe togyther. Contrahere, to ſhrynke. Nerui contrahuntur, the ſynewes be ſhrunken.
                  
                     Contrahere frontem, to lowre. Bona contracta, goodes gotten by conqueſte.
                  
                     Contrarius, a, um, contrarye.
                  
                     Contrauenio, ire, to happen contrary, come contrarye.
                  
                     Controuerſia, a controuerſie or variance.
                  
                     Controuerſioſus, lytigious, or full of controuerſye.
                  
                     Controuerſor, aris, to contende or vary.
                  
                     Controuerſus, a, um, contrary, or in contrary wiſe. Res controuerſa, mater in controuerſye.
                  
                     Contubernium, a felowſhyp or a companie.
                  
                     Contubernalis, a felowe or companyon, or of one company.
                  
                     Contumax, macis, di
                        ••
                     bedient, or frowarde in opinyon, he that wyl not be perſwaded.
                  
                     Contumacia, dyſobedyence, a ſelfe wylle, or frowardenes.
                  
                     Contumelia, a reproche, a thynge done or ſpoken to a mans rebuke.
                  
                     Contumelioſus, he that vſeth to ſpeake rebukefully.
                  
                     Contundo, tudi, tundere, to breke to peces, or ſtryke downe.
                  
                     Contuoſi oculi, eien loking narowe.
                  
                     Contus, a longe ſpeare or morys pike. alſo a longe pole with yron at the ende, wherwith ſhypmen do gauge the water.
                  
                     Conuallis, a valey hauynge hilles on bothe ſydes.
                  
                     Conuaſo, aui, are, to gather by ſtelthe.
                  
                     Conuenae, people aſſembled of diuers coū
                     treys, dwelling in one countrey or towne.
                  
                     Conuenientia, a congruence. Alſo a cōming togither of people.
                  
                     Conuenire, to come togither, or to aſſemble in one place. Alſo to agree, to ſewe at the lawe, or bringe in iugement. Alſo to determine, to ſpeake with one, to accorde. Conuenit inter me at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         hūc, it is agreed betwene him and me, De pretio conuenit, we are agreed of the price, In manū conuenit, She is my wyfe.
                  
                     Conuentae, couenantes of mariage.
                  
                     Conuenticulum, a congreation, moſt commonly for an yll purpoſe.
                  
                     Conuentio, onis, & conuentū, a couenaunt.
                  
                     Conuentus, an aſſembly of people, warned by the chiefe officers commaundement.
                  
                     Conuentus maximus, may be taken for a parlyament. Minores conuentus, ſeſſions of the peace.
                  
                     Conuerſor, aris, to be conuerſaunt.
                  
                     Cōuerſatio, conuerſation or familiaritie.
                  
                     Conuerto, uerti, tere, to conuert, or tourne.
                  
                     Conuexum, the outwarde part and roūdenes

of a thynge that is holowe.
                  
                     Conuicinium, a neyborhode.
                  
                     Conuicior, aris, ari, to ſpeake in reproche.
                  
                     Conuicium, a reproche or rebuke.
                  
                     Conuictor, oris, a dayly companyon at table, or a dayly geſte.
                  
                     Conuiualis, le, pertaynynge to feaſtes.
                  
                     Conuiuor, aris, ari, to feaſte or bankette, or to take meales with other men.
                  
                     Conuiuator, toris, a feaſter or banketter.
                  
                     Conuiua & conuictor, a beden geſt, he that is inuited or beden to dyner or ſupper.
                  
                     Conuiuium, a feaſte or bankette.
                  
                     Conuoluolus, a lyttell worme with manye feete and heary, that eateth the leaues of vynes. Alſo an herbe runnynge vppe by buſhes, hauynge a floure lyke to a lyly, but it hath no ſauoure. peraduenture that whiche is called withwynde.
                  
                     Conuoti, ſworne bretherne, or men making one auowe or promyſe.
                  
                     Conus, proprely the pyneapple tre, by trā
                     ſlation it is a figure in facion lyke to a pyne appull. Alſo the creſt of an helmet or ſalet.
                  
                     Coniſcare, to buſhe or ſtreke heed to heed as rammes do.
                  
                     Conoides, pyneappull trees female.
                  
                     Coos, uel Cos, uel Co, uel Coum, the name of an yle nigh to the Rhodes.
                  
                     Plautus
                     Cous, a, um, of that yle.
                  
                     Copis, plentuouſe.
                  
                     Copia, plentie, eloquence, power, leaue, or licence, multitude.
                  
                     Copiae cornu, is reherſed, whan we wylle ſygnifie to be plentie of all thinges, in that whiche we ſpeake of.
                  
                     Copioſus, a, um, plentuouſe.
                  
                     Copula, a couplyng or ioynyng togyther, couples or fetters.
                  
                     Copulatiuus, ua, uum, that coupleth, or may cowple.
                  
                     Coquina, a kytchyn.
                  
                     Coquinor, aris, ari, to do the office of a coke
                  
                     Coquinaria, cokery.
                  
                     Coquinarius, a, um, pertaynyng to cokery.
                  
                     Coquo, coxi, coquere, to ſeethe or boyle, to make ripe, to make redy, to digeſt.
                  
                     Coquus, a cooke.
                  
                     Cor, cordis, the herte. ſomtyme it is taken for the mynde.
                  
                     Eraſ. in Ci
                           •
                        ilia.
                     Corne edito, Do not tourment thy mynde with care or heuyneſſe.
                  
                     Cora, a cytie that Dardanus buylded, of which the inhabitantes are called Corani.
                  
                  
                     Coraceſius, a part of the hyll Taurus.
                  
                     Corallium, a ſtone callyd corall.
                  
                     Corallobachates, a ſtone with golden rays.
                  
                     Coram, before, openly, in preſence.
                  
                     Corambla, an herbe that maketh the eies duſke and weake of ſyght.
                  
                     Corax, acis, a crowe.
                  
                     Coraxicus, a parte of the hyll Taurus.
                  
                     Coraxis, a mountayne in Aſia, alſo a flood.
                  
                     Corbis, a baſkette.
                  
                     Corbita, a great ſhippe, called a foyſt.
                  
                     Corbona, the treaſure of the temple amonge the Iewes.
                  
                     Corchorus, a vyle herbe.
                  
                     Corculum, ſweete harte. alſo wyſe menne were ſo called amonge the Romayns.
                  
                     Corcyra, an yle in Grece.
                  
                     Cordatus homo, a wytty man, and of great memorie.
                  
                     Cordi eſt, it is to my mind, it cōtenteth me.
                  
                     Cordolium, ſorowe, grefe at the harte.
                  
                     Corduba, a citie in Spayne.
                  
                     Cordus, a, um, that thynge, whiche ſpryngeth or cometh late in the yere. Cordum foenum, latewarde haye.
                  
                     Cordi agni, latewarde lambes.
                  
                     Coreaceus, a, um, of lether.
                  
                     Coriago, aginis, the ſyckeneſſe of cattalle, whan they are clunge, that their ſkynnes do cleaue faſte to their bodies.
                  
                     Coriarius, a tanner.
                  
                     Corinthiacus, a, um, of Corinthe.
                  
                     Corinthia uaſa, plate made of the mettal of
                  
                     Corinthe, whiche was myxt mettall.
                  
                     Corinthus, a citie in Achaia, which was in that parte of Greece, that is nowe callyd Morea: wherof came a prouerbe, Non eſt cuiuslibet Corinthum appellere, It is not in euery mans power to ariue at Corinthus, whiche doth ſignifie, It pertayneth not to euery man to attempt thingis dangerous, or harde to acheue. Vide originem in chiliadibus adagiorum Eraſmi, uel in Aulo Gellio. Corium, the ſkinne of a beaſte, alſo lether. the pane of a wall made with lyme & ſande.
                  
                     Corna, ae, the name of .ii. cities.
                  
                     Cornelia, a noble woman of Rome.
                  
                     Cornetum, a groue of hauthorne.
                  
                     Corneus, a, um, of hawthornes.
                  
                     Cornicen, a blower in a horne.
                  
                     Cornicor, aris, ari, to make a chattryng like a choughe.
                  
                     Cornicularius, a certayne offyce in armes, concernyng capitall ſentences.
                  
                     
                        Cornicū oculos configere,
                        Eraſ. in Chilia.
                      to pricke out the crowes eien, is a prouerbe vſed, whan we wold ſignifie, that one with a newe deuiſe, had obſcured the doctrine or eſtimation of them, which had ben afore him, & had made them to ſeeme, that they knewe or ſee nothing. It may be alſo ſaide, where one man wyll make all other men blynde, that haue ben before him; & reproue or diſſolue that, whiche hath ben allowed by wyſe men.
                  
                     
                     Corniculum, a garment pertainyng to ſouldiours. Alſo ſomtyme a towne in Italy.
                  
                     Cornigenus, a, um, of the kynde, whyche hath hornes.
                  
                     Corniger, geris, al thing that bereth a horn.
                  
                     Cornupes, pedis, euery beaſte that hathe horne on his feete.
                  
                     Cornix, nicis, a byrde called a chowgh.
                  
                     Cornu, a borne: by tranſlation, the corners and wyndinges of ryuers. Alſo the twoo endes of a battayle be callid, Dextrum cornu, et ſiniſtrum cornu.
                  
                  
                     Cornucopiae, was a horne that Hercules plucked from Achelous, whiche horne the Hymphes or immortall ladyes fylled with ſwete flowres and fruites.
                  
                     Cornupeta, a beaſte that ſtryketh with his hornes.
                  
                     Cornus, nus, a hawthorne tree,
                  
                     Cornutus, a, um, that whiche hath hornes.
                  
                     Corolla, a garlande.
                  
                     Corollarium, that whiche is aboue the very meaſure. alſo a lytell crowne.
                  
                     Corona, a crowne, a garlande, a chaplette, a company of people ſtandyng rounde like a cerkle. Alſo the cerkle aboute the mone.
                  
                     Coronamentum, a multitude of crounes, or garlandes.
                  
                     Coronarius, ria, a maker of crownes, or garlandes.
                  
                     Corone, a towne in Greece in the partes nowe named Morea.
                  
                     Coronea, a cytie in the partes of Boeotia, in Greece.
                  
                     Coronis, nidis, the noſe of a ſhyppe. Alſo an ende, the extreme parte, the toppe, the borne, or other lyke.
                  
                     Corono, aui, are, to crowne, or ſette on a crowne or garlande.
                  
                     Corporalis, le, corporall.
                  
                     Corporatio, corporatura, the quātitie, ſtate, or facyon of the body, corporature.
                  
                     Corporcus, ea, um, that which is of a bodily ſubſtance.
                  
                     Ennſus.
                     Corporo, aui, are, to kyll.
                  
                     Corpulentus, corpulente or groſſe in body, fleſhy.
                  
                     Corpus, corporis, a body. ſometyme it ſignifieth but fleſſhe onely. alſo ſometyme all maner of ſubſtance.
                  
                     Corrado, raſi, dere, to ſhaue or ſcrape, to take away, ſpoyle, ſell, or alienate.
                  
                     Corrigo, rexi, rigere, to correcte, or amēde.
                  
                     Corrector, toris, a correcter, or amender.
                  
                     
                        Corripio, pui, 
                              •
                           ere,
                      to rebuke. proprely it is to take a thinge quyckely, and with haſte.
                  
                     Corripitur febre, he is taken with a feuer.
                  
                     Corripitur ſomno, He is faſte a ſlepe.
                  
                     Corriuare, is proprely of beaſtes, to go togither to watrynge.
                  
                     Corrugi, furrowes made in hylles, to cō
                     ney water, to waſhe the owre of mettall.
                  
                     Corrumpo, rupi, rumpere, to corrupte, to viciate, to diſtroy, to ſuborne, to tempte, or procure by gyftes.
                  
                     Corruptela, corruption or defylynge.
                  
                     Corſica, an Ile in the myddell ſee betwene Bean and the Ile of Sardinia.
                  
                     Cortex, corticis, a rynde or barke.
                  
                     Cortina, a dyers fatte. Alſo it is the table of Apollo, from the whiche he gaue aunſwere. Cato taketh it for a veſſell, oute of the whiche oyle is lette runne. Alſo that whiche is called a corteyne of lynnen cloth or ſylke. Alſo places deuided with cortaynes be called Cortinae.
                  
                  
                     Cortinale, the place where veſſelles be ſet, wherin wyne and hony is ſodden.
                  
                     Cortinon, radyſhe ſeede.
                  
                     Cortona, a citie in Tuſcane.
                  
                     Cortyna, or gortyna, a cite ī the ile of Cādy
                  
                     Corus, the northweſterne wynde. Alſo a meaſure contaynynge .xlv. buſhels.
                  
                     Coruſco, aui, are, to brandyſhe or glytter.
                  
                     Coruus, a crowe.
                  
                     Corybantes, the prieſtes of the Idoll Cybeles, which as madde men waggyng their heedes and daunſynge, playinge on cymbales, ranne about the ſtretes, prouokyng other to do the ſemblable.
                  
                     Coryces, curious perſons, crafty inueſtigatours or ſerchers of mattiers. Alſo a hylle in Crete, lyenge on the ſee ſyde.
                  
                     Corycium, a gardeuiandes or walet, or other lyke thynge to put in vitayles.
                  
                     Corycum, the name of a cytie and mountayne in Sycile.
                  
                     Corydalus, a larke.
                  
                     Coryletum, a groue of haſylles.
                  
                     Corylus, an haſyll and a haſylle nutte, or fylberde.
                  
                     Corymbi, bearies of an yuy.
                  
                     Corymbites, a kynde of ſpurge.
                  
                     Coriphaeus, the chiefe in euery order.
                  
                     Corythus, a bowe caſe, or a quyuer for arowes.
                  
                     Corythus, a town in Tuſcan nere to Aretiū 
                     Coryza, the poſe, or diſtillation out of the heed into the eyes and noſe.
                  
                     Cos, cotis, a whetſtone.
                  
                     Coſmera, a chamberer, or woman, that apparayleth hir maiſtreſſe.
                  
                     Coſmicus, ca, cum, worldly.
                  
                     Coſmographia, the deſcriptiō of the world.
                  
                     Coſmographꝰ, he that diſcribith the world.
                  
                     Coſmus, a propre name.
                  
                     Coſsi, wormes bredde in trees, which the people of Phrigia, dyd eate for a delycate

meate. Alſo men or women that haue their bodies riueled or full of wryncles.
                  
                     Coſta, a rybbe.
                  
                     Coſtus, uel coſtum, a tree or her be, whiche is very ſoote in ſauour.
                  
                     Coſyros, an Ile in Aphrike.
                  
                     Coticula, a touche ſtone, wheron they trye golde and ſyluer.
                  
                     Cotidie, dayly, day by day.
                  
                     Coton, a hauen made with ſtoone. Alſo a towne in Byria, of the whiche a certayne kynde of ſmalle fygges, are called plurally, cotona, uel coctona.
                  
                  
                     Cotoneum, a quynſe.
                  
                     Cothurnus, a ſlipper, ſpecially high corked. ſomtime it is taken for a hygh and arrogāt forme of ſpeakynge or writynge.
                  
                     Coturnix, nicis, a byrde named a quayle.
                  
                     Cotyla, a veſſell or cuppe to drynke of, ſuche as Diogenes vſed, before he lerned of a chylde to drinke out of his hande.
                  
                     Cotyle, all the holownes of a cuppe: alſo a meaſure aboute the quantytie of halfe a pynte: alſo the ioynte of a mans thygh. alſo a weight of .ix. ounces.
                  
                     Cotylum, a place in the mountayne of Ida, out of the whiche rounneth thre great ryuers, Scamander, Granicus, & Aeſopus.
                  
                  
                     Couinum, a maner of a chariot.
                  
                     Couinarius eques, horſemen that faughte leapyng out of a chariot vnto horſebacke.
                  
                     Coxa, ex coxendix, dicis, the thigh of a man. ſomtyme the hyppe or ioynt of the thigh.
                  
                     Conuictus, tus, a lyuyng togither in houſe, or at one table.
                  
                     Conuoco, caui, care, to call to gyther.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶C, ante R.
                  
                     CRabro, onis, a great waſpe, callyd a hornette.
                  
                     Cranaus, a kynge of Athenes.
                  
                     Craneum, a place of exercyſe atte Corynthe.
                  
                     Cranium, the foremooſte parte of the ſchulle.
                  
                     Crantor, oris, the name of a philoſopher.
                  
                     Crapula, an inflamation and heed ache, whiche commeth of exceſſe of drynkynge. It is alſo taken for drunkennes.
                  
                     Cras, to morowe, in tyme commynge.
                  
                     Craſtino, is the ſame.
                  
                     Eraſ. in Chil.
                     Craſſamentum, thyckeneſſe.
                  
                     Craſſa Minerua, a groſſe witte, which doth nothynge exactely.
                  
                     Craſceſco, ceſsi, ceſſere, to make fatte, or ful of fleſhe, or thycke.
                  
                     Craſsiore Muſa, with a more playne or intelligible ſeneſ.
                  
                     Craſſus, a, um, fatte, fleſhy, thycke, groſſe, poyſye.
                  
                     Craſsities, & craſsitudo, fatneſſe; thicknes, groſſenes.
                  
                     Craſtino, aui, are, to deferre frome daye to daye.
                  
                     Craſtinus, na, num, pertaynynge to to morowe, or tyme to come.
                  
                     Cratera, uel crater, teris, a greatte cuppe. Alſo a greatte hoole on the toppe of the meruaylouſe hylle of Ethna in Sycyle, out of the whiche iſſueth flames of fyre.
                  
                     Craterus, the propre name of a manne, of whom Perſius ſpeaketh in his .iii. Saty.
                  
                     Crates, grates of yron or wodde. Alſo the name of a phyloſopher, whyche to the intente he moughte the more quietely ſtudye phyloſophye, he beyng ryche, threwe all his goodes into the ſee, ſaying, Hens with a myſchiefe ye vngracyous appetytes, I hadde leauer drowne you, thanne ye ſhoulde drowne me. Suppoſynge, that he moughte not haue vertue and rycheſſe togyther.
                  
                     Crathis, the name of two ryuers, the one in Grece, the other in Calaber.
                  
                     Craticula, a gredyron, whereon meate is broyled.
                  
                     Cratinas, a ryuer in Affrike.
                  
                     Cratinus, a poete whiche wrate comedies.
                  
                     Cratylus, the name of a philoſopher, to whom Plato wrate a boke.
                  
                     Cratio, iui, ire, to couer with grates.
                  
                     Cratippus, the name of a philoſopher.
                  
                     Cratos, power, or dominion.
                  
                     Creo, aui, are, to make of nothynge. Alſo to gette chyldren.
                  
                     Creatura, a creature or thinge made of nothynge.
                  
                     Creber, bra, brū, frequent, or accuſtomed.
                  
                     Crebró, often.
                  
                     Crebreſco, crebrui, crebreſcere, to be wont, to be commune.
                  
                     Credibile, that whiche may be byleued.
                  
                     Creditor, oris, he vnto whom a man oweth any thynge.
                  
                     Creditum, that thinge that is owed.
                  
                     Credo, didi, dere, to beleue, to truſte, to cō
                     mytte, or delyuer a thynge to be ſaufelye kepte, to publyſhe.
                  
                     Credulus, he that beleueth lyghtly.
                  
                     Credulitas, tatis, lyght beleue.
                  
                     Crementum, increaſe.
                  
                     Cremera, a ryuer.
                  
                     Cremium, fried meate burned to the pāne.
                  
                     Cremor, oris, the iuyce of barly ſteapyd in water, beaten and preſſed,
                  
                     Crenae, the dentis about the leaf of an herbe or tree lyke to a ſawe. Alſo it is the ſcores,

whiche men vnlerned do make on ſtyckes for their remembrance. Alſo Crena, is the nocke of a bowe or arowe.
                  
                     Creontes, the name of a king, whoſe daughter Iaſon maried, whā he had left Medea.
                  
                     Creophilus, the name of a poete.
                  
                     Crepetus, a, um, doubtfull, ambiguous.
                  
                     Crepida, & crepis, pidis, a ſhoe with lachettes, ſome take it for a corked ſhoe or ſlypper, bycauſe of the noyſe, which it maketh whan a man goeth.
                  
                     
                        Crepidatius, 
                              •
                           ii,
                      he that maketh ſhowes or ſlyppers.
                  
                     Crepido, inis, a creeke on the waters ſide, wheron the water beateth. Alſo the mouth of a well, & the extreme part of any place.
                  
                     Crepitaculum, a tymbrell, or other inſtrument, which being touched with the hand, maketh a ſownde.
                  
                     Crepito, taui, are, to make a noyſe or bounſynge.
                  
                     Crepitulum, an ornament of the beed, whiche with me
                        •
                     ynge of the heed yeldethe a ſowne.
                  
                     Crepitus, a bounſe or great dynne or noyſe.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈1 paragraph〉
                        
                     
                     Crepo, pui, pere, to make a greatte noyſe or ſowne. Crepere, to be broken.
                  
                     Crepundia, tryfles or ſmal gyftes gyuen to lyttell chyldren, as napkyns, lyttell belles, tymbrelles, and ſuche lyke toyes. Alſo the fyrſt apparayle of chyldren, as ſwathels, waſtcotes, and ſuch lyke. And by tranſlation they ſay, A crepundijs erat uirtuti deditus. From his chyldhode he was euer giuen to vertue.
                  
                     Crepuſculum, the breake or fyrſte ſprynge of the daye, called the twie lyght.
                  
                     Creſco, creui, creſcere, to grow or increaſe.
                  
                     Craeuit haereditatem, He is increaſed in his lyu
                        •
                     l
                        •
                     de, or he hath taken poſſeſſion.
                  
                     Creta, an Ile called nowe Candy: alſo a ſtone called Chalke.
                  
                     Cretatus, ta tum, layde with chalke.
                  
                     Cretaeus, & Cretenſis, a manne of Crete or Candye.
                  
                     Creterra, a buckette to drawe vp water.
                  
                     Eraſ. in Chil.
                     Cretizare cum Cretenſibus, a prouerbe vſed where a crafty man wyll deceyue hym that is crafty: a theefe ſteale from a thefe, or a lyer lye before them, whiche vſe to make leaſynges.
                  
                     Creticus, ca, um, of Crete or Candy. Alſo a foote in metre, whiche hath the fyrſt and thyrde ſyllable longe.
                  
                     Cretoſus, a, um, full of chalke.
                  
                     Cribro, aui, are, to ſyfte or ſarce.
                  
                     Cribrum, a ſieue or a ſarce.
                  
                     Crimen, minis, a faulte, an offence, blame, matter layd agaynſt one by action or ſuite. ſometyme a falſe ſuſpicion.
                  
                     Criminale, criminalle, wherin is an offence or faulte.
                  
                     Criminor, aris, ari, to blame, to rebuke, to lay to ones charge, to accuſe.
                  
                     Criminoſus, a, um, rebukeful, worthy blame
                  
                     Crimiſſus, a ryuer of Grece.
                  
                     Crines, heare of the heed.
                  
                     Crinire, to laye forth the heare.
                  
                     Crinitus, he that hath moch or long heare.
                  
                     Crinita ſtella, a comete or blaſynge ſterre.
                  
                     Crinon, a redde lylye.
                  
                     Criſa, the name of a towne builded by Criſus, Phocus ſonne.
                  
                     Criticus, he that iudgeth the actes or warkes that men do write.
                  
                     Critici dies, the dayes wherin phyſytions gyue iudgement of the contynuance of the ſyckeneſſe.
                  
                     Crito, a philoſophers name of Athenes.
                  
                     Critabulus, was a phiſition, of whom Plinie ſpeaketh lib .vii.
                  
                     Crobylon, a cawle to weare on ones heed.
                  
                     Croco, crocito, to make a noyſe like a rauē.
                  
                     Crocinum et croceum, colored like ſaffron.
                  
                     Crocodilus, a beaſte in Aegypte, lyuynge ſomtyme in water, ſomtyme on lande: and is facioned in the body lyke a dragon, ſauinge that he lacketh wynges.
                  
                     
                        Crocotir
                              •
                           um,
                      cakebreade.
                  
                     Crocotulae, garmētis of the color of ſaffron.
                  
                     Crocotularius, a dyar.
                  
                     Crocus, ſaffron, a ſpice.
                  
                     Crocuta, a beaſte in Ethiope, whiche with his tethe breaketh all thynges in pieces, & deuoureth it, be it wodde or mettall.
                  
                     Cronia, feaſtes dedicate to Saturne.
                  
                     Crotalum, an inſtrument, whiche the Egiptians vſed in ſacrifice made of .ii. plates▪ whiche beaten togither, made an harmony.
                  
                     Crotalus, he that hath a ſownynge voyce, and a ſhyll.
                  
                     Crudaria, a vayne of ſyluer.
                  
                     Crudelis, le, cruell.
                  
                     Crudeſco, crudui, crudeſcere, to be rawe.
                  
                     Crudus, da, um, rawe, freſh, or newe made, not type. Crudus homo, whoſe ſtomacke can not digeſt well.
                  
                     Cruditas, tatis, rawnes, or lack of digeſtion.
                  
                     Cruento, aui, are, to make blody.
                  
                     Cruentus, a, um, blody, cruell.
                  
                     Crumena, a purſe.
                  
                     Cruor, bloudde whiche commethe out of a wounde.
                  
                     Crus, cruris, the parte of the legge, whyche is from the knee down vnto the ancle called the ſhanke.
                  
                     Cruſta, the vtter parte of euery thyng that is not eaten. Alſo the ſcurfe of a ſcabbe or

wounde, alſo playſter of a walle.
                  
                     Cruſto, taui, are, to lay playſter, or pargette.
                  
                     Cruſtata, wheron is layde playſter, or thyn ſhardes of ſtone.
                  
                     Cruſtarius, a pargettour.
                  
                     Cruſtulata, a meate made of cruſtes of bred.
                  
                     Cruſtulum, cruſtum, a crowſt of bread, of a paſty, or of roſted, broyled, or fryed meate
                  
                     Cruſtumina pira, peares redde on the one ſyde.
                  
                     Cruſtuminum, a towne in Italy.
                  
                     Crux, crucis, a croſſe, galowhowſe, or other lyke.
                  
                     Cruciatus, tus, tourment.
                  
                     Crypta, a ſecrete place within the erthe.
                  
                     Crypticus, ca, cum, ſecrete or hydde vnder the erthe.
                  
                     Cryptoporticus, a place vnder grounde, with wyndowes lyke to a parler, where men do dyne in the ſommer tyme for heare.
                  
                     Cryſtallus et chryſtallū, a ſtone callyd criſtal.
                  
                     Criſtallina, veſſell & cuppes of criſtal ſtone.
               
            
            
               
                  C, Ante T.
                  
                     CTenes, certayne teethe.
                  
                     Cteniatrus, he that healeth diſeaſis of horſes and catell.
                  
                     Cteſiphon, the name of a worke man, which builded the temple of Diana, at Epheſie, a worke wonderfull, and renoumed through the worlde: the whiche was after bourned of one Heroſtratus, onely bycauſe he wold for ſome dede be ſpoken of.
               
            
            
               
                  C, Ante V.
                  
                     CVbatus, tus, a ſittyng on broode, as a benne dothe.
                  
                     Cubicularius, a ſeruant that awayteth in the chamber: a chamberlayne, or grome of the chamber.
                  
                     Cubicularis, lare, that perteynethe to the Chaumber.
                  
                     Cubiculum, a bedde chamber.
                  
                     Cubile, a bedde, ſometyme it is taken for a cloſet.
                  
                     Cubito, aui, are, to lye often with one.
                  
                     Cubitus, et Cubitum, an elbowe, ſometyme a meaſure called a cubite, that is to ſay, one foote and an halfe: but a cubite in geometrie conteineth .vi. of our common cubites.
                  
                     Cubitale, a ſorſleue of a garmente, whiche keuereth the arme from the elbowe downwarde.
                  
                     Cubo, cubui, cubare, to lye downe, properly it is of ſicke men.
                  
                     Cubatio, a lyinge.
                  
                     Cubus, is a figure foure ſquare on all partes like a dyce.
                  
                     Cucubo, aui, are, to make a noyſe lyke an oule.
                  
                     Cuculio, onis, a keuerynge of the hedde, whiche men dydde vſe when they walked in the nyght.
                  
                     Cuculus, et Cucullus, a byrd called a cuckow.
                  
                     Cucullus, a cloke to defend rayne & winde.
                  
                     Cucuma, a chafar, wherin water is het.
                  
                     Cucumer, eris, et Cucumis, a fruite callyd a cocumber.
                  
                     Cucumerarius, a garden where cocumbres do growe or be kepte.
                  
                     Cucurbita, a frute called a gourde. Alſo cucurbita, & Cucurbitula, is a cup, wherwith Surgyons do drawe out bloud with ſcaryſying of the ſkynne, called cuppynge.
                  
                     Cucurbitarium, a place where gourdes be ſowen.
                  
                     Cucurbitarius, a louer of gourdes.
                  
                     Cucurio, iui, iri, to make a noyſe like a cock.
                  
                     Cudo, cuſi, cudere, to ſtrike, as ſmythes do.
                  
                     Cudere pecuniā, to make or coyne moneye, alſo cudere, to breake or broyſe.
                  
                     Cuias, cuiatis, of whenſe.
                  
                     Cuius, cuia, cuium, whoſe. Cuium paecus, whoſe catall.
                  
                     Culcitra, a mattreſſe.
                  
                     Culeus, a ſacke, alſo a meaſure conteyning xxx. buſhels.
                  
                     Culex, culicis, a gnatte.
                  
                     Culigna, a bolle or dyſhe to drynke of.
                  
                     Culina, a kechyn, ſometyme the meate that is dreſſed.
                  
                     Culinor, aris, ari, to do the office of a cooke.
                  
                     Culleolum, the vtter ſhale of a nut, whiche is grene.
                  
                     Culullus, an erthen cup, ſuche as the galye cuppes be.
                  
                     Culmen, culminis, the roufe of a houſe.
                  
                     Culmus, the reede or ſtrawe of corne, from the rote to the eare.
                  
                     Culpa, is an offence done not weetinge, or not intendynge to do hurte.
                  
                     Culter, et Cultrum, a knyfe.
                  
                     Cultellum, a lyttel knife or a whittill.
                  
                     Cultrarius, was he that kylled the beaſt, and diuided him in the ſacrifice to Idolles. It maye nowe be taken for a ſlaughter man.
                  
                     Cultus, cultus, apparayle, ſomtyme it is taken for honour done to god.
                  
                     Cum, with, whan, whiles, where, albeit, for aſmoche, as well. Cum mihi tum illi, Aſwel to me as to him. In cum is ſome thing laſſe vnderſtande, in Tum ſomme thynge more. Quod cum omnibus confitendum eſt, tū nobis praecipue, whiche thinge oughte to be confeſſed of all men, and of vs moſte ſpecially. The auncient wryters, whan it ſygnifyed

whan, where, and foraſmoche, they wrate it Quom.
                  
                  
                     Cum dicto, forthewith after that he hadde ſpoken.
                  
                     Cum imperio eſt, he beareth a rule.
                  
                     Cum maxime, excedyngly.
                  
                     Cum poteſtate eſt, he is in authoritie, or in an high offyce.
                  
                     Cum primis, very. Cum primis nobilis, Very noble.
                  
                     Cum ſtomacho, dyſdaynfully.
                  
                     Cum tempore, in a certayne ſpace.
                  
                     Cum uema tua, with your lycence.
                  
                     Cuma, a towne in Grece.
                  
                     Cumae, a citie in Campania.
                  
                     Cumanus, a man of that citie.
                  
                     Cumatilis, tile, a colour called blewe.
                  
                     Cumera, a greatte veſſelle, wherin corne was kepte.
                  
                     Cumetum, a veſſell vſed at weddynges.
                  
                     Cuminum, an herbe and ſede called cōmyn.
                  
                     Cumulo, aui, are, to make an heape, to fyll, to adde more.
                  
                     Cumulatim, in an heape, or heaped vp.
                  
                     Cumulus, an heape.
                  
                     Cunae, et Cunabula, cradels, wherin chyldren be rocked. ſomtyme it is taken for the age of infancy.
                  
                     
                        Cunctator, o
                              •
                           is,
                      a tariar, a differrer.
                  
                     Cuncti, all togither.
                  
                     Cunctor, et Contor, aris, to tary, to prolōge tyme, to abyde, to doubte.
                  
                     Cunctatio, onis, a tarienge, an abydyng, a prolongynge of tyme, a doutynge.
                  
                     Cuneus, an axe to cutte woode, whiche is ſmalle and thyn before, and brode & thycke after, that the wodde may ryue the better. alſo a wedge to cleaue wodde with. By tranſlation it is a company of fotemē in batayle, that goth in a lyke order, ſmal before, and brode behynde: there was a lyke forme in the Theatre or place, where men beheld playes, it is ſometyme taken for a company of people.
                  
                     Cuneatim, in the fourme afore declared.
                  
                     Cuneatus, ta, tū, that whiche appereth to be in the ſayde fourme of Cuneus.
                  
                  
                     Cuniculus, a beaſte called a cony.
                  
                     Cuniculum, an hole in the grounde.
                  
                     Cunila, an herbe called ſauery, wherof be dyuerſe kyndes.
                  
                     Cunire, to dunge as a childe dothe.
                  
                     Cunnus, a womans wyket.
                  
                     Cupa, a cuppe.
                  
                     Cupedinarius, an hucſtar that ſelleth meate and drynke.
                  
                     Cupes, Cupedia, et Cupedula, delicate meates, or deſire of deynty meates.
                  
                     Cupido, Cupidinis, the ſonne of Venus, god of loue. Cupido in the feminine gender, vehement deſyre or appetite.
                  
                     Cupidus, da, dum, deſyrouſe. ſometyme it ſignifieth a louer.
                  
                     Cupiditas, tatis, couaytiſe.
                  
                     Cupidé, deſirouſly.
                  
                     Cuprum, metall called coper.
                  
                     Cur, wherfore or why.
                  
                     Cura, care, thought, ſtudy, diligence, warke or labour, alſo loue.
                  
                     Curatio, cure.
                  
                     Curator, gardeyn in ſocage, or he to whom the cuſtodye of a man madde or folyſſhe is commytted. Alſo he to whom any thyng is commytted to ſuruey, or to prouyde thynges neceſſary for a weale publyke, or to order ſuche thinges as he hath in charge, cō
                     cernynge as well priuate thynges as they that do belonge to a comminaltie: he maye be properly called a ſuruayour.
                  
                     Curatorius, a, um, belonginge to ſurueinge.
                  
                     Curcura, an ilande in the ſee Adriatike.
                  
                     Curculio, onis, a littell worme in grayn called myte or wyuell. It is alſo the weſyll of the throte of a man, wherby he draweth wynde.
                  
                     Cures, a citie of the Sabines.
                  
                     Curetes, a people of the Ile of Crete or Candy.
                  
                     Curia, a courte, that is to ſay, where the ſenate is, or officers exerciſynge ſuche thinges as they haue in charge. it is ſometyme taken for the perſons in the courte.
                  
                     Curiales, they whiche be of that courte.
                  
                     Curio, onis, a bedell or criar.
                  
                     Curionem agnum, Plautus calleth a leane lambe.
                  
                     Curio, alſo of Varro is taken for a place, where prieſtes conſulted of thynges concernynge diuine ceremonies.
                  
                     Curioſus, ſa, ſum, curiouſe, taken ſometyme on the yll parte, where more dylygence is vſed, than is neceſſary or expedient: ſometyme on the better parte, where we be very carefull and buſy about thynges, concernynge eyther our ſelfes or other men.
                  
                     Curioſitas tatis, curioſytie, or to moche dilygence.
                  
                     Curius, the name of a noble Romayne, vnto whom whan the ambaſſadours of Samnytes hadde brought a great ſomme of golde for a preſent from theyr people, deſyrynge hym to take it, and vſe it at his pleaſure, he anſwered, that Marcus Curius hadde leuer haue dominion ouer ryche men, than to be ryche him ſelfe, and that he, which could not be vaynquiſhed in battayl, mought not be corrupted with money.
                  
                     Curo, aui, are, to care, to be doinge of a

thinge. ſomtyme to prepare, to heale one that is ſycke, to take refection or comfort.
                  
                     Curriculo, quyckely.
                  
                     Curro, cucurri, currere, to runne.
                  
                     Curſus, us, et curſura, a courſe.
                  
                     Curſor, oris, he that runneth in poſte.
                  
                     Curſim, runnynge.
                  
                     Curſito, aui, are, to runne often.
                  
                     Curſo, aui, are, to runne alway or often.
                  
                     Curſorius, a, um, pertainyng to runnyng.
                  
                     Curruca, a lyttell byrde, whiche hatchethe and bryngeth vp cuckowe byrdes.
                  
                     Currus, a carre.
                  
                     Curriculus, a lyttell carre.
                  
                     Curriculum, a ſhorte ſpace of tyme. Alſo a runnynge place.
                  
                     Curtus, ta, tum, ſhorte.
                  
                     Curuamen, minis, a crookedneſſe.
                  
                     Curueſco, ueſci, ueſcere, to be croked.
                  
                     Curuipes; he that hath a croked fote.
                  
                     Curulis & curule, were lyttelle carres, or drayes, hauyng in them chaires of yuorie, wherin they ſatte, whyche were heed officers in Rome. ſomtyme it is vſed of poetes for the ſame offycers.
                  
                     Curuo, uaui, are, to bowe or make croked.
                  
                     Curuus, a, um, croked.
                  
                     Cuſpis, idis, ſom tyme ſignifieth the poynte of any weapon, ſometyme the ſtele, ſometyme a ſpeare heed.
                  
                     Cuſtodia, the cuſtody, kepynge, or warde: ſomtyme he that kepeth, ſomtyme he that is kepte, ſomtyme the priſon.
                  
                     Cuſtodio, diui, dire, to kepe, to obſerue.
                  
                     Cuſtoditio, the kepynge.
                  
                     Cuſtoditus, ta, tum, kepte.
                  
                     Cuſtos, odis, a keper.
                  
                     Cutis, the inner ſkynne.
               
            
            
               
                  C, Ante Y.
                  
                     CYamea, a ſtone, whiche beinge broken, is lyke to a beane.
                  
                     
                        Cyaneae, or Cyanitae,
                      Ilandes or rather rockes vnder Thrace Boſphore.
                  
                     Cyaneus, a, um, & Cianus, a, um, a brighte blewe colour, or blunket.
                  
                     Cyathus, a cuppe. it is alſo a meaſure, contaynynge as moche as a reaſonable manne may drynke at one draught.
                  
                     Cybele & cybeles, was the wyfe of Saturne, & was named of painims, the moder of the goddes, whiche hath dyuers other names, as it ſhall appere in their places.
                  
                     Cyclades, yles in the greke ſee.
                  
                     Cyclas, cladis, a womans kyrtell.
                  
                     Cyclus, a rounde place in Athenes, where thynges were ſold. Alſo a coyne or poyſe.
                  
                     Cyclops, clopis, an auncient people, inhabitynge the yle of Sycile, which were lyke gyauntes, hauynge but oone eye in theyr foreheed.
                  
                     Cydnus, a ryuer of Sicile, the water wherof was meruaylous colde. and as Plinie ſayth, auayleable for the goute in the fete Cydon, one of the notableſt townes of Candy.
                  
                     Cygnus, a ſwanne.
                  
                     Cylindrus, an inſtrument, wherwith menne do beate floores, or doo ramme with. Alſo euery thinge that tourneth about quyckly. Alſo ſtones rounde and longe lyke beade ſtones, called langattes.
                  
                     Cylindraceus, a, um, in the fourme of a langatte.
                  
                     Cyllene, a hylle of Archadie, where they ſay Mercurius was nouryſhed.
                  
                     Cyllenius, one of the names of Mercury.
                  
                     Cylydros, a ſerpent that rolleth hym ſelfe, as he gothe.
                  
                     Cyma, yonge colewortes. Alſo the tender parte of the ſtalke of euery herbe.
                  
                     Cymatilis, chamlette.
                  
                     Cymba, a boote.
                  
                     Cymbalum, an inſtrument of muſike.
                  
                     Cymbaliſtae, they that play vpon cymbals.
                  
                     Cymbium, a pece or cup to drynke wine in.
                  
                     Cyminum, cummyne.
                  
                     Cyminus, a laake in Italy.
                  
                     Cynaethium, a citie of Archadie.
                  
                     Cynanche, a ſyckenes called the ſquynce, whiche is in the throte and iawes.
                  
                     Cynegetica, volumes wryten of huntynge.
                  
                     Cynici, a ſect of phyloſophers, whych liued in pouerte without ſhame, like doggis.
                  
                     Cyniphes, biting gnattis with long legges.
                  
                     Cynocephalus, a beaſte hauynge the bodye lyke to an ape, and the heed lyke a dogge. Alſo people vnder the greate cane, hauing heedes lyke dogges.
                  
                     Cynogloſſa, an herbe callid houndes rūge.
                  
                     Cynomia, dogge flyes, whiche doo ſouke bloode from a beaſte.
                  
                     Cynorrhodos, the floure of Eglantyne.
                  
                     Cynos, in latyne is canis, a dogge. Alſo a citie in Locris.
                  
                     Cynoſbatum, a thorne, the leafe wherof is lyke the ſteppe of a mans fote, and hathe blacke bearies like to grapes.
                  
                     Cynoſura, a figure of ſterres in heuen, called Vrſa minor.
                  
                  
                     Cynozoon, a ſtynkynge herbe.
                  
                     Cynthia, one of the names of the moone.
                  
                     Cypariſſus, a cypreſſe tree.
                  
                     Cypirus & cyperis, an herbe, hauyng leaues lyke ſedges, alſo a rote like to ginger.
                  
                     Cyprium aes, copper, mettall.
                  
                     Cyprus, an yle callyd cypers.
                  
                     
                     Cyrcerum, a great ſhyppe, or carrike.
                  
                     Cyrene, nes, a famouſe cytie in Libia. Alſo a citie in the yle of cypers.
                  
                     Cyreneus, a man of that citie.
                  
                     Cyrnus, the yle whiche is callid Corſica, or Corſe.
                  
                     Cyrnea, a goblette to drynke wyne in.
                  
                     Cyrrhea, a citie in the mountayne of Helycon.
                  
                     Cyrrus, the name of .ii. ryuers, one in Armenia, the other in Media.
                  
                  
                     Cyrus, the name of diuers kinges in Perſi.
                  
                     Cyſſus, a kynde of yuye, that groweth alone. alſo the name of a ryuer.
                  
                     Cythera, plural. an yle agaynſte Candy.
                  
                     Cytheron, an hylle in Boeotia.
                  
                     Cytiſus, an herbe, whiche is good to gyue to cattell agaynſt the rotte.
                  
                     Cyzicus, the name of an Ile by Grece.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶D, Ante A.
                  
                     
                        DACIA, a countreye beyonde Hungry, on the northe parte of the ryuer of Dano, or Danubius.
                  
                  
                     Daci, & Dani, people of that countrey.
                  
                     Dacicus, ca, cum, pertaynynge to that countrey.
                  
                     Dacus, ca, cum, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Dactylus, a fynger, a fote in metre, hauing one longe ſyllable, and .ii. ſhorte. it is alſo a date.
                  
                     Dactylides, grapes beinge longe lyke a fynger.
                  
                     Daedalus, the name of an excellent carpentar of Athenes, whiche fyrſte founde the ſawe, the twie bylle, and the awgor: and made the place in Crete callydde Laberynthus.
                  
                  
                     Daemogorgon, onis, whome paynyms called the god of the erthe, fyrſte creatoure of the erthe.
                  
                     Daemon, nis, a damned ſpiryte. ſometyme it is taken for the ſowle, beynge in the body of manne.
                  
                     Daemonicus, ca, cum, dyuellyſhe.
                  
                     Daemonium, a ſpirite. ſometime it is vſed for a godheed amonge the paynyms.
                  
                     Daemoniacus, & demonioſus, poſſeſſed with an yll ſpirite.
                  
                     Dalmatia, a countrey on the ryuer of Dano, called nowe Slauony.
                  
                     Dalmata, a man of that countrey.
                  
                     Dalmaticus, ca, um, of that countrey.
                  
                     Dalmaticatus, apparailed like a Slauanoiſe.
                  
                     Dama, a falowe dere.
                  
                     Damaſcus, a citie in Siria.
                  
                     Damia, one of the names of the goddeſſe Cybele.
                  
                  
                     Damatris, the prieſte of hir temple.
                  
                     Damnas, condemned.
                  
                     Damnifico, feci, facere, to do harme.
                  
                     Damno, aui, are, to condemne, to diſherite▪ to compell, to delyuer.
                  
                     Damnum, harme, or hurte.
                  
                     Damnoſus, a, um, harmefull, or hurtfull, or hauynge moche harme.
                  
                     Damoetas, a ſhepardes name in Virgill.
                  
                     Damon, a philoſophers name of Pythagoras ſecte.
                  
                     Dan, a towne whiche is the boundes of Iudea, on the northe parte.
                  
                     Danaus, the kynge of Argyues, whiche hadde fyfty doughters, who all, ſauynge one, ſlewe all their huſbandes in one night.
                  
                     Danaides, the doughters of Danaus.
                  
                  
                     Dani, a people nowe called Danes.
                  
                     Daniſma, vſury.
                  
                     Daniſta, he that lendeth for vſury.
                  
                     Danubius, a famous ryuer, now called Danowe, wherinto do flowe .lx. ryuers.
                  
                     Danunt, Plautus dothe vſe for dant, they gyue.
                  
                     Dapalis caena, a ſoupper, wherat be many and dyuers meates.
                  
                     Dapatice, feaſtfully, plentuouſly.
                  
                     Dapes, delycate and precious dyſſhes, or bankettes.
                  
                     Daphne, the propre name of a lyttell maiden, and alſo of a wodde.
                  
                     Daphnis, nidis, in latine is a laurell. alſo the ſonne of Mercurie. It was alſo a dilectable place without the citie of Antioche, Alſo it was the name of a porcion of Lycia by the ſee ſyde.
                  
                     Daphnites, one of the names of Apollo.
                  
                     Daphnoides, an herbe lyke to Laurell, now called Laureole, as I ſuppoſe.
                  
                     Daphnon, a place, where laurell groweth.
                  
                     Dapifer, he that bearith a diſhe at a banket.
                  
                     Dapino, to gyue, as it were a delicate diſhe.
                  
                     Dapſa, a ſacrifice, which was made in winter, and in ſprynge tyme.
                  
                     Dapſile, abundantly.
                  
                     Dapſilis, abundant, liberall, or large.
                  
                     Dardanarii, forſtallers of markettes, whyche do bye before hande, to ſelle dere afterwarde.
                  
                     Dardaniae artes, witchecrafte.
                  
                     Dardanus, the name of a prince, reigning in that parte of Phrigia, where Troy ſtode, whiche was of him called Dardania.
                  
                  
                     Darius, the name of dyuers kynges of Perſia.
                  
                     Daricus, money of Perſia.
                  
                     
                     Darideus, the name of a kynge of Perſia in the tyme of Tyberius, Caius, and Claudius themperours.
                  
                     Datarius, a, ū, giuen. alſo an officer in Rome whiche ſubſcribed the date of letters.
                  
                     Datatim, one gyuyng to an other, as at the toſſynge of a balle.
                  
                     Daunia, a parte of Italy, nowe called Appulia.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶D Ante E.
                  
                     DE, of, ioyned with a verbe, or nowne, it ſignifieth withdrawinge or taking away, as, Decorrico, I barke or take away the rynde: Depilo, I plucke away the heare. ſometyme it ſignifieth downeward, as Deorſum deſcendo, I go downewarde. Sometyme contrary, as, Dehortor, I giue contrary aduyſe: Dedoceo, I teache contrary,Terentius ſometyme it ſygnifieth for, as, Quā
                        tum me amas de fidicina hac? Howe well doſt thou loue me for this ſinging wenche?
                  
                     Deambulatorium, an aley to walke in, it may be ſomtyme vſed for a galery.
                  
                     Deambulo, aui, are, to walke vp and downe.
                  
                     Deamo, aui, are, to loue hartily.
                  
                     Deartuo, aui, are, to ioynte, or to cut of by the ioyntes.
                  
                     Deauro, aui, are, to gylte, to laye ouer all with golde.
                  
                     Debacchor, arîs, ari, to rage, as it were in a drunkenneſſe, to be wodde angrie.
                  
                     Debello, aui, are, to vanquyſhe, or take one in battayle.
                  
                     Debeo, bui, ère, to owe, or ought.
                  
                     Debilis, wealte or feble.
                  
                     Debitor, toris, he that oweth.
                  
                     Debitio, onis, the acte of owinge.
                  
                     Debitor, toris, a dettour.
                  
                     Debitum, a dette or duetie.
                  
                     Debiti iudicatus, condempned in an action of dette.
                  
                     Debrior, aris, ari, to be drunke.
                  
                     Decachinnor, aris, ari, to ſkorne.
                  
                     Decachordum, an inſtrument with tenne ſtrynges.
                  
                     Decacumino, aui, are, to ſtrike of the toppe.
                  
                     Decalcatum, layde with lyme.
                  
                     Eraſ. in Chi
                           •
                        ia.
                     De calcaria in carbonariam, out of the lyme kyll into the cole pitte. A prouerbe, wherby is ſygnifyed frome oone myſchiefe to an nother.
                  
                     Decalogus, the boke of holy ſcripture, conteynynge the tenne commandementes.
                  
                     Decapolis, a countrey in Iudea, beyonde the ryuer of ſlume Iordane, contaynynge tenne cyties.
                  
                     Decapulo, aui, are, to empty pottis or cuppꝭ.
                  
                     Decedo, decedere, to depart from a place, to mynyſhe or appaire.
                  
                     Decedere uia, to goo out of the waye, or to gyue the way to an other of courteiſye.
                  
                     Decedere de ſuo iure, to remytte ſomewhat of his ryght.
                  
                     December, the name of one of the twelue monethes.
                  
                     Decemiugis, a teeme of tenne horſes.
                  
                     Decempeda, a perche or poll ten fotelonge.
                  
                     Decempedator, he that meateth with ſuche a polle.
                  
                     Decendium, the ſpace of tenne dayes.
                  
                     Decerno, decreui, decernere, to decree, determyne, or diſcuſſe.
                  
                     Decerpo, pſi, pere, to pull, or plucke of.
                  
                     Decerto, aui, are, to contende or fyght togyther.
                  
                     Decet, it beſemeth, it is conuenient.
                  
                     Decens, tis, conuenient.
                  
                     Dedecet, it is inconuenient, vnſyttynge.
                  
                     Decido, di, dere, to cutte of. alſo to decide or diſcuſſe a matter in variance.
                  
                     Décido, ere, to fall of, or away.
                  
                     Decidua, are thoſe thinges that fall away, as leaues of trees.
                  
                     Decima, a tenthe parte.
                  
                     Decimanus, ſiue decumanus, na, num, great, as Decumana porta, The great yate or entrie into a campe of an armie.
                  
                     Decumanus, a generall receyuer or collectour of taxes or ſubſydies, or other lyke exactions.
                  
                     Decimo, aui, are, to take awaye the tenthe parte from the reſydue.
                  
                     Decimari legiones, was whan the tenthe perſone of euery legion was put to dethe.
                  
                     Decimus, ma, mum, the tenthe, the chiefe or principalle, as, Decimum quod
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         ouum, Euery tenthe egge.
                  
                     Decimus quiſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         fluctus, Euery tenth ryuer.
                  
                     Decipio, decépi, decipere, to deceiue.
                  
                     Decipula, a grynne or trap to take byrdes.
                  
                     Decircino, aui, are, to vnbowe, or to bringe out of compaſſe, or roundeneſſe.
                  
                     Decius, the name of a noble howſe of the Romaynes.
                  
                     Declamo, aui, are, to declame, or to exerciſe in feyned orations.
                  
                     Declamatorius, a, um, pertaynynge to ſuch exercyſe.
                  
                     Declamatio, onis, an exerciſe in ſained orations.
                  
                     Declaro, aui, are, to declare, to open a thing whiche is darke.
                  
                     Declino, aui, are, to eſchewe, to leaue, to tourne away, to leade away, to alienate.
                  
                     Decollo, aui, are, to ſtryke of a heed by the necke, alſo to deceyue, or diſapoynte.Plautus 
                     Vna

eſt, quae decollauit, One womanne there is, whiche hath deceyued hym.
                  
                     Decolor, oris, ylle coloured.
                  
                     Decoloro, aui, are, to ſtayne, to ſpylle the coloure.
                  
                     Decoquo, decoxi, decoquere, to boyle, or to ſethe very moche. ſomtyme to chaunge, or digeſt perfitely. Alſo to conſume or waſt a mans ſubſtance, or to brynge detrymente or loſſe.
                  
                     Decoctor, toris, he that hath waſted all his ſubſtaunce, and is brought to extreme pouertie, ſpeciallye by lecherye and dyſe playenge.
                  
                     Decor, decoris, a beautye.
                  
                     Decoro, aui, are, to beautifie or make faire, or pleaſaunt to the eyes or the eares, to honoure.
                  
                     Decorum, a ſemelyneſſe, or that which becommeth the perſon, hauynge reſpecte to his nature, degree, ſtudy, offyce, or profeſſyon, be it in doinge or ſpeakynge, a grace. ſometyme it ſygnifyeth honeſtie.
                  
                     Decorus, ra, rum, honeſt, ſemely, fayre.
                  
                     Dedecus, diſhoneſtie in acte, reproche.
                  
                     Decoruco, aui, are, to barke.
                  
                     Decores, a bare or thredebare garment.
                  
                     Decrepitus, a very olde man.
                  
                     Decrepita ſenectus, extreme age.
                  
                     Decreſco, feere, to waxe leſſe.
                  
                     Decretorius, a, um, iudiciali, Alſo decreed, ſtablyſhed.
                  
                     Decretorium tempus, decretorium ſydus, wherby iudgement is giuen of the increaſe that ſhall ſuccede of any thinge.
                  
                     Decretum, a decree, a thynge determined.
                  
                     Decubo, aui, are, to lye downe.
                  
                     Deculto, aui, are, to hyde vnder.
                  
                     Decubo, cubui, cumbere, to lye downe, alſo to dye.
                  
                     Decuplatus, ta, tum, tenne tymes dowbled, or tenne folde.
                  
                     Decuplo, aui, are, to double tenne tymes. If it be an aduerbe, it ſygnifyeth tenne times, or tenne folde. Decúplum, like wyſe.
                  
                     Decuppa, he or ſhe that ſellethe wyne by the porte.
                  
                     Cicero in Piſonem.
                     Decurio, onis, an offyce or dignitie, hauyng authorite orther ouer tenne men of armes, or the tenthe parte of a companye. Alſo it was taken for the lorde Chamberlayne to the Emperour.Suetonius in Domit. Cicero. Alſo they were in other cities the ſame that Senators were at Rome Decuria, was the order, office, or company, whiche was vnder the office of Decurio. Alſo the company of iuges, as we haue of the kynges Benche, Commune place, and Eſcheker. And Decurio, he that is chiefe of theym.
                  
                     Decurro, decucurri, rere, to runne downe, by tranſlation it ſygnifieth to runne from the one ende to the other.
                  
                     Decurſio, Iuſtes, as at the tylte or randon.
                  
                     Decurſionem indicere, to proclaime iuſtes.Suetonius in Nero
                           •
                        .
                  
                  
                     Decurtatus, ta, tum, ſhortened, abbreuiated.
                  
                     Decus, decoris, honour.
                  
                     Dedecoro, aui, are, to diſſhonour, reproue, or defyle.
                  
                     Decuſſo, aui, are, to cutte or drawe oute in lengthe, or to cut or deuyde in ten partes.
                  
                     Decuſſatim, in tenne partis.
                  
                     Decuſsis, the perfyte numbre of tenne.
                  
                     Decutio, cuſsi, tere, to ſtryke of.
                  
                     Dedico, aui, are, to dedicate, or tell a meſſage.
                  
                     Dedignor, aris, ari, to diſdayne.
                  
                     Dediſco, dedidici, dedicere, to vnlerne, or forgette.
                  
                     Dediditio, a renderynge vppe of a place beſyeged.
                  
                     Dedititius, a, um, gyuen or ſubiecte to an other mans commandement.
                  
                     Dedo, dedidi, dedere, to gyue vtterly, or for euer: or to become ſubiecte, to render vp, or yelde.
                  
                     Dediditionem facere, ſygnifieth the ſame.
                  
                     Dedoceo, cui, cêre, to teache a manne other wiſe, than he hath before lerned.
                  
                     Dedoleo, lui, lere, to ceaſſe frome ſorowe, or payne.
                  
                     Dedolo, aui, are, to hewe or cutte, lyke a Carpenter.
                  
                     Deduco, xi, cere, to bryng down, or to leade, or drawe, or brynge from one place, or one thynge to an other. ſomtime to moue from his purpoſe. ſometyme to bryng home honorably from any place.
                  
                     Deerro, aui, are, to go out of the right way, or reaſon.
                  
                     Defalco, aui, are, to cutte of, take away, defalcate.
                  
                     Defamo, aui, are, to defame.
                  
                     Defaeco, aui, are, to draw from the dregges, to clenſe or fyne.
                  
                     Defectio, onis, rebellyon, decreaſynge, defaulte, lacke.
                  
                     Defectus, ta, tum, that whiche ſaylethe, or decayeth.
                  
                     Defectus, tus, lacke.
                  
                     Defectus ſolis & lunae, the Eclyps of the ſonne and the mone.
                  
                     Defectus animi, ſownynge or lyenge in a traunce.
                  
                     Defecta corpora, bodies conſumed with ſyckeneſſe.
                  
                     Defendo, di, dere, to defende, to putte of, to prohybyte.
                  
                     Defenſito, taui, tare, to defende often.
                  
                     
                     Defero, detull, deferre, to brynge to, to diſcloſe, to accuſe, or appeale, to beſtowe, to giue office or dignitie, to attribute. Deferre nomen, to complayne.
                  
                     Deferueo, ferui, ere, to be cold, or pacyent.
                  
                     Deferueſco, ſci, ſcere, to waxe pacyente or colde, to appeaſe hym ſelfe, or withdrawe his furye.
                  
                     Deficio feci, ficere, to fayle, not to ſuffyſe, to lacke, to leaue, to diſagree, to rebelle, or departe from hym, with whom he is retayned, or goeth frome one Capytayne to an nother.
                  
                     Defectus, tus, lacke, rebellion, or departing agaynſte couenant or promyſe.
                  
                     Defector, oris, be that ſo departeth or rebelleth, or goth from one to an other.
                  
                     Defigo, fixi, figere, to ſette or fyxe on, or to perce or thruſt through.
                  
                     Definio, iui, re, to define, determīe, or diſcuſſ.
                  
                     Definitio, definitionis, a definition, whyche expreſſeth in fewe wordes, what it is that is ſpoken of, as, Homo eſt animal, rationale, mortale, A man is a thyng lyuely, reſonable, and mortalle.
                  
                     Defioculus, he that lacketh ſight in one eie.
                  
                     Defit, there lacketh.
                  
                     Deficio, defeci, deficere, to lack, or to be vnſufficient.Cicero. Alſo to forſake or fayle. Prudē
                        tia nun
                           
                              
                           
                           quam
                         deficit oratorem, Prudence neuer fayleth an oratoure.Caeſar. 
                     Quem ſanguis uires
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         deficiunt, whom bloode and ſtrength faylleth. Alſo to forſake his capitayne, and go to his aduerſary. Ab eo defecerat, He went from him to his ennemye.
                  
                     Deflacco, aui, are, to weare out.
                  
                     Deflagro, aui, are, to bourne excedyngly.
                  
                     Deflecto, xi, tere, to bowe downe.
                  
                     Defloreo, & defloreſco, ere, to fade, or to fal away as flowres doo: or to leſe beaultie. ſometyme it ſignifieth to burgen or floure.
                  
                     Defluo, xi, ere, to flowe downeward, to fall of or away, or come to nothynge.
                  
                     Deflulis, a, um, that whiche floweth or falleth away from any thynge.
                  
                     Defluuiū, defluxus, the fallyng of the heare.
                  
                     Defodio, di, dere, to burye or hyde a thinge in the grounde, to dygge downe or into the erthe.
                  
                     Defoetus, ta, tum, deſtytute.
                  
                     Deformis, me, foule, deformed.
                  
                     Deformo, aui, are, to deſtroye, or waſte, to make in picture the fourme of a thing.
                  
                     Defraudo, aui, are, to begyle, to miniſſhe or take away the profyte from an other.
                  
                     Defrico, caul, are, to rub moch, or to rub of.
                  
                     Defrigo, xi, gere, to fric moche.
                  
                     Defringo, xi, re, to breke town, or cut down.
                  
                     Defrugo, aui, are, to conſume or weare out the profite, ſpecially of grounde, wherof ſhulde come corne or frute.
                  
                     Defrutare, to boyle newe wyne.
                  
                     Defrutum, ſodden wyne.
                  
                     Defugeo, gi, ere, to refuſe.
                  
                     Defundo, fudi, dere, to poure downe.
                  
                     Defungor, geris, to vſe no lenger, to leaue or reſygne, to perfourme.
                  
                     Degener, is, he that in his maners is vnlike to his auncetours, or baſe of lynage.
                  
                     Degenero, aui, are, to be vnlyke to his auncetours in maners. It may be ſaid of fruites, whiche waxe wylde.
                  
                     Deglabro, aui, are, to plucke of heares,
                  
                     Dego, degi, degere, to leade, to lyue,Plautus. to expelle, to pulle of. Degitur corium de tergo meo, The ſkynne is pulled of my backe.
                  
                     Degulo, aui, are, to conſume in glotony.
                  
                     Dehinc, from hensforth, moreouer.
                  
                     Dehiſco, ſci, ſcere, to gape wyde open.
                  
                     Dehoneſtamentum, a disfyguringe, or dyſhoneſtye.
                  
                     Dehoneſto, aui, are, to diſhoneſte.
                  
                     Dehoneſtus, ta, tum, very honeſte.
                  
                     Deianira, the wyfe of Hercules.
                  
                     Deidamia, the concubyne of Achilles, on whom he begatte Pirrhus.
                  
                     Deiero, aui, are, to take an othe, to ſweare deepely.
                  
                     Deiicio, ieci, iicere, to throwe downe, to caſt downe, to tourne away, to put out of office.
                  
                     Dein, moreouer, furthermore.
                  
                     Deinceps, one after an other in order, from hensforth, or thensforth, afterwarde.
                  
                     Deinſuper, vpwarde.
                  
                     Deintegro, from the begynnyng to thende.
                  
                     Deiphile, the mother of Diomedes.
                  
                     Deiphobus, the name of a ſonne of Priamus and Hecuba.
                  
                     Deiugo, aui, are, to vnyoke, to vnioyne, to diſſeuer.
                  
                     Deiurium, a great and ſolemne othe.
                  
                     Deiurus, he that ſweareth ſolemnely.
                  
                     Delabor, delabi, to be let downe, or fal down to be conſumed or waſted.
                  
                     Delachrimor, aris, ari, to wepe or ſende out droppes lyke teares.
                  
                     Delanio, aui, are, to cutte in pieces.
                  
                     Delapidata, pauementes.
                  
                     Delaſſo, aui, are, to make wery.
                  
                     Delator, toris, a ſecrete accuſer, a cōplainer
                  
                     Delatio, an accuſation ſecretely made, or a ſecrete complaynt.
                  
                     Delebile, that whyche maye be put oute, or put awaye.
                  
                     Delectatio, delectation in the ſēces of heryng, ſeinge, taſte, and ſmellyng.
                  
                     Delecto, aui, are, to delyte, to leade, to allure to a thynge.
                  
                     
                     Delector, aris, ari, to take delectation or pleaſure.
                  
                     Delectus rerum, choyſe or election of thinges. Alſo of men.
                  
                     Delectum habere, ſommetyme ſignifieth to take muſters for the warres.
                  
                     Delego, aui, are, to aſſigne to ſom office meſſage, or other neceſſary and great buſynes, to commytte a cauſe or matter to be determyned, to ſende in ambaſſade or meſſage.
                  
                     Deleo, leui, ere, to diſtroy, to putte out any thynge that is writen, to remoue or putte awaye.
                  
                     Deleretion, venome.
                  
                     Deletile, that diſtroyeth or putteth out.
                  
                     Deliacus, ca, cum, of the yle of Delus.
                  
                     Delibero, aui, are, to be aduiſed, to take aduyſe, to determyne, to doubte, to conſult.
                  
                     Deliberatiua oratio, wherin any thynge is conſulted.
                  
                     Delibo, aui, are, to taſte a thynge, ſomtyme to vyolate, to diſtroy, to ſacrifice, to drain water by forowes.
                  
                     Delibro, aui, are, to pul of the barke or rind of a tree.
                  
                     Delibutus, ta, tum, oynted.
                  
                     Delicatus, cata, catum, delycate, wantonlye broughte vppe.
                  
                     Delicias facere, to be wanton, to be ſquaymyſhe, to play the cockeney.
                  
                     Delitium, & delitiae, a wanton worde, which vneth may be expreſſed in englyſſhe, vſed betwene a man and a womā in wanton paſtyme. Meum delitium, meae delitiae, my ſwete harte, my darlynge, my ioye, and ſuche other lyke, expreſſed beſt by theym that be Venus ſecretaries.
                  
                     Delico, aui, are, to explane.
                  
                     Delictum, an offence whan a thinge is vndone, omiſſion.
                  
                     Deligo, legi, ligere, to choſe or pyke out.
                  
                     Delimo, aui, are, to fyle or ſhaue of frome any mettall.
                  
                     Delinimentum, delectation, an allectyue, or ſwetenes in feelynge.
                  
                     Delinio, iui, ire, to anoynte, to rubbe pleaſantly, to towche.
                  
                     Delinitus, touched ſwetely, anoynted, pacified, appeaſed.
                  
                     Deliniate, to drawe, as a paynter dothe, er he do lay on colours.
                  
                     Delitum, blotted.
                  
                     Delinquo, deliqui, delinquere, to omytte to do well, to offende.
                  
                     Deliquium, lacke. Deliquium animi, whan a man is in a ſwowne.
                  
                     Deliquium ſolis, the eclyps of the ſonne.
                  
                     Deliro, aui, are, to go out of the ryght way, proprely to go out of the forow, and make a balke, as ploughmen do. Alſo to dote.
                  
                     Delirus, he that ſwaruethe from reaſon, a dotarde or dotynge foole.
                  
                     Deliteo, tui, ere, to hyde me.
                  
                     Delireſco, I go to hyde me.
                  
                     Delos, an yle nygh to Grece.
                  
                     Delphi, a citie and people in Grece.
                  
                     Delphicus, ca, cum, of that citie.
                  
                     Delphin, inos, a greatte fyſſhe, called a Dolphyn.
                  
                     Delphis, a temple of Apollo in Grece.
                  
                     Delubrum, a place, wherin be dyuers images of god and ſayntes.
                  
                     Deludo, ſi, ere, to mocke.
                  
                     Delumbis, be, weake, ſomtyme wanton.
                  
                     Deluo, lui, ere, to waſh cleane, or waſhe out.
                  
                     Deluto, aui, are, to lay klaye on any thyng.
                  
                     Demagis, moche more.
                  
                     Demando, aui, are, to committe holy.
                  
                     Demarathus, a kynge of Spartan.
                  
                     Demarchus, a ruler of the people.
                  
                     Demeanculum, a place to deſcende into a Cellar.
                  
                     Demeare, to go downe, or go away.
                  
                     Demens, tis, madde.
                  
                     Dementia, madneſſe.
                  
                     Demenſus, ſa, ſum, meaſured.
                  
                     Demenſum, wages gyuen euery month.
                  
                     Dementio, tiui, ire, to be madde.
                  
                     Demento, taui, tare, to be madde, to make madde, to make foolyſhe.
                  
                     Demereo, rui, ere, to wynne or gette.
                  
                     Demereor, eris, reri, to bynde by frendſhip, to wynne ones fauoure, to make a frende, to deſerue moche.
                  
                     Demetior, to mette diligently, to eſteme.
                  
                     Demeto, tij, tere, to mette.
                  
                     Demetrias, a towne of Theſſalie.
                  
                     Demetrius, a mans name.
                  
                     Demiror, aris, ari, to meruayle moche. ſome tyme it ſignifieth to knowe not.
                  
                     Demitto, miſi, tere, to ſend downe, to humble my ſelfe, to laye downe.
                  
                     Demiſsitia tunica, a longe cote.
                  
                     Demiſſus, a, um, humble.
                  
                     Demo, mere, to take away, or abate.
                  
                     De capite demptum, appayred in ſubſtance or valewe.
                  
                     Democratia, a fourme of a common welth,Ti. Liuius
where the people haue authoritie.
                  
                     Democraticus, he that fauoreth the cōmon welth, where the people hath auctoritie.
                  
                     Democritus, the name of a philoſopher.
                  
                     Demodocꝰ, the name of a harper ī Homer.
                  
                     Demolior, iris, to throwe downe any thing that is buylded.
                  
                     Demonſtro, aui, are, to ſhewe openly.
                  
                     Demonſtratiuus, a, uum, that ſheweth, or is ſhewed, or mete to be ſhewed.
                  
                     
                     Demonſtratio, onis, a ſhewynge.
                  
                     Demonſtratiuum genus, a fourme of ſpeakynge, wherin oratours didde either commende or diſpraiſe any man openly.
                  
                     Demophon, the ſonne of Theſeus and Phedra kynge of Athenes.
                  
                     Demorior, eris, to dye vtterly.
                  
                     Demoror, aris, to tary longe, to kepe back, or cauſe to tarye.
                  
                     Demonſthenes, the name of a famous orator.
                  
                     Demulceo, cere, to ſtryke gentilly and ſoftly with the hande, as we do to chyldren or houndes, whan we make moche of them.
                  
                     Demum, at the laſte. ſometyme it ſignifieth onely, or alway.
                  
                     Demuſſata contumelia, diſpleaſure done by diſſimulation.
                  
                     Denarius, a certayn coyne, after the diuerſities of countreys, dyuers in weight. it is taken nowe for a peny.
                  
                     Denarius, a, um, that whiche contayneth the numbre of tenne.
                  
                     Denarro, aui, are, to tell in order.
                  
                     Denaſo, to cutte or pull of the noſe.
                  
                     Denato, aui, are, to ſwymme downe.
                  
                     Denego, aui, are, not to gyue, or to denye to gyue.
                  
                     Denigro, aui, are, to make blacke.
                  
                     Deni, tenne togither. Caeſar lib. 5. Vxores habent deni duodeni
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         inter ſe communes, They haue wyues tenne and twelue men togither, commune amonge them.
                  
                     Deni
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , in concluſyon.
                  
                     Denomino, aui, are, to name.
                  
                     Denoto, aui, are, to blame.
                  
                     Dens, dentis, a toothe.
                  
                     Denſo, aui, are, to thycken or make thycke.
                  
                     Denſus, a, um, thycke, harde, cloſed togyther, compacte.
                  
                     Denſitas, tatis, & denſitudo, dinis, thicknes.
                  
                     Dentale, the ſhare of a plough.
                  
                     Dentatim, in order lyke tethe.
                  
                     Denticulus, dentatus, ta, tum, dētoſus, ſa, ſum,
toothed.
                  
                     Denticulare, to thruſte in his teethe.
                  
                     Dentifricium, a medycyne, wherewith the tethe be rubbed, to make them white.
                  
                     Dentiloquus, he that ſpeaketh betwene the tethe, or lyſpeth.
                  
                     Dentio, ire, to putte forthe tethe, or breede teethe.
                  
                     Dentiſcalpium, an inſtrumente, wherwith teethe be ſcraped.
                  
                     Dentitio, onis, a puttyng forth or growinge of tethe.
                  
                     Denubo, pſi, bere, to mary or wedde.
                  
                     Denudo, aui, are, to diſpoile or make naked.
                  
                     Denuncio, aui, are, to ſhewe or tell a thinge to an other man, or denounce. Alſo Denunciare teſtimonium, to brynge wytneſſe into the courte of iugement, is they doo in the Chauncerie, where wytneſſes are compelled to come.
                  
                     Denuò, agayne.
                  
                     Deorſum, downewarde.
                  
                     Depalmo, aui, are, to buffette.
                  
                     Depango, xi, gere, to plant or ſette.
                  
                     Depeciſcor, ciſceris, to couenant or promiſe or agree, or patiſe. Depectus, a, um, couenanted or patiſed. Depectus eſt cum hoſtibus, he patiſed with the ennemies.
                  
                     Depecto, xui, uel, xi, tere, to keme diligently.
                  
                     Depexus, a, um, kempte, trymmed.
                  
                     Depeculor, aris, ari, to robbe a commune weale a prince, or a place halowed.
                  
                     Depelli portenta, whā monſtruous or ſtrāge thinges do happen, betokenynge ſome yll auēture to happen, to repele it by prayers, auowes, or other goood dedes.
                  
                     Depello, puli, pellere, to putte downe, putte away, or remoue.
                  
                     Depulſus, putte downe.
                  
                     Dependeo, ere, to hange downe of a thing. to depende.
                  
                     Dependo, di, dere, to paye.
                  
                     Dependere penas, to be punyſſhed, to ſuffre peynes.
                  
                     Deperdo, ere, to loſe.
                  
                     Depereo, ii, ire, to peryſſhe, to dye, to loue inordynately.
                  
                     Depeſco, ſcui, ere, to dryue cattell.
                  
                     Depeſſus, rente, torne.
                  
                     Depilis, without heare.
                  
                     Depilo, aui, are, to pull of heare.
                  
                     Deplano, to make playne.
                  
                     Deplanto, to ſette.
                  
                     Depleo, pleui, plere, to fylle.
                  
                     Deploro, aui, are, to lament, to bewayle.
                  
                     Deploratus, ta, tum, without hope of recouery or remedy.
                  
                     Depono, poſui, nere, to laye downe, to depriue or take away, to leaue a thynge in an other mans cuſtody.
                  
                     Depoſitus, ta, tum, layde downe, lefte in an other mans kepynge, alſo deſperate.
                  
                     Depopulor, ari, to diſtroye or waſte a countreye.
                  
                     Deporto, aui, are, to cary or brynge awaye. to banyſhe.
                  
                     Deportatus, banyſſhed.
                  
                     Depoſco, popoſci, depoſcere, to deſyre moche, or requyre.
                  
                     Depoſitorius, he that leaueth a thyng with an other man.
                  
                     Depoſitum, that whyche is lefte in an nother mannes kepynge: or that is layde to pledge.
                  
                     Depraedor, ari, to robbe a countrey or toune.
                  
                     
                     Deprauo, aui, are, to make ylle, to depraue.
                  
                     Deprecor, cari, to beſeche. Deprecari ueniā, to aſke forgyuenes. Alſo Deprecari, to refuſe, to deſyre the contrary, to put awaye, or denye that whiche we wolde not haue, to haue in deteſtation, to reſyſte, to delyuer a man by prayer.
                  
                     Deprehendo, di, ere, to take a man vnwares.
                  
                     Deprehenſus eſt in ſermone, He was taken in his wordes. Deprehenſus eſt in ſcelere, He was taken with the faulte. Alſo deprehendere to knowe, to perceyue.
                  
                     Deprimo, re, to kepe down, to thruſt down.
                  
                     Depromo, to drawe out, to declare.
                  
                     Depſo, pſi, pſere, to warke a thynge with the handes, to the intent to make it ſoft.
                  
                     Depuber, depuberis, a chyld or yonge beaſt, whiche are not come to ripe yeres.
                  
                     Depudet, he hath layde aſyde ſhame.
                  
                     Depudico, caui, are, to diſhoneſte or vyolate a womanne.
                  
                     Depugno, aui, are, to fyght valyantly.
                  
                     Depurgo, aui, are, to clenſe any thing vnder fote.
                  
                     Depuno, to make cleane or pure.
                  
                     Deputo, aui, are, to cutte of, to eſteme, to iudge, to repute.
                  
                     Depuuio, ere, to beate.
                  
                     
                        De
                              •••
                           ,
                      the name of a people in Aſia.
                  
                     
                        De
                              •
                           ce,
                      a well moſte colde in ſommer.
                  
                     
                        Dereli
                              •
                           quo, dereliqui, derelinquere,
                      to forſake vtterly.
                  
                     Derepentè, ſodaynly.
                  
                     Derideo, riſi, dere, to laugh, to ſcorn, to mock
                  
                     Deripeo, ripui, pere, to take away, to diſpoil.
                  
                     Deriuo, aui, are, to deriue from one to an other, to lay to one, as to lay to a mans default, or charge, to take from one, and giue to an other.
                  
                     Derogo, aui, are, to mynyſſhe, to derogate, to take awaye.
                  
                     
                        Der
                              •
                           aei,
                      a people of Grece in the coſtes of Thrace.
                  
                     Deruncinare, to cut or pull of that whyche is ſuperfluous.
                  
                     Deruo, ui, ere, to fall downe.
                  
                     Deſaeuio, ſaeui, uire, to be wodde angry. ſomtyme to ceaſſe to be angry.
                  
                     Deſcendo, di, ere, to go downe, to deſcende.
                  
                     Deſcio, iui, ire, to knowe nat.
                  
                     Deſciſco, iui, ſciſcere, to diſagree, to leaue one and go to an other, to rebell.
                  
                     Diſcobinatus, wounded or cutte.
                  
                     Deſcribo, pſi, ere, to write out of a copy, to order or appoynt, to paynte or write aduyſedly, to declare or deſcribe.
                  
                     Deſeco, aui, are, to cutte in ſonder.
                  
                     Deſido, ſedi, ere, to ſytte ſtyll, or contynually, to ſyt on a thing, to ſit on a chāber ſtole. it is alſo proprely whan the erth doth gape or chinke. Terra deſedit, the grounde openeth or gapeth.
                  
                     Deſero, ui, ere, to leaue or forſake.
                  
                     Deſerto, taui, are, to forſake.
                  
                     Deſertus, forſaken, not inhabitable, where no man dwelleth, a deſert or wylderneſſe.
                  
                     Deſeruio, uiui, ire, to obey or ſerue humbly, ſomtyme to do yll ſeruyce.
                  
                     Deſes, deſidis, vnoccupied.
                  
                     Deſiderium, a deſyre.
                  
                     Deſidero, aui, are, to deſyre.
                  
                     Deſiderati, deed or ſlayne.
                  
                     Deſidia, ſlouthfulnes.
                  
                     Deſidioſus, a man ful of idelnes, ſlouthfull.
                  
                     Deſigno, aui, are, to aſſigne, to note or ſigninifie, to do a thinge newely.
                  
                     Deſignator, toris, a marſhall, which ſetteth or appointeth euery man to his place, conuenient to his degree or office.
                  
                     Deſignatus, aſſigned, ordeyned.
                  
                     Deſilio, lui, ere, to leape or lyght downe.
                  
                     Deſino, ſii, nere, to leaue, to ceaſſe.
                  
                     Deſinere artem, to leaue the crafte.
                  
                     Deſipio, pui, ere, to do foliſhly, to wax foliſh.
                  
                     Deſiſto, deſuti, deſiſtere, to leaue of.
                  
                     Deſolo, aui, are, to make deſolate.
                  
                     Deſolatus, a, ū, that is made deſolate or diſtroyed.
                  
                     Deſolor, ari, to comforte.
                  
                     Deſpectio, onis, a deſpyſynge.
                  
                     Deſpecto, aui, are, to loke behynde.
                  
                     Deſpectus, ta, tum, deſpiſed.
                  
                     Deſperatio, onis, deſpayre.
                  
                     Deſpero, aui, are, to deſpaire.
                  
                     Deſperatus, a, um, deſperate.
                  
                     Deſpicabilis, to be deſpiſed.
                  
                     Deſpicientia, deſpectus, deſpectio, diſpite.
                  
                     Deſpiceo, ſpexi, cere, to looke or beholde downe, to deſpiſe. Deſpicor, caris, to diſpiſe.
                  
                     Deſpicus, a watcheman, to ſe who cometh, as it is in Calyce.
                  
                  
                     Deſpolio, aui, are, to diſpoyle or to robbe.
                  
                     Deſpondeo, di, ere, to affyance or betrouth. alſo to promyſe.
                  
                     Deſpondere animum, to be in deſperation, or wery of lyfe, to deſpaire of any thynge, that a man ſeketh for.
                  
                     Deſpondere ſapientiam, to deſpaire, to com to great wyſedom.
                  
                     Deſpumo, aui, are, to ſkymme or claryfye any lycour.
                  
                     Deſpuo, ui, ere, to ſpet downe, or ſpette on a thynge.
                  
                     Deſquammo, aui, are, to ſkale a fyſhe.
                  
                     Deſtino, aui, are, to pourpoſe, to appoynte, to depute, to prepare, to cheſe, to tye to a thinge, to ſette a pryce.
                  
                     Deſtituo, ui, ere, to forſake, to leaue, to depriue or take fro, to lowſe, or vnbynde, to ſette downe a man.Cecilius. 
                     Deſtituit omnes ſeruos

ad menſam ante ſe, He dyd ſette downe all his ſeruantes at the table before hym.
                  
                     Deſtringo, xi, ere, to bynde harde or cutte.
                  
                     Deſtructile, that whiche ſhall be deſtroyed.
                  
                     Deſtruo, xi, ere, to diſtroy or throwe down that whiche is buylded.
                  
                     Deſubulo, aui, are, to perce, proprely with an awle or bodkyn.
                  
                     Deſudaſco, to ſweate.
                  
                     Deſudo, aui, are, to ſweatte moch or labour.
                  
                     Deſueſco, ueui, ſcere, to diſcuſſe or brynge out of cuſtome.
                  
                     Deſuerudo, dinis, a diſuſe.
                  
                     Deſultor, toris, he that can vaunte a horſe, and leape frome one horſbacke vnto an other. Alſo thoſe men of warre, that in time of battaylle wolde leape downe of their horſes quyckely, and fyghte on foote, and leape vppe agayne as quyckely, were Deſultores.
                  
                     Deſultorii equi, horſes whiche ſerued for that purpoſe.
                  
                     Deſum, defui, deeſſe, to lacke.
                  
                     Deſuper, from aboue. Deſurſum, the ſame.
                  
                     Detego, tegi, tegere, to diſcloſe or diſcouer
                  
                     Deter, lackynge ſomwhat.
                  
                     Detergeo, terſi, gere, to wype of, to make cleane.
                  
                     Determino, aui, are, to determin, to diſcuſſe.
                  
                     Detero, teri, terere, to bruſe, to beate oute, as grayne is beaten oute of the eare with threſhyng or treadynge.
                  
                     Deterreo, ui, ere, to putte in feare, to lette by feare.
                  
                     Deteſtabile, abhomynable.
                  
                     Deteſtor, ari, to abhore. Amonge Ciuilyons, deteſtari is to ſummon a manne with wytneſſe.
                  
                     Deteſtatio, abhorryng, execration, ſummonyng with wytneſſe, Alſo Apuleius takith it for geldynge.
                  
                     Detexo, xi, xere, to weaue, or to wynde.
                  
                     Detineo, nui, ere, to withholde, to reſtrayne from lybertie.
                  
                     Detondeo, detondi, dere, to ſheare or clyp.
                  
                     Detono, aui, are, to make a great ſounde.
                  
                     Detorqueo, ſi, quere, to bowe, to turne out of the ryght waye.
                  
                     Detracto, aui, are, to eſchue, to forbeare, to hynder by reporte or acte.
                  
                     Detractores, detracters, backbyters.
                  
                     Detraho, xi, here, to drawe of, to report yl.
                  
                     Detrimentum, detriment or damage.
                  
                     Detrimētoſum, that which is cauſe of moche damage or hurte.
                  
                     Detrudo, ſi, ere, to thruſte downe. ſomtyme to conſtrayne or inforce.
                  
                     Detrullo, aui, are, to put from one veſſel into an other.
                  
                     Detrunco, aui, are, to cutte of ſhorte.
                  
                     Deturbo, aui, are, to beate downe.
                  
                     Deturpo, aui, are, to make fowle, or defyle.
                  
                     Deucalion, onis, the name of a kynge, who in fables is ſayde dydde reſtore mankynde diſtroyed with a floode.
                  
                     Deueho, xi, ere, to cary from a place.
                  
                     Deuenio, ueni, nire, to comme downe frome highe to lowe, from rycheſſe to pouertie, from proſperitie to aduerſitie.
                  
                     Deuenuſto, aui, are, to make fowle.
                  
                     Deuerbero, aui, are, to beate moche.
                  
                     Deuerro, ri, ere, to ſwepe cleane.
                  
                     Deueſtio, ueſtii, ire, to vnclothe.
                  
                     Deuexo, aui, are, to vexe moche.
                  
                     Deuexus, a, um, holowe or lyke to a valaye.
                  
                     Deuincio, xi, cire, to bynde faſte.
                  
                     Deuinco, uici, uincere, to vanquyſhe.
                  
                     Deuio, aui, are, to go out of the waye.
                  
                     Deuirgino, aui, are, to defloure a mayden.
                  
                     Deuito, aui, are, to eſchewe.
                  
                     Deuius, a, um, out of the right waye.
                  
                     Deunx, cis, a poyſe, whyche is a pounde, lackynge an ounce.
                  
                     Deuoco, aui, are, to call aſyde, or awaye.
                  
                     Deuolo, aui, are, to flee or rounne frome a hygher place to a lower.
                  
                     Deuoluo, ni, uere, to tumble or roll downe. by tranſlation it ſignifieth, it is fallē, or com from one to an other, or hapned. Deuoluta eſt haereditas, The īheritāce is fallē or com.
                  
                     Deuoro, aui, are, to deuoure. ſommetyme to beare. Hoc taedium mihi deuorandum eſt, This labour I muſt ſuſteyne.
                  
                     Deuotio, onis, a curſe, a vowe to dye, or to make a man dye.
                  
                     Deuoto, aui, are, to bynde by a vowe.
                  
                     Deuotorius, a, ū, concerning a vow or curſe.
                  
                     Deuotus, ta, tum, vowed or curſed.
                  
                     Deuoueo, ère, to vowe or curſe, to conſente to dye.
                  
                     DEVS, god.
                  
                     Dexter, dextri, of the right hande. ſomtyme it ſignifieth apt, conuenient, quicke and dyligent, proſperous, fauourable.
                  
                     Dexteritas, tatis, aptnes and redynes in the thing that a man goth about.
                  
                     Dexter, tra, trum, ryght, or apte.
                  
                     Dextero, aui, are, to couple horſes in a teme,
                  
                     Dextrale, a bracelet to weare on the ryght arme. Dextrocherium the ſame.
                  
                     Dextrarii, horſes ioyned in a teeme.
                  
                     Dextrorſum, towarde the right hand.
                  
                     Dextimi, horſemenne beinge on the righte wynge in battayle.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶D Ante I.
                  
                     DIA, an addicion to womens names, whan theyr folyſhe louers wyl make them equall to goddeſſes.
                  
                     
                     Diabolus, the dyuelle. howe be it in greke it ſygnifieth proprely a fals accuſer.
                  
                     Diaconus, a deacon.
                  
                     Diadema, a cappe, whiche an emperour or kinge weareth vnder his crowne.
                  
                     Diaeta, a parler to ſuppe in. Alſo dyete in eatynge and drinkyng. Alſo a place where iugementes were gyuen.
                  
                     Diaetarii, ſeruauntes that do awayte on the table. Sometyme ſuche as do haunt dyners & ſuppers, to the intent to ſteale ſomwhat.
                  
                     Dialectus, a maner of ſpeche, as we wolde ſaye diuerſities in englyſſhe, as Northerne ſpeche, Southerne, Kentyſhe, Deueniſhe, and other lyke.
                  
                     Dialexis, dyſputation.
                  
                     Dialectica, logyke.
                  
                     Dialis, Iupyter. Alſo it ſygnifyeth of one day, as Conſul Dialis, a Conſul of one daye.
                  
                     Dialogus, a diſputation betwene two.
                  
                     Diameter, a lyne, whiche diuydeth any fygure into two equall partes.
                  
                     Diana, the doughter of Iupyter, whyche fleinge the company of men, to the intente that ſhe wolde not be meuyd with carnalle iuſtes, ſhe contynually exercyſed her ſelfe in huntynge wylde beaſtes: and for hyr chaſte lyfe, ſhe was honoured of the paynyms for a goddeſſe. She is alſo taken for the Moone.
                  
                     Diapaſma, a ſprynkelynge of water, or other lyke.
                  
                     Diapaſon, a concorde in muſyke of fiue tunes, and two halfe tunes.
                  
                     Diapente, of fyue.
                  
                     Diaphanum, clere throughout, as chriſtall.
                  
                     Diaphonia, a diſcorde.
                  
                     Diaphora, a difference.
                  
                     Diaphoreticus, ca, cum, that whiche dothe diſſolue and ſende forth humoures or vapours.
                  
                     Diaphragma, is a thynne ſkynne or caulle in the body, whyche ſeparateth the harte and lunges from the ſplene and lyuer, and is called the Myddrefe.
                  
                     Diarium, prouyſion for oone daye. Alſo a boke declarynge what is done day by day.
                  
                     Diaſtole, a diſtinction or poynte, whereby one worde or ſentence is diſtincte frome an nother.
                  
                     Diateſſaron, of eyghte.
                  
                     Diatretum, a cuppe imboced, and cunningly wrought.
                  
                     Dibapha, purple twyſe dyed. Alſo a garment therof.
                  
                     Dica, a cauſe, an accuſation, a iudgemente.
                  
                     Dicacitas, tatis, ſcoffynge or bourdynge.
                  
                     Dicaculus, & dicacula, mery in talkyng.
                  
                     Dicaearchus, a iuſte Prince. Alſo the name of a phyloſopher.
                  
                     Dicax, cacis, a rayler, or reprocher.
                  
                     Dico, caui, to vowe, to offre, to dedicate.
                  
                     Dico, xi, cere, to ſaye, to telle, to bydde, to promyſe, to affirme, to defende: as Cicero dixit cauſam Milonis, Cicero defended Miloes cauſe.
                  
                     Dicere ſententiam, to gyue ſentence or iudgemente·
                  
                     Dicere leges, to appoynte lawes, or condycions of peace, as by the vanquyſher to hym that is vanquyſhed.
                  
                     Dicere diem, to ſewe a man, or call him vp, (as we vſe to ſay) by action, writte, or commandement, proprely to cauſe a man to be bounden to appere and make aunſwere.
                  
                     Dicere cauſam, to make aunſwere to action or playnte.
                  
                     Dicere mulctam, to ſette or aſſeſſe a fyne or ſumme of money to be payde by hym, whiche hath commytted a treſpace.
                  
                     Dicere ius, to gyue commandement or ſentence on a peyne. Sometyme it ſygnifyeth to gouerne by lawes a towne or countrey.
                  
                     Dicere ſacramento, to take an oth. proprely as they do, whiche be retayned in warres.
                  
                     Dictannus, an herbe called dittayne.
                  
                     Dictator, the hygheſt offyce in the publyke weale of the Romaynes, whiche was alſo called Magiſter populi, the mayſter of the people: whiche for the ſpace of ſyxe monethes, hadde the authoritie of a kynge. And therfore that dignitie was neuer giuē but onely whan the ſtate of the citie was in any ieoperdie.
                  
                     Dictatura, the office or dignitie of dictator.
                  
                     Dicte, a citie in the yle of Crete or Candy.
                  
                     Dicteria, tauntes, or quippies, or ſhort and ſharpe reaſons.
                  
                     Dictio, onis, a worde, a forme of ſpeaking.
                  
                     Dictito, aui, are, to ſpeake ofte or in dyuers places.
                  
                     Dicto, aui, are, to ſpeake or declare that an other writeth, or beareth in remembrance. Alſo to inueſtigate or expounde the ſence of any authour. Alſo to brynge to remembraunce.
                  
                     Dictata, Interpretations, expoſytions, or declarations, made by mayſters vnto their ſcholers.
                  
                     Dictum, ſpoken, or ſayde.
                  
                     Dicta, ſygnified mery ſentences.
                  
                     Dicturio, iui, ire, to goo aboute, or prepare to ſpeake.
                  
                     Dictynna, one of the names of Diana.
                  
                     Dictynnus, a hylle, wherein the temple of Diana was ſytuate.
                  
                     Dictys, one of the Centaures, and an hyſtographier of Candy.
                  
                     
                     Didaſcalus, a ſchole mayſter.
                  
                     Dido, the name of a lady that buylded Carthage.
                  
                     Diduco, xi, cere, to brynge into ſondry partes, or to diuide or pulle aparte.
                  
                     Didymae, arum, ylandes of Aphrike, that bound
                        •
                      on Aegypte.
                  
                     Didynnis, the name of a man, and in latine it ſignifieth Geminus, in englyſhe, a twinne or double.
                  
                     Diecula, a lyttell while.
                  
                     Plautus.
                     Dierecta, in an yll tyme.
                  
                     Dies, diei, a daye. Sometyme it ſygnyfyeth tyme or ſeaſon.
                  
                     Dies critici, the dayes in whyche phiſitions do gyue a certayne iugement in ſyckenes.
                  
                     Dieſcit, it is daye, it waxeth daye.
                  
                     Dies legittimi, amonge lawyers be callyd ordinary dayes, or dayes in courte.
                  
                     Diem dicere, an̄, dicere diem.
                  
                  
                     Dieſpiter, one of the names of Iupiter.
                  
                     Dieteris, the ſpace of two yeres.
                  
                     Diffamo, aui, are, to ſprede by fame.
                  
                     Differo, diſtuli, differre, to ſpare or deferre. ſometyme to brynge frome one place to an nother. ſomtime to report abrode, ſomtyme to deuide or cut aſonder, ſomtyme to ſet in order. ſometyme differ or be in difference. Cic. At uide quid differat inter meam opinionem & tuam, But ſe nowe what difference is betwene thyne opinion and myne.
                  
                     Diffibulare, to vnbuckle, to open, to vngird.
                  
                     Difficilis, difficile, harde, vneaſye.
                  
                     Diffido, dere, to myſtruſte.
                  
                     Diffindo, di, ere, to cleaue in ſunder.
                  
                     Diffinio, niui, ire, to diffine or declare in few wordes playnely, the ſygnyfycation of a thynge.
                  
                     Diffinitio, onis, a diffinition, or declaration of the nature qualitie or propre ſygnification of a thynge by generaltie, ſpecialtie, and difference.
                  
                     Diffiteor, fiſus ſum, diffiteri, to denye.
                  
                     Diffluo, xi, ere, to flowe abrode.
                  
                     Diffugio, gi, gere, to flye aſonder, or on dyuers partes.
                  
                     Diffundo, di, dere, to powre oute, or ſcatter.
                  
                     Diffundere diem, amonge lawyers, to contynue the matter vntyll an other daye.
                  
                     Digamma, amonge latynes is the letter F.
                  
                  
                     Digamus, he that hath had two wiues, cō
                     monly called Bigamus.
                  
                  
                     Digama, a womanne that hathe hadde two huſbandes.
                  
                     Digeries, a diſpoſition or order.
                  
                     Digero, geſsi, gerere, to diſpoſe, to order, to interprete or make playne, to deuyde, to dygeſte.
                  
                     Digitalis, le, pertaynynge to the fynger.
                  
                     Digitali craſsitudine, The thyckeneſſe of a fynger.
                  
                     Digitalia, thinges worne on the fyngers.
                  
                     Digitus, a fynger.
                  
                     Digitum tranſuerſum, ſygnifyeth in a ſentence, a lyttell or ſmalle diſtaunce. Digitum tranſuerſum ab eo non diſcedebat, He went not from hym a fynger bredde.
                  
                     Digladiari, to fight togither with ſwordes. by tranſlation to contende or ſtryue.
                  
                     Dignatio, fauour or familiaritie.Liuius.
                  
                  
                     Dignitas, tatis, honour gyuen or dewe to a man for his merites. ſommetyme aſtate of nobilitie, or great authorytie. ſommetyme beautie, proprely of a man, ſpecially in geſture and communication.
                  
                     Digno, aui, are, & dignor, ari, to iuge one to be worthy, or to be eſtemed worthy.
                  
                     Dignoſco, noui, ſcere, to diſcerne or knowe by dyuers meanes.
                  
                     Dignoro, aui are, to marke, as men marke beaſtes to knowe them.
                  
                     Dignus, na, num, worthye.
                  
                     Digne, worthyly.
                  
                     Digredior, dieris, gredi, to departe or goo awaye.
                  
                     Digreſsio, & digreſſus, a departynge.
                  
                     Diiouis, Iupyter.
                  
                     Diiudico, caui, care, to iudge betwyxte two thynges.
                  
                     Dilabor, eris, labi, to ſlyppe or go awaye, to falle downe, as 
                        •
                      howſe doeth. ſometyme it ſignyfieth to fayle.
                  
                     Dilacero, aui, are, to teare or rent in pieces.
                  
                     Dilapido, daui, are, to conſume goodes, or ſpende ryotrouſly or waſtefully.
                  
                     Dilato, aui, are, to ſtretche out in breadth.
                  
                     Dilēma, tis, an argument, whiche on euery parte taunteth him, to whom it is ſpoken.
                  
                     Diligens, tis, diligent, or louynge.
                  
                     Diligentia, dilygence or loue.
                  
                     
                        Diligo, lexi, ligere,
                        Plautus.
                      to fauour or loue meanly ſomtyme to diuyde.
                  
                     Dilorico, aui, are, to vndo, or cutte a cote, or other thynge beinge ſowed.
                  
                     Diluceſcit, the daye appereth.
                  
                     Dilucidus, clere, bryghte.
                  
                     Diluculó, an aduerbe, whiche ſignifieth betyme in the mornynge.
                  
                     Diluculo, laui, lare, to waxe daye, to appere to be daye.
                  
                     Diluculum, that porcion of daye, whiche is before that the ſonne ryſeth.
                  
                     Diludium, the leauyng of play, or the ſpace betwene recreations or playes.
                  
                     Diluo, ui, ere, to waſſhe, to make cleane, to putte away, to releaſe, to alaye, as wyne is alayde with water: or to tempre, to purge, or diſcharge a crime.
                  
                     
                     Dilutus, ta, tum, alayed or tempred.
                  
                     Dilutus color, a faynt colour, or vnperfect coloure.
                  
                     Dilutum, is wyne or other lycour, wherein any herbe or other thing is depid by a certayne ſpace, whiche ſome phiſytions calle infuſed.
                  
                     Diluuium, is whan the erth is ſurrounded or drowned with moche rayne.
                  
                     Dimauo, aui, are, to flowe abrode, as diuers ſtreames out of one ſpringe.
                  
                     Dimembro, aui, are, to deuyde.
                  
                     Dimenſum, & demenſum, meaſured.
                  
                     Dimico, aui, are, to ſyght or contende with ſome thynge.
                  
                     Dimidius, a, um, the halfe deale of that whiche is diuided.
                  
                     Dimidium plus toto, is ſpoken where a mā intendeth to ſhewe that that the meane is beſte.
                  
                     Dimidiatus, a, um, the halfe deale of that whiche is not ſeuered or diuided.
                  
                     Diminuo, ui, ere, to minyſhe, to cutte of.
                  
                     Dimiſsoriae literae, letters ſent from oone to an nother.
                  
                     Dimitto, ſi, tere, to ſende dyuers perſones into dyuers places. Somtyme it ſygnifieth to let to departe, to gyue leaue, to ceaſſe, to leaue, to lette paſſe, to ſuffre, to humble.
                  
                     Deiecit uultū & dimiſſa uoce locuta eſt, She dyd caſt downe hir loke, and with an humble voyce ſayde. Alſo to gyue, to let down.
                  
                     
                        Dim
                              •
                           ſſus, a, um,
                      is ſommetyme taken for abiecte.
                  
                     Dimulgo, aui, are, to publyſhe abrode.
                  
                     
                        Dynaſ
                              •
                           ae,
                      poteſtates.
                  
                     Dindymene, & Dindyme, one of the names of Cybele, called the mother of the goddꝭ
                  
                     Dindymus, the rydge of the hylle of Ida in Phrigia.
                  
                     Diobolares meretrices, harlottes, whyche be hyred for lyttell moneye.
                  
                     Diolares, harlottes, whiche kepe abrode in the feldes and woddes.
                  
                     Dioeceſis, ſios, a iuriſdiction, a gouernance. Alſo the dioceſe of a byſhop.
                  
                     Diminutus capite, & diminutio capitis, 
                     Vide ante, capitis diminutio.
                  
                  
                     Diodorus, a philoſopher of Socrates ſect, and Diodorus Siculus, a ſtory writer. and an other Diodorus,
                     Ci. in Br
                           •
                        
                        to. & Tuſ. lib. 5. a ſtoike phyloſopher, of whom Cicero writeth.
                  
                     Diogenes, a famous philoſphers name.
                  
                     Dione, a goddeſſe of the ſee, mother of Venus.
                  
                     Dioptra, a geometricall inſtrument, to diſcerne altitudes and diſtaunce. Victrunius vſeth it for wayinge or pluckynge vppe of water.
                  
                     Dioſcoron, an yle in the borders of Italy.
                  
                     Dioſpolis, a cytie of Aegypte. There be foure other of the ſame name in Aegypte, but very ſmall cities in comparyſon of this.
                  
                     Diotae, veſſels of erth with handels, wherin wyne was kepte.
                  
                     Diphthera, a ſhepeherdes cote made with ſhepe ſkynnes.
                  
                     Diphthongus, two vowels ioyned togither called a dipthonge, as ae, oe, au, ei.
                  
                  
                     Diploma, tis, a Charter of a prince or cytie, or a wrytte.
                  
                     Diplois, idis, any garmente lyned, but it is taken for a doublette.
                  
                     Dipondium, a weight of two pounde.
                  
                     Dipſacon, whyte brere.
                  
                     Dipſas, a ſerpent, of whom if a man be bitten, he dyeth for thyrſte.
                  
                     Dyrrachiū, a citie in the realme of Naples.
                  
                     Dirae, curſynges.
                  
                     Dirce, a womans name, the wyfe of Lycus kynge of Thebans.
                  
                     Diribitores, diſtrybuters of money, or paye mayſters.
                  
                     Dirigeo, gui, gêre, to ſhrynke for colde, or for feare.
                  
                     Dirigo, exi, gere, to make ſtreight, or ryght.
                  
                     Directus, a, um, ryght or ſtreyght.
                  
                     Directé, ſtreight, or in a right fourme.
                  
                     Dirimo, remi, ere, reptum, to breke or leaue of. Eares conſilium diremit, That thynge brake or diſſolued the counſayle. alſo to put of, or deferre.
                  
                     Diripio. 
                     Vide in deripio.
                  
                  
                     Diris, an hygh hylle of Maurytayne nowe callyd Atlas.
                  
                     Dirus, ra, rum, vengeable.
                  
                     Diritas, tatis, crueltie, vengeance.
                  
                     Dirumpo, rupi, rumpere, to braſte or breake a ſonder.
                  
                     Diruncio, iui, ire, to wede out, or purge that whiche is nought.
                  
                     Dis, ditis, callyd the god of rycheſſe, ſometyme it ſignifieth ryche.
                  
                     Diſcapidino, aui, are, to vncloſe or open.
                  
                     Diſcedo, ſceſsi, dere, to departe. ſometyme it ſignifieth an exception as, Quum diſceſſerim a fratre, nemo eſt mihi te charior, Excepte my brother, no manne is to me more dere than thou arte. Alſo it ſygnifieth dyuyſion or openynge. as,Ci. 1. 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      
                     Quum terra diſceſſiſſet, magnis quibuſdam imbribus, diſcendit in illum 
                           •••
                        atum, whan the erthe by thoccaſyon of moche rayne opened, he wente downe into the cleft or ſwalowe.
                  
                     Diſcepto, aui, are, to dſpute or contende.
                  
                     Diſceptatio, diſputation or contencion.
                  
                     Diſcerniculum, diuerſytie.
                  
                     Diſcerno, decreui, cernere, to depart or ſundre

one thyng from an other. Alſo to ſtriue or varie, to knowe diſtinctly.
                  
                     Diſcerpo, pſi, ere, to pluck or teare in piecis.
                  
                     Diſcinctus, diſſolute, or neglygent, or vnable for the warres, cowarde.
                  
                     Seruius.
                     Diſcindo, ſcidi, ſcindere, to cutte of.
                  
                     Diſciplina, lerning as it is ꝑceyued of the ſcholer. It is alſo a good forme of lyuing.
                  
                     Diſciplinoſus, apte to lerne.
                  
                     Diſcipulus, a ſcholer or diſciple.
                  
                     Diſcludo, ſi, dere, to ſhutte out.
                  
                     Diſco, didici, diſcere, to lerne.
                  
                     Dediſco, ere, to forgette that whiche was ones lerned.
                  
                     Diſcobolus, he that throweth a dyſhe.
                  
                     Diſconuenio, ni, nire, to diſagree or diſcord.
                  
                     Diſcordia, diſcorde.
                  
                     Diſcors, dis, he that agreeth not with an nother.
                  
                     Diſcrepo, aui, are, to diſagree or diſcorde.
                  
                     Diſcretio, onis, a ſeparation. ſomtyme election of good from yll, diſcretion.
                  
                     Diſcretus, ſeuered or parted. Valla ſaythe, that it is he that diſcerneth the qualyties of men, and value of thinges.
                  
                     Diſcrimen, minis, diuerſite or difference. alſo the ſhedynge or partynge of the heare. Alſo it ſygnifieth peryll.
                  
                     Diſcriminale, an inſtrument, wherwith the heare is parted or ſhadde.
                  
                     Diſcriminatim, a ſunder here and there.
                  
                     Diſcrimino, aui, are, to deuyde.
                  
                     Diſcrutior, ari, to be moche vexed or troubled in mynde.
                  
                     Diſcumbo, cubui, cumbere, to ſyt at meales.
                  
                     Diſcuneatus, opened wih a wedge or other lyke thynge.
                  
                     Diſcurro, rere, to runne hither and thither, or wander.
                  
                     Diſcus, a dyſhe. Alſo a rounde thynge of wodde or mettalle, whiche in playinge is throwen from one man to an nother. It is ſometyme taken for the hole fygure of the ſonne or the moone.
                  
                     Diſcutio, ſsi, tere, to caſte or ſhake downe, to remoue, to examyne, or diſcuſſe.
                  
                     Diſertus, eloquent in wordes.
                  
                     Diſiicio, disieci, diſiicere, to caſte a ſonder.
                  
                     Disiungo, xi, ere, to vnioyne, to ſeparate.
                  
                     Diſpaleſcere, to publyſhe abrode.
                  
                     Diſpalo, aui, are, to wander.
                  
                     Diſpalati, ſcattered.
                  
                     Diſpello, diſpuli, diſpellere, to expelle or put from many places or many wayes.
                  
                     Diſpendioſus, ſa, ſum, harmful, vnprofitable.
                  
                     Diſpendium, loſſe by neclygence, or ſuperfluous expenſes. Alſo it ſignifieth harme.
                  
                     Diſpēdo, di, ere, to ſpēde, alſo to ſtretch out.
                  
                     Diſpenno, ere, to ſtretche.
                  
                     Diſpenſator, toris, a ſtewarde, or other offycer, layinge out money for howſeholde: a diſpoſer of thinges.
                  
                     Diſpenſo, aui, are, to laye out money.
                  
                     Diſpereo, rii, tire, to be loſte vtterly.
                  
                     Diſperdo, di, ere, to loſe.
                  
                     Diſpergo, ſperſi, gere, to ſowe abrode, or to ſcatter.
                  
                     Diſpertio, tiui, ire, to gyue parte to one, part to an nother.
                  
                     Diſpeſco, cui, ere, to dryue beaſtes frome their paſture.
                  
                     Diſpeſſo, ſsi, ere, to ſprede abrode.
                  
                     Diſpicio, xi, cere, to diſcerne, to eſpye, to conſyder.
                  
                     Diſpicientia, circumſpection, aduyſement, diligent conſyderation.
                  
                     Diſplodo, ſi, dere, to ſprede.
                  
                     Diſpondaeus, a fote in meter, that hath four ſyllables longe, as Oratores.
                  
                  
                     Diſpono, ſui, ere, to diſpoſe, to order.
                  
                     Dſpungo, xi, gere, to take accompt, or examyne any maner of thinge writen.
                  
                     Diſpunctio, an examination.
                  
                     Diſputo, taui, tare, to diſpute, to make plain to be vnderſtande.
                  
                     Diſquiro, ſiui, rere, to inſerche diligently, to inquyre.
                  
                     Diſquiſitio, where euery mans opinyon is aſked in a matter, whiche requyreth iugemente.
                  
                     Diſraro, raui, rare, to make thynne that whiche is thycke.
                  
                     Diſſuauior, ari, to kyſſe ſwetely, and with moche delectation.
                  
                     Diſsecatus, ta, tum, cutte as a bodye is in an anotomye.
                  
                     Diſſectio, onis, an Anotomie.
                  
                     Diſſeco, caui, care, to cutte in pieces.
                  
                     Diſſentaneus, a, um, not accordinge.
                  
                     Diſſentio, tire, & diſſentior, tiri, to think contrary, or to diſagree.
                  
                     Diſſero, rui, rere, to ſowe ſedes, ſometyme to diſpute or declare.
                  
                     Diſſerto 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Diſſertio, a particion of landes.
                  
                     Diſsideo, ere, to be at variance or diſcorde.
                  
                     Diſsidium, variance or diſcorde.
                  
                     Diſsilio, liui, ire, to lepe down from a place, ſomtyme to braſte.
                  
                     Diſsimulo, aui, are, to diſſemble or fayne a thynge, whiche is not as it ſemeth to be.
                  
                     Diſsipo, aui, are, to ſcatter or ſprede abrode or diſpatche, alſo to bringe vnto noughte.
                  
                     Diſsitus, ta, tum, ſette farre of, diſtant.
                  
                     Diſſoluo, ui, uere, to loſe or vnbynd, to ſpede to paye ſeuerall dettes.
                  
                     Diſſolui, to be paide or diſcharged.
                  
                     Diſſoluere religionem, to do agaynſt the relygion,

to breake the relygion.
                  
                     Diſſonus, na, num, that whyche dothe not accorde.
                  
                     Diſſulto, taui, tare, to leape hither & thither.
                  
                     Diſto, aui, are, to differre, to be diſtant.
                  
                     Diſtantia, diſtaunce.
                  
                     Diſtendo, di, dere, to ſtratche out, or retche, to fyll, as a bottell is fylled.
                  
                     Diſtentus, fulle.
                  
                     Diſtero, terete, to breake ſmalle, to pounde or to braye ſyne.
                  
                     Diſtichon, two verſis.
                  
                     Diſtillo, aui, are, to diſtylle, or drop downe.
                  
                     Diſtillatio, onis, a diſtyllyng, ſpecyally from the heed, callid a reume or catarf, the poſe.
                  
                     Diſtineo, nui, ere, to lette or withholde with buſyneſſe, or vrgente cauſes, to holde or putte backe.
                  
                     Diſtinguo, xi, ere, to dyuide. Alſo to make dyſtinction.
                  
                     Diſtito, aui, are, to ſtande aparte, or be dyſtant one from an other.
                  
                     Diſtraho, xi, here, to plucke away, or to dyuide, or to withdrawe a thynge. ſometyme by tranſlation it is taken for to ſell. Alſo to fyniſſhe or conclude matters in variaunce. Controuerſias diſtrahere, to ende controuerſies or ſuites.
                  
                     Diſtribuo, ui, ere, to dyſtrybute, or gyue in ſondry partes to dyuers perſones.
                  
                     Diſtringo, xi, gere, to bynd faſt, or to ſtrain harde, to rubbe of or clenſe the fylthe or ſoyle of the body, to thretten to ſtryke, or to drawe out a ſwerde. Gladium diſtrinxit, He drewe out his ſworde. Sommetyme to gather,Columel. as, Sereno caelo manibus diſtringi oliuam opertet, In a fayre cleere daye the olyues muſt be gathered by hande. Diſtrictus negotiis, lette with buſyneſſe.
                  
                     Diſtorqueo, diſtorſi, quere, to drawe awrye, or aſyde.
                  
                     Diſturbo, aui, are, to caſte downe.
                  
                     Diſulcus, an hogge, which hath the briſtils of his necke deuided.
                  
                     Diteo, & diteſco, ſci, ſcere, to make ryche, or be ryche.
                  
                     Dithyrambus, a verſe made in the honoure of Bacchus.
                  
                     Ditio, onis, a domynion.
                  
                     Dito, aui, are, to make ryche.
                  
                     Dittochaeus, a fote of four ſillables in verſe, hauynge one longe, an other ſhorte, an nother longe, the fourthe ſhorte.
                  
                     Diu, longe tyme. alſo the day tyme. wherof commeth Interdiu, in the day tyme.
                  
                     Diutius, lengar. diutiſsime, lengeſt.
                  
                     Diuagor, ari, to wāder from place to place.
                  
                     Diuarico, aui, are, to ſtryde, or to ſpred wide one from an other, as bowghes of a tree.
                  
                     Diuello, li, ere, to pull away by violence.
                  
                     Diuendo, didi, dere, to ſelle to dyuers perſones, or in dyuers parcelles.
                  
                     Diuerbia, the partes of a comedy or interlude, where many perſons ſpeke togither.
                  
                     Diuerſito, aui, are, to turne often to a thing, or to reſorte.
                  
                     Diuerſor, ari, to reſort, or repaire to a place.
                  
                     Diuerſorium, an inne, wherto men in iourney doo reſorte to bayte or be lodged: a lodgynge.
                  
                     Diuerſorius, a, um, pertaynynge to an inne, or lodgynge.
                  
                     Diuerſus, a, um, dyuers or ſeparate.
                  
                     Diuerticulum, a by waye, or ſyde way, oute of the high way.
                  
                     Diuerto, ti, tere, to tourne from one thinge to an other, to take lodgynge, or to bayte.
                  
                     Diuerto ad te & apud te, I come to lodge with the, or to tary for a tyme with the.
                  
                     Diues, diuitis, ryche. ditior, rycher, ditiſsimus, rycheſt.
                  
                     Diuexo, aui, are, to vexe or trouble.
                  
                     Diuidia, tediouſnes. ſomtime it betokeneth diſcorde.
                  
                     Diuidiculum, an heed of a cundyte.
                  
                     Diuidium, a particion or diuident.
                  
                     Diuido, ſi, dere, to diuide or parte in ſonder.
                  
                     Diuiduum, that whiche may be ſeuered or diuyded.
                  
                     Diuinipotens, he that hath power in diuine thynges.
                  
                     Diuinitus, godly, or of god.
                  
                     Diuino, aui, are, to telle truthe, as well of thynges preſent, as of thinges paſſed. for the more parte it ſignifyeth to coniecte of thinges preſent, what ſhall happen.
                  
                     Diuinatio, onis, a foreiugement or coniecture. Alſo where a matter cometh in iugement, without writinge or wytneſſe on any of the partes, that iudgement may be called Diuinatio, a diuination.
                  
                     Diuinus, na, num, that whiche pertayneth to god, diuine.
                  
                     Diuiſio, onis, wherby we declare what is in variance, or whereby we doo expreſſe of what thinges we wyll treate. Alſo a diuyſyon into ſondry partes.
                  
                     Diuiſor, oris, amonge the olde Romaynes was he, whiche at the election of greatte officers, diuidid or gaue money to the people, in the names of them whiche ſued for the office, to thintent for to attayne it.
                  
                     Diuitiae, diuitiarum, diuitiis, diuitias, ryches.
                  
                     Diuito, aui, are, to make ryche.
                  
                     Dium, the day light vnder the fyrmament. whan we ſay, Sub dio aliquid fieri, it ſygnifieth ſome thynge to be doone abroode, or out of the houſe.
                  
                     
                     Diunt, old writers vſed for dant, they giue.
                  
                     Diuortium, a dyuorſe, or ſeparation of a mā and his wyfe. ſometyme a departyng from any other thynge.
                  
                     Diurno, aui, are, to lyue longe.
                  
                     Diurnus, na, num, pertayninge to daye, as Diurni libri, bokes conteynynge the actis done euery day. ſometime a dayes hyre.
                  
                     Dius, dia, come of a gentyll ſtocke.
                  
                     Diutule, a lyttell whyle.
                  
                     Diutinus, tina, num, longe contynuynge.
                  
                     Diutiſsime, very longe, or to longe.
                  
                     Diuturnus, na, num, longe continuynge.
                  
                     Diuus, ua, uum, worthy a diuine remēbrāce, Nowe they take Diuum, & diuam, for a man or woman ſaynct.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶D Ante O.
                  
                     Terentius
                     DO, dedi, dare, to gyue. Alſo to offre, or proffre. Vt tes dant ſeſe, As thynges offre them ſelfes.Vergilius. Alſo to bryng. Magnam dabit ille ruinā arboribus, He ſhall brynge a great fall vnto trees. Alſo to ſay, Quamobrem has partes didicerim paucis da bo, For what cauſe I lerned that parte, I wyll telle the in fewe wordes. Alſo to obeye,Terentius to conforme. Da te mihi, Conforme the to my wylle. Alſo to committe or doo. O Aeſchine, pol haud paternum iſtue dediſti, O Eſchines, in good faith in this thou haſt not done lyke a father.
                  
                     Dare operam, to applye, to gyue or take hede, or to helpe.
                  
                     Do manus, I rēder me, or I am vāquiſhed.
                  
                     Dare poenas, to ſuffre punyſhement.
                  
                     Dare ueniam, to forgyue.
                  
                     Dare poteſtatem, to commytte authoritie or power, or remyt a thinge to an other mans pleaſure or lybertie. Suarum ominum rerū illi poteſtarē dederat, He gaue hym the rule of all that he had.
                  
                     Dare fidem, to promyſe faithfully.
                  
                     Dare facultatem, to gyue lybertie or power to do a thynge.
                  
                     Dare manum, to putte into his hande pryuily, as they do to men of lawe, or priuy ſolyciters, or corrupt offycers.
                  
                     Dare damnas, to pay damages, or to make ſatisfaction.
                  
                     Dare auribus, to flatter, or ſpeake to pleaſe.
                  
                     Saluſtius.
                     Dare negotium, to aſſigne or appoynte buſyneſſe, or a thynge to be done.
                  
                     Ci. Teren. Plaut. Eraſ. in Chilia. Vergilius.
                     Dare in uiam, to take a iourney.
                  
                     Dare in pedes, to flee or runne away.
                  
                     Dare uerba, to deceyue by fayre promyſes, or pleaſant demonſtration.
                  
                     Datum eſt, It is predeſtinate.
                  
                     Doceo, cui, cere, to teache or gyue knowelege, or to informe, to aduyſe.
                  
                     Docibilis, apte to be taught.
                  
                     Docilis, lyghtly taught or inſtructed.
                  
                     Docilitas, aptenes to lerne.
                  
                     Doctrina, ae, doctrine, whiche procedeth of the teacher. Diſciplina, lernynge taken of the ſcholer.
                  
                     Documentum, a leſſon.
                  
                     Doctus, ta, tum, lerned, that is to ſay, knowynge a thynge without experience. Vide peritus.
                  
                  
                     Dodona, a citie in Greece, whereby was a woode, in the whiche men thoughte that trees ſpake.
                  
                     Dodone, the daughter of Iupiter and Europa.
                  
                     Dodra, was a drinke made of nine thinges, herbes, iuyſe, water, wyne, ſalt, oyle, bread, hony, and pepper.
                  
                     Dodrans, antis, a poyſe waying .ix. ounces.
                  
                     Dogma, atis, a certayn determination, whiche in ſectes of philoſophers euery oone had, without the whiche the ſecte fayled. ſometyme they be called placita.
                  
                     Dolabra, a carpentars axe.
                  
                     Dolabro, aui, are, to hewe as a carpentar.
                  
                     Dolentia, griefe.
                  
                     Doleo, ui, ere, to fele peyne or grefe.
                  
                     Dolere caput, pedes, oculos, the heed, fete, or eyen to ake.
                  
                     Doleo tuis rebus aduerſis, I am ſory for thy mysfortune or trouble.
                  
                     Doleo tuam uicem, I am ſorye on thy behalfe.
                  
                     Dolium, any great veſſel of wine, as a tūne, pipe, butre, or hoggisheed.
                  
                     Doliaris, great as a tunne. Doliaris heluo, a gorbelyed glutton.
                  
                     Doliarium, a wyne ſellar.
                  
                     Dolichus, a ſpace of grounde contaynyng xii. furlonges.
                  
                     Dolo, aui, are, to cutte or hewe with an axe or ſythe.
                  
                     Dolio, iui, ire, to graue in mettal.
                  
                     Dolobella, an hatchette.
                  
                     Dolon, the propre name of a man of Troy,Varro. that was very ſwifte of fote.
                  
                     Dolones, a ſcourge, hauynge a dagger, or other lyke thyng cloſed within it.Seruius. Liuius. It is alſo a certayne taklynge of ſhyppes. Alſo a lyttell ſayle called a trynkette.
                  
                     Dolopes, a people of Theſſaly.
                  
                     Dolor, is, griefe or paine of body or mynd, alſo ſorowe.
                  
                     Dolorificus, ca, cum, that whiche makethe griefe or ſorowe.
                  
                     Dolus, deceypte.
                  
                     Dolus malus, euery crafty deceite to compaſſe a man, wherby he receiueth damage.
                  
                     
                     Doloſus, deceytefull, or crafty.
                  
                     Doma, tis, a ſolar or flatte keuerynge of a howſe. it is ſomtyme taken for the houſe.
                  
                     Suetonius
                     Domeſticatim, by houſeholdes.
                  
                     Domeſticus, ca, cum, pertainynge to houſholde. ſometyme it ſygnifieth tame.
                  
                     Domeſtici, houſeholde ſeruantes.
                  
                     Domicilium, a manſyon place.
                  
                     Domicoenium, an home ſuppar.
                  
                     Dominor, ari, to rule or haue ſouerayntie.
                  
                     Domiporta, a pylar or other lyke thynge, that beareth vp an houſe.
                  
                     Dominus, a lord or maiſter, to whom other doo ſeruyce.
                  
                     Dominium, a lordeſhyp or rule ouer other.
                  
                     Lucretius.
                     Domis, was taken of olde wryters for dominus.
                  
                     Domitalis, apte to be tamed or broken.
                  
                     Domitura, the acte of tamynge or brekyng of any wylde beaſte.
                  
                     Domo, aui, are, to make tame, ſommetyme to vaynquyſhe, as Domare hoſtes, to vaynquyſhe ennemyes.
                  
                     Domitor, oris, a tamer or breaker of that, whyche is wylde.
                  
                     Domitio, onis, a retournynge home.
                  
                     Domus, mus, mui, a houſe generally.
                  
                     Domus, domi, mo, a dwellyng houſe.
                  
                     
                        Domun
                              •
                           ula,
                      a lyttell or poore houſe.
                  
                     Donum, a gyfte or rewarde.
                  
                     Donarium, a howſe, where ſuche thynges were kepte, that were gyuen to the goddes. It is ſometyme taken for a gyft or rewarde.
                  
                     Donatiuum, a gyfte in money or grayn, giuen by emperours vnto the people. alſo to ſowldiours aboue their wages.
                  
                     Donatiuus, he that is able to gyue.
                  
                     Donatus, he to whom any thynge is giuen. rewarded.
                  
                     Donax, cis, a reede or cane, whereof they made arowes.
                  
                     Donec, vatyll. ſometyme as longe. Donec uiuo, as longe as I lyue.
                  
                     Dono, aui, are, to gyue lyberally and frely.
                  
                     Donyſa, an yle in the ſee Aegeum.
                  
                     Dorcas, cadis, a bucke or a doo.
                  
                     Doria, & Dorica, names of countreys ioynynge to Athenes.
                  
                     Dorion, a towne of Achaie.
                  
                     Dores, people in Grece nygh to Aetolia.
                  
                     Doris, a Nimph of the ſee, and is interpretate bytterneſſe.
                  
                     Dormio, miui, ire, to ſlepe.
                  
                     Dormito, aui, are, to ſlepe ſoundely.
                  
                     Dorſualia, panels, which horſes do weare on their backes, whan they carie or drawe.
                  
                     Dorſuarius, ia, um, that whiche beareth or carieth any thinge on the backe.
                  
                     Dorſum, a backe of man or beaſte.
                  
                     Dorilaus, the name of a riuer in Phrigia.
                  
                     Doryphorus, a yoman of the gard, or other lyke, whiche for gardyng of his mayſters perſon, beareth alway a iauelyn or byll.
                  
                     Dos, dotis, dowery, lande gyuen in maryage, to the huſbande or wyfe, for cauſe of the mariage onely.
                  
                     Dotes animi, indowmentes of the ſowle, that is to ſay, vertues and good maners.
                  
                     Dotes corporis, indowmentes of the body, that is to ſay, beautie, ſtrength, helth. &c.
                  
                     Dotalis, le, that pertayneth to dowerie, as bona dotalia.
                  
                  
                     Doto, aui, are, to indowe.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶D ante R.
                  
                     DRachma, ae, a poiſe or weyght, ponderynge .lx. where cornes, taken out of the myddes of the eare. Alſo a coyne of Athenes, ſigned with a bullocke.
                  
                     Draco, nis a dragon.
                  
                     Draconarius, a ſtanderde bearer.
                  
                     Dracones, of Plinie be taken for old branches of vynes. alſo it is an herbe, which is otherwiſe called Pyretum, it bourneth and byteth the tongue, as welle the leaſe as the roote.
                  
                     Draconites, a precious ſtone, taken out of the heed of a dragon, whyle he lyueth.
                  
                     Dracontium, an herbe called dragons.
                  
                     Dracunculus, a lyttell dragon.
                  
                     Dragma, a grype or hande full.
                  
                     Dracontia, an herbe called dragons.
                  
                     Drama, matis, where in a comedy or interlude, dyuers perſonages be broughte in, ſome abydyng, ſome departynge.
                  
                     Drangiana, a prouince in Aſia the more.
                  
                     Drepanum, the name of a citie.
                  
                     Dromedarius, a beaſte lyke to a camell, but of a wonderfull ſwiftenes.
                  
                     Dromus, the place where men do rounne horſes.
                  
                     Drupae, a kynde of olyues.
                  
                     Druſus, the name of a Romayne, of ryght noble lynage, and eloquence: but he was proude and ambicious.
                  
                     Dryas, the propre name of a man of Theſſaly, frende of Neſtor.
                  
                     Dryades, were fairies of woddes.
                  
                     Dryidae, ſiue Druidae, were in the olde tyme religious, or rather ſuperſtitious perſones in Fraunce, whiche vſed arte magike.
                  
                     Drylon, a ryuer of Dalmacie.
                  
                     Drymodis, afterwarde Pelaſgus, is nowe called Archadie.
                  
                     Dryos, ſlyme growynge in okes.
                  
                     Drypetae, a kynde of olyues.
               
            
            
               
               
                  D, ante V.
                  
                     DVbio, aui, are, to be in doubte.
                  
                     Plaut.
                     Dubiat quid agat. He is in doubte, what he ſhulde do.
                  
                     Dubito, aui, are, to be in doubte, or to tracte tyme.
                  
                     Dubitatio, & dubietas, doubte.
                  
                     Dubitanter, dubitatim, doubtfully.
                  
                     Dubius, a, um, doubtfull, Dubius is he that hath two wayes, and woteth not whiche to take.
                  
                     Ducatus, tus, the act of a capteyn, or guyde. Alſo a duchy. alſo Ducatus, ti, a coyne callid a ducat.
                  
                     Ducenarius, a captayne of .CC. men.
                  
                     Duco, xi, cere, to leade them that be wyllynge, to haue reſpecte to a thynge. ſome tyme it ſignifieth to allecte or ſtyrre with ſome pleaſaunt meane. alſo to reuolue: alſo to drawe, as a man draweth a ſworde, alſo to gette. ſometyme it ſignifieth doinge, as Ducere ſomnos, to ſlepe. Alſo to buylde or make vp. ſomtyme to tourne away. as Ducere uultus, to tourne awaye the viſage. to delaye or prolonge. to go downe. Ego me duco ab arbore, I wente downe of the tree. Alſo to wedde, or do the act of mariage.
                  
                     Varro.
                     Duco, aui, are, to gouerne.
                  
                     Ductarius funis, a corde that is drawen.
                  
                     Ductilis, & ductile, eaſy to be drawen.
                  
                     Ductim, with leyſour.
                  
                     Ductiro, aui, are, to leade aboute often.
                  
                     Ducto, aui, are, to leade aboute.
                  
                     Dudum, but late.
                  
                     Duella, a poyſe, contaynynge .ii. drammes and .ii ſcruples.
                  
                     Duello, aui, are, to fyghte within lyſtes, or in battayle.
                  
                     Duellator, he that dothe battayle.
                  
                     Duellona, men in olde tyme called Bellona.
                  
                  
                     Duillus, a citeſens name of Rome, whiche Duelium, battayle. fyrſt tryumphed for victorie on the ſee.
                  
                     Duis, of the auncient writers was vſed for dederis.
                  
                  
                     Dulcadium, euery ſwete meate.
                  
                     Dulcis, & dulce, ſwete.
                  
                     Dulcedo, Dulcitas, Dulcitudo, & Dulcor, ſweteneſſe.
                  
                     Dulceſco, ſci, ſcere, to become ſwete.
                  
                     Dulciarius panis, a marchepayn made with almondes and ſugar.
                  
                     Dulciarius, a paſtlar.
                  
                     Dulcifluus, flowynge ſwetely.
                  
                     Dulciloquus, he that ſpeaketh ſwetely.
                  
                     Dulciſonus, ſownynge ſwetely.
                  
                     Dulco, caui, dulcare, to make ſwete.
                  
                     Dulia, the ſeruyce of a bondeman or ſlaue.
                  
                     Dulichium, an ile in the ſee Maliake, or as ſome ſaye, Ionio.
                  
                     Dum, ſometyme ſignifieth whan, or whiles, as, Dum dormis, fures domū intram, whyles thou ſlepeſt, theues entre in to the houſe. ſomtyme vntyll, ſomtyme as longe. Alſo it ſignifieth wherfore: alſo, ſo that. ſomtyme it doth but make vp a worde: as, Adeſdū, paucis te uolo, Come hyther, I wolde a fewe thynges with the.
                  
                     Dummodo, ſo that.
                  
                     Dumtaxat, onely.
                  
                     Dumetum, a thorny or buſſhy grounde.
                  
                     Dumus, all kyndes of thornes or breres.
                  
                     Duo, two.
                  
                     Duo, dui, ere, to gyue.Plautus.
                  
                  
                     Duodeni, twelue togyther. Vide deni.
                  
                  
                     Duplaris numerus, a nombre doubled.
                  
                     Duplares, knyghtes, or ſuche ſouldiours as had double alowaunce.
                  
                     Duplex, duplicis, double, or two.Cato de re ruſtie.
                  
                  
                     Duplico, aui, are, to make double.
                  
                     Dupli, double ſo moche.
                  
                     Duplus, a, um, double.
                  
                     Durabile, durable.
                  
                     Dutacinae vuae, grapes with thicke ſkynnes.
                  
                     Duram, ſome thinke to be the name of a ryuer, nere to whiche the gyantes made the towre Babel: Some woll it to be a fielde,Daniel. 3. as in Daniel.
                  
                     Duramen, & duramentū, the arme of a vyne.
                  
                     Durateus, ea, um, wodden, or of wodde.
                  
                     Duré, & duriter, hardly, or cruelly.
                  
                     Dureo, rui, ere, to be harde or cruell.
                  
                     Dureſco, ſci, ſcere, to waxe harde.
                  
                     Dureta, the Spayniardes call a veſſell, that they vſe to waſſhe and bayne them in.
                  
                     
                        Duria, or Turia,
                      the name of a ryuer nere to Valentia.
                  
                     Duricia, & duricies, hardnes.
                  
                     Duro, aui, are, to indure, to ſuſtaine or ſuffre.
                  
                     Durus, ra, rum, harde, paynfull, or cruell.
                  
                     Dux, ducis, a capitayne or leader.
               
            
            
               
                  D ante Y.
                  
                     DYnaſtes, a lorde, a prince, a ruler.
                  
                     Dynaſtia, myght, power.
                  
                     Dyrrachium, a citie in Cicile, whiche fyrſt was called Epidānus.
                  
                     Dys, in compoſition, ſignifieth yuell, difficile, or impoſſible.
                  
                     Dyſcolia, difficultie.
                  
                     Dyſcolus, intractable.
                  
                     Dyſenteria, frearynge of the guttes.
                  
                     Dyſonoea, difficultie in fetchynge breth.
                  
                     Dyſuria, a ſyckenes, whiche letteth a man that he can not pyſſe, called the ſtrangurie.
               
            
            
               
               
                  
                     
                        ERE TVA, pertainyng to thy profyte.
                  
                     E Republica, concerning the common weale.
               
            
            
               
                  E ante A.
                  
                     EAntes, the name of a ſtory wryter, whiche was in that age, that Pygmalion reigned in the eaſt parte.
                  
                     Eatenus, vnto that, in that maner of wyſe.
                  
                     Ebenus, uel ebenum, a tree, which is blacke in colour, and is odoriferous, whanne it is bourned, it hath vertue to clenſe the eyen. This tree groweth in India, which beinge cutte, wareth as harde as ſtone. Sola India nigrum fert ebenum, India alone bryngeth forth blacke Ebenus. Virg. 2. Geor.
                  
                  
                     Eboratus, a, um, of yuorie without.
                  
                     Eboreus, ea, um, of yuorie.
                  
                     Eboſus, an yle, betwene the Iles Ophiuſa and Pythiuſa, the erthe of whyche yle ſerpentes can not abyde.
                  
                     Ebrio, aui, are, ebriulo, to make drunke.
                  
                     Ebrius, ia, um, drunken. ſometyme abūdant.
                  
                     Ebrietas, tatis, drunkennes.
                  
                     Ebrioſus, a, um, often drunke.
                  
                     Ebron, a mountayne in Paleſtina.
                  
                     Ebudes, yles in the ſee aboute Englande, where the people do lyue by whyte meate and fyſſhe.
                  
                     Ebuleus, the ſonne of Iupyter and Proſ
                        ••
                     pine.
                  
                     Ebullo, aui, are to braſte out, or bubble vp, as water dothe whan it rayneth.
                  
                     Ebulum, an herbe, of ſome called walwort.
                  
                     Ebur, & ebor, oris, yuorie.
                  
                     Eburneus, ea, um, eburnus, of yuorie.
                  
                     Eburones, people of the countreye called Liege, or Luke, beyonde Brabant.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶E Ante C.
                  
                     ECbaſis, a fygure in ſpeakynge, callyd digreſſion, where a manne leaueth for the tyme the principall matter.
                  
                     Ecbatana, the chiefe citie of the royalme of Mede. There is a citie in Syria of the ſame name, ſommetyme called Ephiphania, and maye be writen Egbatana.
                  
                  
                     Ecce, an aduerbe demonſtratiue, whiche ſygnyfyeth, Lo, ſee, proprely where a thyng ſodaynly happeneth. Ecce tibi, wylt thou ſee, take hede.
                  
                     Eccleſia, an aſſembly, a counſayle. Amonge chriſten authours, it ſignifieth the congregation of people in the faythe of Chriſte.
                  
                     Eccleſiaſtes, a preacher.
                  
                     Eccubi, lo where.
                  
                     Eccum, eccam, eccos, eccas, lo he is here: lo ſhe is here, lo theſe men be here, loo theſe women be here.
                  
                     Echemythia, taciturnitie, or ſtylneſſe.
                  
                     Echeneis, a lyttell fyſſhe, whyche retayneth a ſhyppe vnder ſaylle, that he canne not moue.
                  
                     Echidna, a water ſerpent.
                  
                     Echinades, bene Ilandes in the ſee Malyake.
                  
                     Echinus, the vttermooſte ſhaale of a cheſton nutte. It is alſo an Hedgehogge. Alſo a fyſhe lyke to the ſame beaſt, alſo a veſſell of tynne, wherein cuppes be waſſhed. Alſo the name of a citie.
                  
                     Echion, a certayne medicyne.
                  
                     Echioni, Thebans, ſoo callyd of Echyon, oone of the fyue, that holpe Cadruus to buylde Thebes.
                  
                     Echites, a ſtone ſpecked lyke a Serpent.
                  
                     Echo, a ſounde, whyche reboundeth to the noyſe or voyce, that is made in a valay, or in great woddes.
                  
                     Eclegma, atis, a medycyne, whyche muſte not be eaten or chewed: but beinge in the mouthe, ſuffred to ſtyll downe into the ſtomacke by lyttell and lyttell.
                  
                     Eclipſis, a wanynge or faylynge.
                  
                     Econa, an ymage.
                  
                     Econcula, a lyttell ymage.
                  
                     Econtrariò, contrary wyſe.
                  
                     Ecphraſis, a playne interpretation of the letter.
                  
                     Ecquando, at what tyme, or lo whan.
                  
                     Ecquis, but who, ſee who.
                  
                     Ecquid, but what, lo what.
                  
                     Ecſtaſis, a ſtonye, a dampe, a traunſe, whan a man forgetteth hym ſelfe.
                  
                     Ectaſis, a fygure, whereby a ſyllable naturally ſhorte, is produced.
                  
                     Ecthlipſis, where, in, ioyned with a vowell, is not ſowned.
                  
                     Ectropium, whanne the nether lydde of the eye falleth, and canne not ioyne with the ouer lydde.
                  
                     Hecyra, a mother in lawe.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶E Ante D.
                  
                     EDax, edacis, a greatte eater or conſumer.
                  
                     Edo, edonis, the ſame.
                  
                     Edentatus, tootheles.
                  
                     Edento, aui, are, to make tootheles.
                  
                     Edentulus, tootheleſſe.
                  
                     Edera, Iuye.
                  
                     Edeſſa, a Cytie beyonde the ryuer of Euphrates.
                  
                     Edico, xi, cere, to commaunde, to ordeyne, to declare.
                  
                     
                     
                        Edict
                              •
                           ,
                      ordinaunces or commaundementes of them, whiche be in great authoritie.
                  
                     
                        Edo, es, edi, eſum, uel 
                              ••
                           tum,
                      to eate or fede.
                  
                     Ede naſturtium, is applied to a cull & groſſe perſone: and for as moche as Naſturtium, called Creſſis, being eaten, dothe make the noſe tynkell, and therby cauſeth the dulle ſpirites to wake, therfore by this proueth is ment, Plucke vp thy ſpirites: or, awake dullarde or luſke.
                  
                     Edituus, a ſextan of a churche.
                  
                     Edilia, all thynges that appertayne to be eaten.
                  
                     Pac.
                     Ediſſero, ediſſeris, to explane, to declare. Ediſſere fabulam hanc, Declare this fable.
                  
                     Edolo, aui, are, to hewe or cutte cleane and ſmothe.
                  
                     Edom, Eſau was ſoo called, and the countrey where he reigned.
                  
                     Edomus, a hylle nere to Pangcum in the borders of Theſſalye.
                  
                     Edones, people of Thrace, nere to the ſee cooſte.
                  
                     Edonides, were women which ſlutred with a diuyne furoure, dydde celebrate the myſteryes of Bacchus.
                  
                     Edonii, people of Thrace.
                  
                     Edonus, a hyll, where the ſame people inhabyteth.
                  
                     Cicero in Phil.
                     Edormite crapulam, to ſlepe out a ſurfette.
                  
                     Educo, xi, cere, to bryng forth, alſo to drawe out,Virgilius. as, Hoc dicens, eduxit corpore telum, That ſayenge, he drewe the weapon oute of his bodye. Sometyme to reyſe vp.
                  
                     Educo, aui, are, to nouryſhe or brynge vppe from chyldehoode.
                  
                     Educatio, nouriſhyng or bryngyng vppe of chyldren.
                  
                     Edulco, aui, are, to make very ſwete.
                  
                     Edulis, le, that may be eaten.
                  
                     Edulium, is what ſo euer is ſet on the table at diner & ſupper to be eatē, ſaue the breed.
                  
                     Edurum, not harde.
               
            
            
               
                  E ante E & F.
                  
                     EEton, Andromaches father, that reygned at Thebes in Cilicie.
                  
                     Effartio, effarſi, ire, to ſtuffe or fil a thīg.
                  
                     Effari, to ſpeake.
                  
                     Effaxillo, aui, are, to cut of by the arme pit.
                  
                     Effero, extuli, efferre, to cary out or put out. ſometyme to ouercome or ſubdue. alſo to cōmende: ſomtyme to holde vp, to ſet forth: ſomtyme to myniſſhe or appayre.
                  
                     Effero, aui, are, to make ymages of wylde beaſtes.
                  
                     Efficax, acis, effectuell.
                  
                     Efficaua, effect or vertue.
                  
                     Efficio, eci, icere, to brynge to effect.
                  
                     Effectus, effect.
                  
                     Effigles, a ſigne made to the l
                        ••
                     ely ſimilitude of man or beaſt.Plaut.
                  
                  
                     Effigia, the ſame.
                  
                     Effiugo, xi, gere, to make lyke.
                  
                     Efflagito, aui, are, to deſyre or aſke a thynge impo
                        •••
                     nately.
                  
                     Efflictim, excedyngly.
                  
                     Efflo, aui, are, to blowe away, or blow forth.
                  
                     Effloreo, & effloreſco, to blo, as a flour doth at the firſt commynge out.
                  
                     
                        Effl
                              •
                           o, 
                              •
                           xi, ere,
                      to flowe or rounne out, as water dothe out of a fountayne.
                  
                     Effodio, ſsi, & di, ere, to dygge oute.
                  
                     Effoemino, aui, are, to effeminate or make delycate.
                  
                     Effoeminati, m
                        •
                     nne wanton and delicate, or tender, enduryng no hardneſſe.
                  
                     Effoeta, ſhe that hath lately brought forthe a chylde. Alſo a womanne paſte teemynge. Terra effoeta, land: ſpent or worne with bearynge of moche grayne.
                  
                     Effoetus, ta, tum, barayne, conſumed, feble.
                  
                     Effrenus, na, num, without a beydell.
                  
                     Effugio, gi, ere, to eſcape.
                  
                     Effundo, fudi, ere, to powre out. ſomtyme it ſignifyeth to conſume, to put out.
                  
                     Effuſus, ſa, um, diſcomfited, ſcattered, putte oute, or powred out.
                  
                     Effugium, diſcomfiture, or flyght.
                  
                     Effutio, iui, ire, to ſpeake vnaduiſedly, or folyſhely, or haſtily.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶E ante G.
                  
                     EGelaſte, a towne in the hyther Spayn.
                  
                     Egelidor, aris, to relent or diſſolue, as yſe that thawith.
                  
                     Egenus, nedy, or lackynge ſomwhat.
                  
                     Egeo, egui, ere, to nede or lacke.
                  
                     Egens, lackynge.
                  
                     Egeſta, a citie in Sicile, whiche Aeneas buylded.
                  
                     Egeſtas, tatis, neceſſitie or lacke of thynges neceſſary, pouertie.
                  
                     Egero, ſsi, rere, to beare out.
                  
                     Egeſtoſus, a, um, very poore.
                  
                     Egredior, eris, gredi, to go forth, or go out.
                  
                     Egregius, a, um, excellent.
                  
                     Egregie, excellently.
                  
                     Egurgito, aui, are, to drawe out, as lycoure out of a place.
               
            
            
               
                  E ante H, & E ante I.
                  
                     EHo, an Interiection of callynge. it ſignifieth howe. Eho dum ad me, Howe come hyther to me.
                  
                     Eia, ſommetyme it exhorteth, ſommetyme it blameth.
                  
                     Eiiceo, eieci, eiicere, to caſt out, or put out.
                  
                     Eiectitius, a, um, beinge caſte out.
                  
                     Eiulo, aui, are, to crie oute, to wayle.
                  
                     Eiurare, to do beſyde the lawe.
                  
                     
                     Eiuſmodi, & eiuſcemodi, the ſame.
                  
                     Eiuſdem farinae, of the ſame ſort or cōdiciō.
                  
                     Eiuſdē notae, of the ſame eſtimatiō or ſtate.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶E Ante L.
                  
                     ELabor, eris, elabi, elapſum, to ſlyppe or ſlyde. ſometyme to eſcape.
                  
                     Elaboro, aui, are, to labour.
                  
                     Elacateria, a ſawce vſed in the olde tyme.
                  
                     Elamitae, be called the prynces of Porſyanes, of Elam the ſonne of Sem, as Ioſephus ſayth.
                  
                     Elatus, proude, hyghe.
                  
                     Elea, a citie in the countrey of Lucania.
                  
                     Eleates, a man of that citie.
                  
                     Electio, onis, an election, an approbation.
                  
                     Electo, aui, are, to choſe.
                  
                     Electrum, that whiche is in engliſhe called ambre, wherof beades be made, It is alſo taken for a mettalle, parte golde, parte ſyluer. Plin.
                  
                  
                     Eleemoſina, almeſſe.
                  
                     Elegans, tis, elegaunte, freſſhe, gorgyous, cleane, polyte.
                  
                     Elegantia, elegancy, gorgiouſnes, clennes, beautie in wordes.
                  
                     Elegia, a lamentable ſonge or verſe.
                  
                     Elegus, the ſame.
                  
                     Elegiacus, ca, cum, pertaynynge therto.
                  
                     Elegiographus, a writer of lamentable verſis, or balades.
                  
                     Elego, elegi, eligere, to choſe.
                  
                     Elei, people in Grece in the countrey ſome tyme called Peloponeſſus, nowe Morea.
                  
                     Elementa, the fyrſte or pryncipall mattier, wherof al thinges do take their beginning: whiche be foure in numbre, fyre, ayre, water, and erthe. Alſo the letters, wherof ſillables be made, are called elementa.
                  
                     Elenchus, an argument, reprouynge ſubtilly an other argument. It is alſo a table in a boke, to ſhew the places by letter or other wiſe. It is moreouer a great perle, or other precious ſtone, whiche women were wont to hange at their cares.
                  
                     Eleo, eui, ere, to ſpotte, or ſoyle.
                  
                     Elephas, antis, uel elephantus, ti, a beaſt, callyd an olyphaunt. It is ſometyme taken for yuory. ſometyme a ſyckenes callyd lepry.
                  
                     Elephantezographi, be called theſe peynters, whiche peynt with yuorie.
                  
                     Elephantia, ſeu elephantiaſis, a kynde of leprie, wherin the fleſſhe dothe ſwelle, and is full of ſpottes.
                  
                     Elephantiacus, a lepre.
                  
                     Elephantini libri, amonge the olde Romaynes were bokes, wherin their lawes were written, whiche concerned the nobilitie.
                  
                     Elephantinus, pertaynynge to an olyphant.
                  
                     Eleus, a ryuer, whiche watereth a greatte parte of Media.
                  
                     Eleules, a purgation.
                  
                     Eleuo, aui, are, to lyfte vp. ſomtyme to take away, to mynyſhe, to extenuate.
                  
                     Eluſa, an yle agaynſt Cypers.
                  
                     Eluſis, & eluſin, a Cytie in the prouynce of Africa, not farre from Athenes.
                  
                     Eleuſina ſacra, ceremonies of Ceres the goddeſſe.
                  
                     Elutherius, the name of a man, and is interpretate, free, gentyll.
                  
                     Elutheria, freedome, gentylneſſe.
                  
                     Elices, ſorowes in the fieldes, to conueye water.
                  
                     Elicio, cui, cere, to brynge out, to drawe out, to prouoke.
                  
                     Elicito, to drawe often.
                  
                     Elico, aui, are, to tourne vp ſo downe.
                  
                     Elico, onis, he that tourneth thynges oute of order.
                  
                     Elido, ſi, dere, to hytte agaynſte a thynge, to breake, to preſſe out, to exclude, to ſtrangle, to kylle.
                  
                     Eligo, legi, eligere, to choſe.
                  
                     Elimino, aui, are, to putte or caſt forth from a place ferre of.
                  
                     Elimo, aui, are, to putte out.
                  
                     Elinguis, without a tunge, ſpecheles.
                  
                     Elinguo, aui, are, to plucke out ones tunge.
                  
                     Eliquo, aui, are, to melte.
                  
                     Elis, a citie of Archadie.
                  
                     Eliſſa, one of the names of Dido.
                  
                     Elixo, aui, are, to ſethe or boyle.
                  
                     Elixus, a, um, ſodden or boyled.
                  
                     Elychnium, the matche, whiche is in a lāpe, and ſtandeth in oyle.
                  
                     Elogium, a teſtification or witneſſe in wordes, of praiſe or diſpraiſe, of honoure or reproche.
                  
                     Elocutio, onis, a propre fourme of wordes and ſentences.
                  
                     Elongo, aui, are, to remoue fer of, to make longe, to deferre.
                  
                     Eloquentia, eloquence.
                  
                     Eloquium, ſpeche in a pleaſant maner.
                  
                     Eloquor, eris, qui, to ſpeke, ꝓprely it is, whā I ſet a thynge forth in ſpeking, that the herers may vnderſtād it, as I conceyue it.
                  
                     Elotae, among the Lacedemonians was as moche to ſaye, as commune mynyſters or ſeruauntes, as ſergeauntes, or ſuche as in London they do call yomen.
                  
                     Elpenor, a companion of Vlyſſes, whiche with other, Circe tourned into an bogge.
                  
                     Eluceſco, ſci, ceſcere, to be very bright.
                  
                     Eluciſico, caui, care, to depriue of lyght.
                  
                     Elucus, he that is ſycke of the drynke of yeſterday. Alſo a louer of trifles.
                  
                     
                     Elugeo, gi, gere, to leaue mournynge.
                  
                     Elucido, aui, are, to ſhyne or make bryghte outewarde.
                  
                     Eludo, ſi, ere, to mocke or deceyue, Alſo to leaue playenge.
                  
                     Elumbus & elumbis, he that hath feble loines, and can not ſtande vpright.
                  
                     Eluo, lui, luere, to waſhe out.
                  
                     Eluo, aui, are, to lyue in glotony, or to ſpend ſuperfluouſely.
                  
                     Eluſco, aui, are, to make one purblynde.
                  
                     Eluto, aui, are, to ſoke out water.
                  
                     Elutrio, aui, are, to powre out of one veſſell into an other.
                  
                     Eluuies, ordure or fyithe cauſed of aboundance of water, or other lycour.
                  
                     Elyſium, a place where poetes dyd ſuppoſe the ſowles of good men to dwell.
                  
                     Elyſii campi, the ſame place.
               
            
            
               
                  E ante M.
                  
                     EMacio, aui, are, to make leane.
                  
                     Emancipo, aui, are, to infraunchyſe or make free, or ſette at lybertie. ſomme time it is vſed in the cōtrary ſence, to bynd or make bonde. It is moſt cōmonly where a man diſpoſſeſſeth him ſelfe, and doth alienate his lande to an other.
                  
                     Emancipator, a feffour, or alienour.
                  
                     Emaneo, emanſi, emanere, to dwelle out of a place.
                  
                     Emano, aui, are, to iſſue or flowe out.
                  
                     Emanſor, oris, he that wandreth longe, and at the laſte retourneth home: a lurker.
                  
                     Emargino, aui, are, to take awaye ſcurfe aboute the brymmes of woundes or ſoores.
                  
                     Emaſculo, aui, are, to gelde, or to take away the courage of a man, or to abuſe a manne chylde in lechery.
                  
                     Emath, a citie that is nowe called Antioch.
                  
                     Emathia, a parte of the realme of Macedonia.
                  
                     Emaus, a notable citie of Paleſtine, which nowe is called Nicopolis.
                  
                  
                     Emax, cis, he or ſhe that is redye to bye any thynge.
                  
                     Emacitas, tatis, redynes or cuſtome to bye.
                  
                     Embamma, matis, ſawce.
                  
                     Emblema, blematis, pictures made of wod, ſtone, or mettal, of one colour, ſet in wodde ſtone or mettall of an other coloure: as we ſee in cheſſe bourdes or tables, callid coū
                     ters: it is moche vſed in Italy.
                  
                     Embrio, onis, ſignifieth the childe conceyued before it receiueth perfecte ſhappe of a man or woman.
                  
                     Emedullo, aui, are, to take out marowe.
                  
                     Emendico, caui, care, to aſke in fourme of beggynge.
                  
                     Emendo, aui, are, to amende.
                  
                     Emergo, emerſi, gere, to iſſue or come oute of the place where a thinge is drowned.
                  
                     Emereor, emereri, to deſerue to the vttermooſte.
                  
                     Emeriti milites, old worne ſouldiours, whiche were pardoned of warres, & not withſtandynge had pencyons, which were called Emerita ſtipendia.
                  
                  
                     Emineo, eminul, eminere, to ſhewe or excel aboue all other, to be higher than other.
                  
                     Eminulus, a, um, a lyttell ryſynge in height.
                  
                     Eminus, ferre of.
                  
                     Emiſſarium, a ſluſe, or place to lette water out of a ponde or ryuer.
                  
                     Emiſſarius, ſommetyme it ſignyfieth hym, whiche is ſent before in battayle to eſpie, or to ſkyrmyſhe. ſometyme a ſeruant, whiche is alway at, hand, redy to be ſent forth. Alſo it ſignifieth ſuche a perſone, whyche is ordeyned of him that is in any great office or authoritie, to aduaunce his bribery. Alſo it ſygnifyeth a horſe ſtalyon, whiche ſerueth to gette coltes.
                  
                     Emiſsiſsius, a ſpyall.
                  
                     Emitto, miſi, mittere, to ſende forth, to publyſhe, to manumiſe.
                  
                     Emo, emi, emere, to bye.
                  
                     Emodus, a hyll, whiche aboute the border of Indie, is diuided into two bowghtes.
                  
                     Emolumentum, profyte gotten of labour.
                  
                     Emortualis dies, the day of dethe.
                  
                     Emorior, emori, to die vtterly.
                  
                     Empedocles, the name of a Phyloſopher, which ſuppoſed all thynges to haue theyr beinge of amitie, and variance.
                  
                     Emphaſis, an expreſſe ſignification of that, whiche is intended.
                  
                     Emphyteoſis, the making of a thynge better than it was, whan it was receyued or letten, as lande.
                  
                     Emphyteota, he that taketh a thynge, and promyſeth or couenaunteth to make it better than he receyued it.
                  
                     Emphracta, ſhyppes or barges kouered.
                  
                     Empiricus, a phiſition that practiſeth.
                  
                     Emplaſtratio, is graffyng betwene the bark and the wodde.
                  
                     Emplaſtrum, a playſter.
                  
                     Emporetica charta, paper, wherin marchantes or groſſers do putte their wares.
                  
                     Emporium, a place wherin is kept a marte or fayre.
                  
                     Emporeuma, ſhepmanſhyppe.
                  
                     Emptitius, a, um, that whiche is or maye be boughte.
                  
                     Emptito, aui, are, to vſe to bye.
                  
                     Emunctorium, an inſtrument, wherwith the ſhuffe of a candell is taken away, a ſhuffer.
                  
                     
                     Emungo, xi, gere, to ſnuffe a candelle. Alſo to make cleane a mans noſe. ſomtyme it ſignifyeth to diſpoyle a man of money, proprely by crafte.
                  
                     Terentius Horatius.
                     Emunctus auro, ſpoyled of his treaſure.
                  
                     Emunctae naris, of a cleane and ſure iudgemente.
                  
                     Emuſsicata, made or wrought by rule.
               
            
            
               
                  E ante N.
                  
                     EN, loo, ſee.
                  
                     Energia, a demōſtration, whan a thing is ſo diſcryued, that it ſeemeth to the reder or herer, that he beholdeth it, as it were in doinge.
                  
                     
                        En
                              •
                           aema,
                      an innouation or renewynge. It was amonge Iewes the feaſte of dedication of their temple.
                  
                     Encanthis, a diſeaſe in the eies.
                  
                     
                        Encanſ
                              •
                           ū,
                      vernyſhe, enamyll, or other pycture, wrought with fyre.
                  
                     Enchaldion, a handell of a thyng. ſomtime a dagger, ſomtyme that part of an ore, that the water man holdeth. It is vſurped for a boke in ſo lyttell a volume, that a man maye alway carye it with hym.
                  
                     Enduros, a beaſte bredde in the oriente, as great as a bull.
                  
                     Enchinia, thynne oyntementes.
                  
                     Encumbomata, maydens kyrtelles, or pety 
                        ••
                     etes.
                  
                     Encychos, & Encyclia, the cyrkle or courſe of all doctrines.
                  
                     Encyclopaedia, that lernynge whiche comprehendeth all lyberall ſciences & ſtudies.
                  
                     Endelechia, a conſuminate perfection, whiche Ariſtotle dyd put beſides the foure elementes.
                  
                     Endeploro, aui, are, to make interceſſyon with teares.
                  
                     Endoprocinctum, whan men wente oute of the campe vnto battayle.
                  
                     Endromis, midis, a mantell ſuche as Iriſhe men and women do nowe weare.
                  
                     Endymion, the name of a manne, whiche founde the courſe of the mone. wherfore the poetes fayned, that the moone loued hym, and deſcended downe to kyſſe hym, whyles he ſlepte.
                  
                     Enérgia, an efficacie or operacion.
                  
                     Energificus, effectuall.
                  
                     Eneruo, aui, are, to debilitate or make feble.
                  
                     Eneruis, & Eneruus, without ſynewes.
                  
                     Engaddi, a citie in Iudea, from whens the precious balme cometh.
                  
                     Enim, forſothe. ſometyme it is expletine, and dothe but fylle vp a ſentence, to make it ſounde well. ſometyme it is a copulatiue: Sed enim, but foraſmoche.
                  
                     Enipeus, a ryuer of Theſſaly, nere to whiche the battayle was fought betwene Ceſar and Pompey.
                  
                     Eniteo, tui, tere, to indeuour, to inforce to do a thynge.
                  
                     Enitor, teris, enixus ſum, eniti, idem quod eniteo.
                  
                  
                     Enixe, & Enixum, dilygently with all force.
                  
                     Enna, a cytie of Sycile, ſytuate in a hyghe place.
                  
                     Ennius, the name of an auncient poete.
                  
                     Enoch, a mans name in holy ſcripture.
                  
                     Enodis, enode, without a knotte.
                  
                     Enodo, aui, are, to cutte away the knottes, or to vnknytte.
                  
                     Enormis, enorme, great out of meaſure.
                  
                     Enos, is interpretate a very man.
                  
                     Ens, entis, the beinge of euery thynge.
                  
                     Enſis, a ſworde.
                  
                     Enthymema, enthymematis, a ſhorte or imperfect ſyllogiſme.
                  
                     Enucleo, aui, are, to take out the kernell of a nutte. It is alſo to declare or make playne a ſentence.
                  
                     Enaſcor, ſceris, ſci, to growe or ſprynge of a thynge.
                  
                     Enarro, tare, to tell out at length.
                  
                     Enarratio, a playn declaration or expoſitiō.
                  
                     Enyalius, the ſonne of Bellona.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶E ante O.
                  
                     EO, is, iui, ire, to goo.
                  
                     Eo uenum, ire uenum, to be ſolde.
                  
                     Eon, the compas of the eie.
                  
                     Eò, therfore, foraſmoche, vnto that.
                  
                     Eous, the caſte.
                  
                     Eo uſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , in ſo moche.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶E ante P.
                  
                     EPaminondas, the name of a valiant capitayne of the Thebans.
                  
                     Epanalepſis, a replication or repetitiō.
                  
                     Ephabus, the ſonne of Iupiter that builded Memphis in Aegipte.
                  
                     Eparcus, the preſydent of a prouince.
                  
                     Epauxis, an increaſe.
                  
                     Ephebia, the age wherin oone entreth into the ſtate of a man .xv. or .xvi. yeres.
                  
                     Ephebus, he that is of that age.
                  
                     Ephemeris, a boke, wherin is written that, which is done daily, or a boke of reckning.
                  
                     Ephemerinos, a feuer contynuyng one day.
                  
                     Ephi, a meaſure conteynynge .iii. buſhels.
                  
                     Ephippium, the harneis of a horſe or mule.
                  
                     Ephori, greate officers amonge the Lacedemonians, by whome the kynges power

was reſtrayned.
                  
                     Ephira, re, or Ephire, res, a towne of Achaie, whiche nowe is called Corinthus.
                  
                  
                     Epialos, a feuer cauſed of fleume.
                  
                     Epibata, a ſouldiour on the ſee.
                  
                     Epibatra, the ladder that gothe vp to the toppe caſtell.
                  
                     Epicharmus, the name of an excellent phyloſopher of Syracuſe.
                  
                     Epicheremata, argumentes made in reaſonynge.
                  
                     Epicedium, verſis in cōmēdacion of a deed man, a gay laude.
                  
                     Epicterus, the name of a ſtoik philoſopher.
                  
                     Epicurus, the name of hym, which dyd put the principal goodnes in voluptuoſitie.
                  
                     Epidamnus, a cytie in Sycile, but the Romaynes after they had ſubdued it, wolde haue it called Dyrrachium.
                  
                  
                     Epidaurus, a cytie in Grece.
                  
                     Epidicticon, demonſtratiue.
                  
                     Epidromes, the armynge of a nette.
                  
                     Epigloſsis, a ſmall thynge in the innermoſt parte of the tunge, lyke a littell tunge.
                  
                     Epigramma, a ſuperſcription.
                  
                     Epigrammatarius, he that wryteth verſes, called Epigrammata.
                  
                  
                     Epigriphus, he that hath a croked noſe.
                  
                     Epilepſia, the fallynge ſyckenes.
                  
                     Epilepticus, he that hath that diſeaſe.
                  
                     Epilogus, a cōcluſion in writing or ſpeking.
                  
                     Epimenides, the name of a philoſopher.
                  
                     Epinicia, verſes contaynyng prayſes.
                  
                     Epinyctides, a wheale or puſhe, whiche ryſeth on the ſkynne by nyght.
                  
                     Epiphanes, notable, or famous.
                  
                     Epiphania, a manyfeſtation. It is alſo a ſolemne feaſte in the churche.
                  
                     Epiphonema, an exclamation.
                  
                     Epirrhedium, a waggen, or carte.
                  
                     Epirus, a countrey in Grece.
                  
                     Epiſcopatus, a byſhopryche.
                  
                     Epiſcopium, a byſhoppes palays or houſe, or a place to eſpie out of.
                  
                     Epiſcopius, a, um, pertaynynge to eſpiall.
                  
                     Epiſcopus, a byſhoppe, ſometyme an eſpie. ſometyme a clerke of the markette.
                  
                     Epiſtola, a letter ſent from one to an other.
                  
                     Epiſtolium, a lyttell epiſtle.
                  
                     Epiſtomium, a ſpowte ſendynge forth water from a cundite.
                  
                     Epiſtylium, the chapiter of a pylar.
                  
                     Epitaphium, a ſcripture written on a graue or ſepulchre.
                  
                     Epithalamium, a ſonge beinge ſonge atte a weddynge, or verſes made in the praiſe of them that are maried.
                  
                     Epithema, a medicine layde to the regyon of the harte or lyuer, to coole it.
                  
                     Epithetes, a diſceyuer.
                  
                     Epitheton, an addition, proprelye applyed to a thyng for ſome notable qualitie, which it ſygnifieth, as Seuū mare, The rough ſee. Garrula pica, The chatterynge pie. Crudelis Nero, The cruel Nero. Campi florigeri, The flouryſhynge fieldes.
                  
                     Epithymia, miae, concupiſcence, deſyre.
                  
                     Epitogū, i, a garment worne vpon a gowne.
                  
                     Epitome, mes, a brigement, or breuiate.
                  
                     Epitritus, a foote of foure ſillables, of whiche one differeth euer from the other thre.
                  
                     Epitrope, procuration, wardſhyp.
                  
                     Epityrum, a cheſe cake.
                  
                     Epithyrum, a meane to conſerue olyues.
                  
                     Epos, epodos, a kynde of verſe, or ſonge, which contayneth thynges concernyng as well god as manne. Alſo whiche hath the fyrſt verſe lengar than the ſeconde, as, Beatus ille, qui procul negoriis Vt priſca gens mortalium.
                  
                  
                     Epulae, meates.
                  
                     Epulum, a greate feaſte, whervnto all the people aſſembled, whiche amonge the olde Romayns was made either to the honour of ſome of their goddes, or at the burieng of ſome notable perſonage. It may be now taken for a churche feeſt, or feeſt of a brotherheed,Cicero & L. Planco
                           •
                        
                      or dyner made at a buriall or interment. It hath bene ſometyme vſed for a uate bankette.
                  
                     Epularis, are, bilongynge to a feaſte or banket, as Epularis ſermo, cōmunication mete for a feaſte or bankette.
                  
                     Epulor, ari, to eate at feaſtes or bankettes.
                  
                     Epulatorius, ia, ium, apt to be eaten at a feeſt or bankette.
                  
                     Epulis, fleſhe that groweth on the gūmes about a mans tethe.
                  
                     Epulo, nis, plurali epulones, men boden to a great feaſte, or they which come vnboden, to eate the reuercion. Amonge the gentils they were called by the priſtes, to eate that whiche was lefte of the ſacrifice.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶E ante Q.
                  
                     EQuarius, ia, ium, pertainyng to horſes.Vale. Max.
                  
                  
                     Equarius medicus, a horſe leche
                  
                     Eques, a horſeman, contrary to a fote man. ſometime it is taken for a knight. But I ſuppoſe, that amonge the Romaynes, Equites, were taken for theym, whome we calle gentylmen.
                  
                     Equeſter, equeſtris, equeſtre, pertaynynge to eques, as, Equeſtris ordo, the ſtate or degree of gentylmen. Equeſtres copiae, the numbre or company of horſemen.
                  
                     Equeſtria, the places aſſigned to gentilmen,

where they ſatte to beholde any ſolempne ſyghtes or playes.
                  
                     Equidem, verily.
                  
                     Plinius. Varro.
                     Equiſerus, a wylde horſe.
                  
                     Equila, a lyttell mare.
                  
                     Equile, a ſtable for horſes.
                  
                     Equimentum, the hyre of a ſtallyon to ſeaſon a mare.
                  
                     Equinus, na, num, of a horſe.
                  
                     Equio, iui, ire, whan a mare deſyreth to be ſeaſoned.
                  
                     Equiria, runnynge with horſes: a playe dedicate to Mars.
                  
                     Equiſeſſor, a man on horſbacke.
                  
                     Equiſetum, an herbe called horſetayle.
                  
                     Equiſo, onis, a horſebreaker.
                  
                     Equitabilis, bile, able to be ridē, alſo a place in whiche horſes might eaſily walke.
                  
                     Equitatus, an hoſte of horſemen. alſo the acte of ridynge. ſometyme the ſtate or order of gentylmen.
                  
                     Equitium, the eſquirie or companye of the ſtable.
                  
                     Equitius, the propre name of a manne, and ſurname of a familye in Rome.
                  
                     Equito, aui, are, to ryde.
                  
                     Equitatio, a rydynge.
                  
                     Equuleus, a horſecolt. Alſo a maner of turment made of bournynge plates, lyke to a horſe, wherin men were tourmented.
                  
                     Equulus, a nagge or lyttell hors.
                  
                     Equus, a horſe.
                  
                     Equa, a mare.
                  
                     Equus citatus, a horſe taken vp:
                  
                     Equus carpentarius, a carte horſe.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶E ante R.
                  
                     ERado, aſi, ere, to ſcrape of, or out of a thynge.
                  
                     Eraſinus, the name of a ryuer.
                  
                     Eraſiſiratus, the name of a famous phyſytion.
                  
                     Erato, the name of one of the Muſts.
                  
                     Eratoſthenes, the name of a philoſopher.
                  
                     Erciſcere, to diuide, proprely landes.
                  
                     Erciſcundae familiae, of houſeholde to be deuided or parted amonge dyuers heires.
                  
                     Ercinia, a wonderfull greatte wodde in Germany.
                  
                     Ercius, one of the names of Iupiter.
                  
                     Erebus, one of the ryuers of Hell.
                  
                     Eregione, on the other ſyde.
                  
                     Erenata, by occaſion wherof.
                  
                     Erembi, people in Arabia, which go naked.
                  
                     Eremea, uel tua, for my profite or thyne.
                  
                     Eremodicium, a diſcontynuance of action, doone throughe abſence or neglygence of the parties.
                  
                     Eremus, a deſerte or ſolytary place.
                  
                     Erepublica, for the profyte of the publyke weale.
                  
                     Eretum, a ſtreate of the Sabynes.
                  
                     Erga, towarde. Erga feſtum natalis Chriſti, Agayne Chriſtmaſſe.
                  
                     Ergaſterium, a warkehouſe.
                  
                     Ergaſtes, ſiue ergaſticus, a workeman.
                  
                     Ergaſtulum, a houſe, where men were compelled to worke on ſtone or mettall. Nowe is it taken for a pryſone, and ſometyme for the priſoners.
                  
                     Ergaſtularius, the gayler or keper of the pryſone.
                  
                     Ergaſtulus, a gayler. ſometyme it ſignifieth a labourer.
                  
                     Ergaſylus, the propre name of a man.
                  
                     Erginus, was a tyranne, whiche Hercules ſubdued and ſlewe.
                  
                     Ergo, therfore. ſomtyme it is ſpoken dyſdaynouſly. Fac ergo quod libet, Than doo as the lyſte. ſometyme exhortynge. Ergo age, go to. ſometyme it ſignifyeth bycauſe, Illius ergo, for his ſake. Virtutis ergo, bycauſe of vertue.
                  
                     Ergatum, an engyne to drawe vp thynges of great poiſe or weight, callid a crane.
                  
                     Erguminus, a mā poſſeſſed with an yl ſpirite
                  
                     Eriboea, the ſtepmother of Mercury.
                  
                     Erica, an herbe growynge in woddes, and is lyke to maioram.
                  
                     Ericthonius, the fyrſte kynge of Athenes, whiche inuented a chariotte.
                  
                     Eridanus, a ryuer in Italy, now called Po.
                  
                     Erimantus, a diuinour.
                  
                     Erinaceus, an hedgehogge or vrchyn.
                  
                     Erinnys, the name of oone of the furyes of helle.
                  
                     Eriphyle, the wyfe of Amphiaraus, & ſyſtar of Adraſtus, whiche betrayed hir huſbande for a bracelette at the ſiege of Thebes.
                  
                     Eripio, pui, pere, to take awaye, to delyuer.
                  
                     Eripuiſti mihi pecuniam, Thou haſte taken my money from me. Eripuiſti me a periculo, Thou haſte delyuered me frome perylle.
                  
                     Eripuiſti a me librum, Thou haſte taken my boke from me. ſommetyme to make haſte.
                  
                     Eripe fugam, Flee away in haſte.
                  
                     Eris, an herbe growynge in Aegypte, and may be interpretate contention.
                  
                     Erodius, a fowle, the greatteſt that fleeth̄, and ouercometh and eateth the Egle.
                  
                     Erogo, aui, are, to diſtribute.
                  
                     Errabundus, moche wanderynge, or vacabunde.
                  
                     Erraticus, ca, cū, that crepeth here & there, as, Vitis erratica, a crepyng vine, that ſhoteth out in dyuers places.
                  
                     Erratus, tus, erratum, ti, an errour or ſynne.
                  
                     
                     
                        Errone
                              •
                           ,
                      ſtart
                        •
                     rs aſyde, vagobundes.
                  
                     Error, errour, properly where falſehode 
                        〈◊〉
                      affirmed or taken for trouth▪ or trouth for falſehode.
                  
                     Erro, aui, are, to erre, to wander.
                  
                     Erubeſeo, but, beſcere, to be aſhamed, or to bluſſhe.
                  
                     Eruca, an herbe called Rokat. alſo a worme called the canker worme, whiche cōmonly is vpon 
                        •
                     olewortes.
                  
                     Eructo, taui, tare, to belke or broake wynde out of the ſtomacke.
                  
                     Erudero, aui, are, to throwe out, or cary awaye rubbell, as morter, ſtones, and other lyke thynges of olde buyldynge decayed, or pulled downe.
                  
                     Erudio, iui, ire, to teache any arte or ſcience.
                  
                     Eruditio, doctryne or teachynge.
                  
                     Eruditus, lerned or taught.
                  
                     Eruila, a grayne called tares.
                  
                     Erunco, caui, care, to wede out.
                  
                     Eruo, ui, ere, to drawe out with force.
                  
                     Eruum, a kynde of pulſe.
                  
                     Erugo, an vnkindly moiſture, wherby corne growynge is putrified.
                  
                     Plin. lib. 4
                     Erymathus, a mountayn in Archady, where Hercules ouercame a bore, that deſtroyed the fieldes. There are alſo a wodde and a ryuer of the ſame name.
                  
                     Erythace, bees meate, whyle they labour.
                  
                     Erythacus, a byrde called Robyn redbreſt.
                  
                     Erythea, an Ile, the countraye of Gerion, where the ayre is ſo benigne, that men well nere are there immortall.
                  
                     Erytheus, was a kynge of Athenes.
                  
                     Erythios, an herbe called redde betes, as I do ſuppoſe.
                  
                     Erythraeum, is called the redde ſee, this ſee is betwene the Indie & Aethiope occean.
                  
                     Eryx, the name of a mountayn in Cicile, and of a citie theron buylded, wherin was edified a temple to Venus, wherof of Venus is called Erycina.
                  
                     Ouidius.
                     Quid geminas Erycina meos ſine ſine dolores? O Venus, why doeſt thou continually double my ſorowes?
               
            
            
               
                  ¶E Ante S.
                  
                     ESca, all maner of meate, as welle for men, as beaſtes.
                  
                     Eſcarius, a, um pertaynynge to meate.
                  
                     Eſcaria menſa, a table, wherat men do eate meate.
                  
                     Eſculentus, ta, tum, any thynge to be eaten.
                  
                     Eſculus, an oke bearynge acornes.
                  
                     Eſito, aui, are, to eate.
                  
                     Eſſei, certayn religious men of the Iewes.
                  
                     Eſſeda, a wayne.
                  
                     
                        Eſſedone
                              •
                           ,
                      a people, whiche 
                        •
                     oo eate theyr frende
                        •
                     ; whan they be deed, and drynke in the ſculles of their heedes.
                  
                     Eſto, be it.
                  
                     Eſuriales feriae, wake dayes.
                  
                     Eſuries, hanger.
                  
                     Eſurio, iui, ij, ire, to be a hungred.
               
            
            
               
                  E Ante T.
                  
                     ET, and, as well, Te admirantur & ciues & hoſpites, As well thy countrey men as ſtraungers do wonder at the. ſometyme it ſignifieth but, by an interrogation, ſometyme, That is to ſaye, Annos natus 
                           〈◊〉
                         ſexaginta, & ſenex, Nowe thre ſcore yeres olde, that is to ſay an olde man.
                  
                     Etſi, all be it.
                  
                     Etenim, for.
                  
                     Eteſiae, wyndes which do cōmonly blowe in ſommer, about the canicular dayes.
                  
                     Ethalia, the name of an yle in the ſee called mare liguſticum, whiche is by Ieane.
                  
                     Ethanion, the name of a certayne veſſell.
                  
                     
                        Et
                              •
                           ocles,
                      the ſunne of Oedipus and Iocaſia his mother.
                  
                     Ethicus, morall.
                  
                     Ethmus, the myddell brydge of the noſe.
                  
                     Ethnicus, a gentyle.
                  
                     Ethologos, he which with voyce, geſture, and countenance expreſſeth the maners of menne.
                  
                     Etiam, alſo, moreouer, ye, ye forſothe.
                  
                     Etiamnum, alſo.
                  
                     Etymologia, true ſayenge, or true expoſytion, or reaſon.
                  
                     Ethopeia, an imytation of other mennes maners.
                  
                     Ethici pictores, paynters, whiche in pyctures doo lyuely ſette out the maners and affections of men.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶E Ante V.
                  
                     EVado, ſi, uadere, to eſcape, to paſſe with daunger, to appere, to clymme, to delyuer, to be, to come to.
                  
                     Euadne, Mars daughter, of Thebes, the wyfe of Aeſopu
                        •
                     : and the wyfe of Capanei was ſoo called, whyche louyd her huſbande ſo feruētly, that whan ſhe harde he was take at Thebes, ſhe fell nere deed in a ſwowne, and after whan his funerall was celebrate, ſhe l
                        •
                     pte into the fyre.
                  
                     Euaenerus, a kynge of the Lacedemoniās.
                  
                     Eualeo, iui, ere, to waxe hole or ſtronge.
                  
                     Eualeſco, ſcere, to waxe very ſtronge.
                  
                     Eualuo, aui, are, to putte or ſette out of the doores.
                  
                     
                     Euan, an exclamation to the praiſe of Bacchus, and is as moche to ſaye, as Bone puer, O good chylde.
                  
                     Euander, the propre name of Carmentis ſonne, and is interpretate a good man: he lefte his countrey Archadia, and came into Italy, and entryng into the mouth of Cyber, and expulſyng the inhabitantes, reſted in the hylle Palatine, where he beganne to buylde the towne Palanteum.
                  
                     Euaneo, et euaneſco, ſcere, to vaniſhe away.
                  
                     Euangelium, good tydynges.
                  
                     Euanidus, a, um, vnfruitefull.
                  
                     Euapelus, a foole or ideote.
                  
                     Plautus.
                     Euax, an interiection of reioycynge. Euax iurgio uxorem tandem abegi, Heida, I haue yet at the laſte dryuen my wyfe away with chydynge.
                  
                     Euboea, an yle in the greke ſee, & the name of a citie ſituate in the ſame.
                  
                     Eubulus, the name of a ſtorie writer, and is interpretate prudente.
                  
                     
                        Euca
                              •
                           pia,
                      a citie of Phrigia, where growe great plentie of very fayre grapes.
                  
                     Euchariſtia, good grace, a renderynge of thanke. It is nowe taken for the ſacramēt of the aultar.
                  
                     Euchila, meates of good iuyce.
                  
                     Euclides, the name of a famous Geometrycian.
                  
                     Eueho, euexi, euehere, to cary out. ſomtyme it ſygnifyeth to extoll or lyfte vp.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                     Euemerus, the name of an old ſtory writer
                  
                     Euenne, to happen by chaunce.
                  
                     Euênus, a ryuer deſcendyng from Thrace, and deuydynge Calydonie.
                  
                     Euentus, tus, happe. ſomtyme it is taken for the ende▪ or concluſion of a thynge.
                  
                     Euenta, thynges whyche happen in concluſyon.
                  
                     Euentum praeſtare, to waraunt al that, whiche ſhall happen.
                  
                     Euerriator, he that hath goodes of the teſtatour with condicion, that if he performe not his laſte wyll, or do diſtourbe it, he ſhal leſe all that he hath.
                  
                     Euerro, rri, rere, to ſwepe cleane.
                  
                     Euerto, ti, tere, to tourne vp ſo downe.
                  
                     Eueſtigió, by and by, at an inſtant.
                  
                     Euganei, people of Venece.
                  
                     Euganei montes, mountaynes in Italy by Padowe.
                  
                     Euge, well done.
                  
                     Euidens, entis, euident, apparant.
                  
                     Euilla, a countrey in the orient, aboute the whiche the ryuer Phiſon, whiche we calle Ganges, that commeth out of Paradyſe, dothe rounne.
                  
                     Euiratus, of womanly or chyldyſhe condicions. alſo he that lacketh his genitours.
                  
                     Euiro, aui, are, to take away a mannes membres of generation.
                  
                     Euiſcero, aui, are, to bowel or drawe out the guttes of any thinge.
                  
                     Euito, aui, are, to flee, to eſchew, or beware.
                  
                     Eulogium, a worde well ſpoken, a praiſe, a benediction.
                  
                     Eumelus, the ſonne of Admetus, kynge of Theſſaly, gotten on Alceſta his wyfe.
                  
                     Eumenides, furies of helle.
                  
                     Eumolpus, a mās name of Athenes, whom Suidas writeth to be the ſonne of Muſeus the poete.
                  
                     Eumonides, a mans name of Thebes.
                  
                     Eunucho, & eunuchiſo, to gelde men.
                  
                     Eunùchus, a man gelded.
                  
                     Eunomia, a iuſte conſtitution or ordynance of lawes.
                  
                     Euoco, aui, are, to call out, to call forthe, or calle away. Euocare teſtes, to brynge forth wytneſſe.
                  
                     Euocati, ſouldyours, whiche for ſome neceſſitie be ſodaynely called out of the fieldes vnto battayle.
                  
                     Eupalia, a towne in Locris, whiche ſomme call Eupalion, and ſome Eupolyon.
                  
                     Euphonia, a good ſounde.
                  
                     Euphorbium, an herbe.
                  
                     Euphorion, a poetis name of Calcidonye, whom Gallus did tranſlate.
                  
                     Euphraſinū, an herbe called Bugloſſe,
                  
                     Euphrates, one of the ryuers, that comme out of Paradyſe, whiche paſſeth through the citie of Babylon.
                  
                     Euphroſyna the propre name of a woman.
                  
                     Eupilis, a laake in France Ciſalpine.
                  
                     Euryale, the daughter of kynge Minois, whiche brought forth to Neptune, Orion. ther was an other of that name, the daughter of Proetus, kyng of Argiue.
                  
                     Euryalus, the name of one of the princis of Peloponneſe. Virgil feineth a Troyane to be ſo callyd.
                  
                     Euripides, the name of an excellente poete amonge the Grekes.
                  
                     Euripus, a ſmall cundyte ryſynge of a great height. Alſo a diche made to incloſe places to play in, in the ſtede of hedges. ſome do take it for a ſmall ponde or ſtewe.
                  
                     Euripus, an arme of the ſee, or a narrowe paſſage betwene two places.
                  
                     Euronotus, a northeaſte wynde.
                  
                     Europa, that parte of the worlde, whyche we do inhabyte, ſo named and called of Europa, the daughter of Agenor, kynge of Phenice.
                  
                     Eurotas, a ryuer that rounneth before the towne of Lacedemona.
                  
                     
                     Eurus, the eaſte wynde.
                  
                     Euricion, the name of a goldeſmythe.
                  
                     Euricratidas, a man of Lacedemonye.
                  
                     Virgi. Plut. Ouid. Herod.
                     Euridamas, a man of Troye.
                  
                     Euridame, was the wyfe of Leutichis, kynge of Spartans.
                  
                     Eurydice, the wyfe of Orpheus.
                  
                     Eurylochus, the kyng of Phlegia, whiche diſtroyd Thebes, before Cadmꝰ buildid it.
                  
                     Eurypylus, one of the ſonnes of Hercules that reigned in the yle Cous.
                  
                     Eurerpe, one of the Muſis.
                  
                     Eutheca, a ſtorehouſe.
                  
                     Euthymia, quieteneſſe, ſuertie of mynde, or hartis eaſe.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶E Ante X.
                  
                     EX, ſygnifyeth of, or fro.
                  
                     Ex fide, fama. Cic. ad Atticum, Summa erit haec, ſtatues, ut ex fide fama, re
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         mea uidebitur, This ſhall be the hoole effecte, that thou doo, as it ſhall ſeeme to be for myne honeſtie, accordynge to the truſt that I putte in the, and for my profyte.
                  
                     Ex dignitate tua, et ex repub. facis, Thou doeſt accordynge to thyne auctoritie, and for the weale of thy countrey.
                  
                     Exactio, a pyllynge of the people.
                  
                     Exactor, a demaunder of money. ſome englyſhe it a Comtroller.
                  
                     Exactus, ta, tum, paſſed, verye dylygente, exacte.
                  
                     Exacerbeſco, ere, to waxe ſharpe.
                  
                     Plautus.
                     Exaedifico, aui, are, to buylde perfectely. alſo to dryue out of the houſe.
                  
                     Exaggeratio, a heapynge togyther.
                  
                     Exagito, aui, are, to vexe, to angre.
                  
                     Exalto, aui, are, to mounte or lyfte vp, ſome tyme to prayſe very moche.
                  
                     Examen, minis, a ſwarme of bees, Alſo the nedyll or tounge in balaunces and beames. Sommetyme it ſygnyfyeth a iuſte examynacyon.
                  
                     Examino, aui, are, to examyne.
                  
                     Examurco, aui, are, to drawe oyle cleane from the mother.
                  
                     Examuſsim, iuſtely by rule.
                  
                     Exanclo, aui, are, to drawe oute cleane, to emptye, ſommetyme to ſuffre, to make. Non poteſt hic ſine tu
                           •
                         opera exāclari clauꝰ,
                     Pac. This nayle can not be made without thy helpe.
                  
                     Exanguis, exangue, without bloode, tymorous, or fearefull.
                  
                     Exanimalis, without ſowle or lyfe.
                  
                     Ex animo eſt, It is as nature requyreth.
                  
                     Ex animo facio, I do it with my good wyll, or as my mynde gyueth me.
                  
                     Ex animi ſententia, accordynge to myn appetyte, or as I wolde deſyre it.
                  
                     Ex animo illi faueo, I fauour hym with all my harte.
                  
                     Ex animo, aui, are, to kyll,Plaut. ſomtyme to make aferde. Prius
                           
                              
                           
                           quam
                         intus redii exauimatus fui, Or euer I came in agayn, I was made aferde.Q. Cut
                           •
                        iꝰ. 
                     Multos exanimauii rigor inſolitus niuis, The vnaccuſtomed chyllyng of the ſnowe depriued many of their lyues.
                  
                     Exanimus, ma, mum, & exanimis, exanime, deed, put in feare.
                  
                     Exanimatus, ta, tum, made aferde, or troubled in mynde: ſomtime it ſignifyeth deed.
                  
                     Exanio, aui, are, to put cleane away.Colum
                           ••
                        .
                  
                  
                     Exanthema, a wheale or a puſſhe in a mannes ſkynne.
                  
                     Exarefio, exarefieri, to be dried vp.
                  
                     Exareſco, ſci, ſcere, to drie.
                  
                     Exarmo, aui, are, to make tame, proprelye to breake the tethe of wylde beaſtes.
                  
                     Exarmare, to vnarme, or to take harneyſſe from a man.
                  
                     Exarmare nauem, to take away the taklyng from a ſhyppe.
                  
                     Exarmare actionem, to make the accyon faynte or feble.
                  
                     Exaro, aui, are, to eare well, alſo to write.
                  
                     Exaſceare, to polyſhe, or make playn, as carpentars doo after that they haue hewed.
                  
                     Exaſpero, aui, are, to make ſharpe, Alſo to make very angrye.
                  
                     Ex aſſe, of the hole. Haeredem fecit ex aſſe, He made him heire of all the hole.
                  
                     Exauctoro, aui, are, to putte out of wages, ſomtime to diſgrade a knight, or other like.
                  
                     Exauctorati, ſouldiours or ſeruantes putte out of wages, or diſmiſſed of their ſeruice.
                  
                     Exauctoratus, depoſed, or put out of office.
                  
                     Exaudio, iui, ire, to here beneuolentelye or perfectely.
                  
                     Exbaliſto, aui, are, to trumpe or deceyue.
                  
                     Ego hunc communem meum, at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         noſtrum omnium hoſtem exbaliſtabo lepidè, I wolie feately deceyue this min enmy, and al ours in commune.
                  
                     Excandeſcentia, vehement angre or wrath.Plaut▪
                     
                  
                  
                     Excanto, aui, are, to charme. ſommetyme to ſhutte out.
                  
                     Excandeſco, ſci, ere, to be very angry.
                  
                     Excandefacio, feci, facere, to chaufe, or make angry, or to make very hote.
                  
                     Excarnificatus, torne or rente with tourmentes.
                  
                     Excarnifico, caui, care, to rente or cutte in pieces.
                  
                     Excedo, ceſsi, dere, to departe or go forthe, to paſſe or excede.
                  
                     Excello, li, ere, to excelle.
                  
                     Excelſus, a, um, hyghe or great.
                  
                     
                     Exceptio, an exception.
                  
                     Excepto, aui, are, to take or drawe to.
                  
                     Exceptor, oris, he that wryteth faſte that whiche other men do ſpeake.
                  
                     Excerebro, aui, are, to beate out the braynes of any thynge.
                  
                     Excetra, a ſerpent, of whom the heed being cutte of, thre came vp for it. It was alſo called Hydra.
                  
                     Excerno, excreui, excernere, to ſhite. proprely it is to trye out the yll from the good.
                  
                     Excerpo, pſi, pere, to gather here and there the chiefe of any thynge.
                  
                     Excidium, the ſackynge of a towne or citie, or the vtter deſtruction therof.
                  
                     Excido, excidi, dere, to fall out of a thynge.
                  
                     excidere, to cutte out of a thynge.
                  
                     Excidere animo, to be forgoten.
                  
                     Excidere formula, to loſe his action.
                  
                     Excieo, exciui, ire, to moue or ſhake out.
                  
                     Excio, ciui, ire, to moue vehemently, or to call out, to waken.
                  
                     Excipio, excepi, excipere, to excepte, to take or receyue, to trye or inſerche, to ſeparate, to take by crafte, to gather, to hyde, to ſuccede, to reſyſt without any buſyneſſe.
                  
                     Excipere notis, to wryte in cyfer, or other compendiouſe fourme.
                  
                     Excipula, a weele to take fyſſhe.
                  
                     Excipuus, a, ū, wherwith any thing is taken.
                  
                     Exciſo, aui, are, to crop, to teare, or to beate.
                  
                     Exciſus, a, um, gelded.
                  
                     Excito, aui, are, to ſtire, procure, or incorage.
                  
                     Exclamo, aui, are, to crye oute, to calle for al
                        •
                     wde.
                  
                     Excludo, to ſhytte out, to deliuer, to hatche egges, to make to appiere.
                  
                     Excolo, excolere, to garnyſhe or decke.
                  
                     
                        Excompo
                              •
                           i
                              •
                           o,
                      in order appoynted.
                  
                     
                        Exco
                              ••
                           o, aui, are,
                      to plucke of the ſkynne or hyde of a beaſte.
                  
                     Excors, excordis, a foole, or a man hartles.
                  
                     Excreo, aui, are, to ſpytte out.
                  
                     Excrementum, thinges of dygeſtion expulſed moyſte or drie, vrine, or ſiege.
                  
                     Excreſco, excreui, excreſcere, to grow oute, or to growe moche.
                  
                     Excretum, the refuſe or of fall of any thing.
                  
                     Excubiae, biarum, watche, as well by daye as by nyghte.
                  
                     Excubitor, he that watcheth.
                  
                     Eraſmꝰ in Chiliad.
                     Excubitus, watche.
                  
                     
                        Ex diame
                              •
                           ro oppoſita,
                      ſo contrarye the one to the other, that they may neuer agree.
                  
                     Excubo, aui, are, to watche, as they whiche in battaylle, or in the garde of a pryncis perſonne doo.
                  
                     Excudo, excuſi, excudere, to beate or ſtryke out, ſometyme to fynde out with ſtudy. V
                           •
                         primum ſilicis, ſcintillam excudit Achates,
                     Verg
                           •
                        
                      As ſoone as Achales had ſtryken fyre of the flynte. Alſo to hatche.
                  
                     Excutio, aui, are, to put out of court▪ 
                     Apollonium ideo excuriauit, quia nihil habebat,
                     Ve
                           •••
                        
                        ▪
                      Therfore dyd he put Apolonius out of the courte, bycauſe he had nothyng.
                  
                     Exaehite, to be pacified,C
                           •
                        ſ
                           ••
                        
                        ▪
                      to be aſſuagid of ire
                  
                     Excurſio, a digreſſion in ſpeakynge, a ſkyrmyſhe in warres.
                  
                     Excuſo, aui, are, to excuſe.
                  
                     Excuſatoria epiſtola, a letter of excuſe.
                  
                     Excuſſorium cribrum, a rengyng ſyue. alſo a bulter.
                  
                     Excutio, ſsi, tere, to ſhake, to chooſe.
                  
                     Excuſſus, a, um, ſhaken.
                  
                     Excuſſores equi, gambaldynge horſes.
                  
                     Exdecimo, aui, are, to tythe out.
                  
                     Exdiſpoſito, by an order, of a purpoſe.
                  
                     Exdorſuo, aui, are, to breake the backbone.
                  
                     Execo, aui, are, to cutte withoute.
                  
                     Exectus, gelded.
                  
                     Execro, aui, are, to abhorre, to curſe.
                  
                     Execratio, curſynge.
                  
                     Exedo, di, dere, to eate, as a worme or ſoore dothe, to eate vp.
                  
                     Exedra, a parlour, or other lyke place.
                  
                     Exegematicus, a forme of ſpekyng, where the poete onely ſpeaketh.
                  
                     Exemplum, an example to folowe, eſchewe, or beware.
                  
                     Exemplar, a ſample, wherby we attempt to make a thynge lyke to it. ſomtyme the one is vſed for the other. oftentymes they both do ſignifye an example, where one thynge is compared with an other.
                  
                     Exemptus, exempt or priuileged.
                  
                     Exemptus eſt rebus humanis, he is deed.
                  
                     Exemptilis, exemptile; that whiche may be taken away, or taken out.
                  
                     Exeo, exiui, exire, to go out, to exchewe, to braſte oute. In memoriam exire, to be in remembraunce. Exit in fabellam, It is made a fable. Exit de poteſtate, He is not able to gouerne hym ſelfe: he is in warde, or vnder a gardayne.
                  
                     Exentero, aui, are, to make a hole in a thing.
                  
                     Exequiae, funeralles, the whiche are doone in the buriall of any perſon.
                  
                     Exequior, aris, ari, to execute the funerals.
                  
                     Exequor, eris, qui, to do or execute. ſomtime to declare or expreſſe.
                  
                     Exerceo, cui, cere, to exercyſe. ſometyme to driue out of the houſe, to ſette on warke, to vſe. Exercere diſcordias, et ſimultates, To haue variance or contencion. alſo to get or wynne. Exercere ſumptus, To gette theyr expenſes. Exercere tellurem, to tylle welle the grounde.
                  
                     
                     
                        Exer
                              ••
                           o, 
                              〈◊〉
                           ,
                      to amende or repaire.
                  
                     
                        Exer
                              •
                           m,
                      exerciſe or vſe.
                  
                     
                        Exerc
                              •••
                           , taui, ture,
                      to exerciſe.
                  
                     
                        Exercita
                              ••
                           o,
                      exercyſe, vſe, or cuſtome.
                  
                     
                        Exercit
                              ••
                           s, ta▪ tum,
                      exerciſed, 
                        〈…〉
                      labour, weried, hardned.
                  
                     Exercitus, tus, an hooſt of 
                        〈◊〉
                      of wa
                        •
                     te.
                  
                     Statius.
                     
                        Exero, 
                              •
                           rui, erere,
                      to go forth, to drawe out, as a man wyll drawe out a ſworde. Fulgentē
                        
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         exerit enſem, And he drewe oute his bryght ſworde. Alſo to lyfte vp.
                  
                     Exertus, ta, tum, ſhewed forthe.
                  
                     Exerto, aui, are, to ſhewe forth abrode.
                  
                     Exfio, I pourge or clenſe.
                  
                     Exhaeredo, aui, are, to diſherite.
                  
                     Exhalo, aui, are, to puffe oute.
                  
                     
                        Exhaur
                              •
                           o, lui, rire,
                      to drawe oute cleane, to make empty.
                  
                     Exherbare, to plucke vp herbes or wedes.
                  
                     Columel.
                     Exherbandus eſt locus, The place muſte be weeded.
                  
                     Exherbatio, weedynge.
                  
                     Exhibeo, bui, bere, to proſ
                        •
                     re, to ſet abrode, for all men to beholde.
                  
                     Exhibere negotium, to putte to buſyneſſe, or trouble.
                  
                     Exhomologeſis, confeſſion.
                  
                     Exhorreo, rui, rere, to feare horryblye, or with tremblynge.
                  
                     Exibilo, aui, are, to whiſtyll or hiſſe a manne out of the place. Exifilare, idem.
                  
                  
                     Exigo, exegi, exigere, to expell or ſhutt out. alſo to require, to inquyre, to do.
                  
                     Exigere pecuniam, to demaunde money.
                  
                     Exactus, ta, tum, expelled, demanded, perfectly done, or perfourmed.
                  
                     Exilium, exyle.
                  
                     Exilio, lii, iui, ire, to goo out haſtilye, or to leape out.
                  
                     Eximium, excellent, very great.
                  
                     Eximo, exemi, mere, to take away, to except
                  
                     Eximor ex reis, Eximor noxae, I am acquite or diſcharged of the offence or treſpas.
                  
                     Eximor ex aerariis, I am clerely diſcharged of all paymentes.
                  
                     Eximere actionem, to barre the action.
                  
                     Exin, from thensforthe.
                  
                     Exinanio, niui, ire, to emptye, to brynge to nowghte.
                  
                     Exinſperato, vnloked for, whiche no manne hooped.
                  
                     Exiſtimo, aui, are, to trowe or ſuppoſe, to decerne or iudge.
                  
                     
                        Exiſtimatio, ſup
                              •
                           oſel.
                      ſomtime reputation.
                  
                     Exiſto, extiti, exiſtere, to be, to appere, to be ſette vp, or aduanced.
                  
                     Exitiabilis, bile, deedly.
                  
                     Exitialis, le, deadely, or that cauſeth dethe, or myſchiefe.
                  
                     Exitium, dethe, or miſchiefe.
                  
                     Ex iure manum conſerere, to detayne battayle in the triall of ryght.
                  
                     Exlex, he that lyueth without loue, or oute of loue.
                  
                     Exodium, a ſonge at the ende of a comedy or interlude. alſo the ende of a matter.
                  
                     
                        Exoleſ
                              •
                           o, exoleui, exoleſcere,
                      to leaue growynge. ſometyme to growe mightily.
                  
                     Exolerus, he that is paſſed growynge. alſo olde, or out of vſe, it ſignifieth alſo a manne childe abuſed agaynſt nature.
                  
                     Exoluo, ui, uere, to vnbynd, to pay al clerely, to recompence or gyue in rewarde, to delyuer. Suſpitione exoluere, to deliuer frō ſuſpicion. Exoluere religione, to diſcharge from vowe or conſcience.
                  
                     Exocularus, he that hath his eien put out.
                  
                     Exomida, a garmente without ſleues, a taberde or chymere, or ſuche as hermytes do weare, or mūkes whan they do ride.
                  
                     Exopolis, he that dwelleth in the ſubbarbes of a towne or citie.
                  
                     Exorabulum, a crafty forme of deſyryng or aſkynge a thynge.
                  
                     Exorbito, aui, are, to go out of the track or carte loſe, or to go out of the right way.
                  
                     Exorciſmus, an a diuration of comuryng.
                  
                     Exorciſta, an adiurour or coniur our.
                  
                     Exorciſo, aui, are, to adiure or coniure.
                  
                     Exordine, without ceaſſynge.
                  
                     Exordior, iris, iri, to begynne.
                  
                     Exordium, a begynnynge.
                  
                     Exorior, iris, riri, to be borne, to appere out, to ryſe, as the ſunne dothe, to inuade.
                  
                     Exorno, aui, are, to garnyſhe or make faire, to apparayle rychely, to ordeyne. Somme tyme to make foule, or out of apparayle.
                  
                     Exoro, aui, are, to induce or optayne by deſyre, to deſyre hartily.
                  
                     Exors, exortis, out of felowſhyppe.
                  
                     Exos, without bones.
                  
                     Exoſſo, aui, are, to bone, or plucke out boones. Alſo to pulle oute the ſtrynge of a lamprey.
                  
                     Exoricus, a, um, a ſtranger, that is come out of another countrey, and dwelleth here.
                  
                     Expalpo, aui, are, to grope out.
                  
                     Expando, di, ere, to ſprede out.
                  
                     Expapillo, aui, are, to make nakyd to the pappes.
                  
                     Expato, aui, are, to come abrode, or into an open place.
                  
                     Expecto, aui, are, to tarye or abyde, to obſerue or take hede. Expecto quid uelis, I marke what thou wylt ſaye: or elles I deſyre to knowe what thou woldeſt. Alſo to hope. Expectate uenis, Thou comeſt euen as I wolde haue the.
                  
                     
                     Expectoro, aui, are, to put out of the breſte or ſtomacke.
                  
                     Expeculiatus, he that hathe nothynge of his owne.
                  
                     Expedio, iui, ire, to delyuer, to ſpede, to carye out. Expedire manus, to holde vp the handes. Expedit, ſignifyeth alſo, It is expedient or neceſſary. it is come to paſſe.
                  
                     Expeditus, ta, tum, delyuered.
                  
                     Expediti milites, ſouldiors in light harneis.
                  
                     Expeditio, a ſettyng forth toward battayle.
                  
                     Expello, expuli, pellere, to expell or put out.
                  
                     Expendo, di, ere, to ponder or weye, to examyne ſtraytely, to paye truely, to ſpende moneye.
                  
                     Expenſae, expenſes, or diſpenſes.
                  
                     Expenſum ferre, to ſpend or lay out money.
                  
                     Expergiſcere, Expergefacere, Expergificare,
to wake a man out of his ſlepe.
                  
                     Expergiſcor, eris, Expergifio, I am wakyd, or wake.
                  
                     Experrectus, Expergefactus, ta, tum, wakened. Expergitus, ſlepte ynough.
                  
                     Expergo, experrexi, expergere, to waken.
                  
                     Experientia, experience.
                  
                     Experior, iris, iri, to attempte, or aſſaye, or proue.
                  
                     Expertus, ta, tum, attempted, taught.
                  
                     Expertus, a man of experience.
                  
                     Expers, tis, without any parte, lackyng experience. Expers doloris, withoute peyne.
                  
                     Expers mortis, neuer dyenge. Expers lucis, without lyght.
                  
                     Experſus, perſa, perſum, ſpronge with licour or wette.
                  
                     Expes, without hope.
                  
                     Expeto, iui, tii, ere, to deſyre moche, or coueyte, to happen, to wylle. ſommetyme to take, to paſſe ouer.
                  
                     Expilo, aui, are, to robbe, polle, or take by extorcion, or deceyte, to ſpoyle.
                  
                     Expio, aui, are, to pacyfie god with ſatisfaction or prayer, whan we thynke that he is diſpleaſyd.
                  
                     Expiro, aui, are, to dye.
                  
                     Expiſcor, aris, ari, to ſeke for fyſſhe, to fiſhe out, or ſerche priuilye, to gette or wynne. Tandem neſcio quid ab eo expiſcatur, Fynally I can not telle what he wynneth or getteth by hym.
                  
                     Explano, aui, are, to make playne.
                  
                     Ter. Heau.
                     Expleo, eui, ere, to fylle, fulfylle. alſo to ſacyate, to comforte.
                  
                     Explico, plicaui, plicare, to extende. Alſo ſo to vnfolde,Ouidius, to declare. Explicat enſem, He draweth out his ſword. Explicat & caenas unica menſa duas,
                     Martialis. He maketh two ſuppers at one table.
                  
                     Explodo, oſi, dere, to dryue oute with noiſe or rebukes, or clappynge of handes.
                  
                     Exploſus, ſa, ſum, conuicted, or reiected.
                  
                     Exploro, aui, are, to bewayle with exclamation, to ſerch out diligently, to proue with ſerchynge, to be aduyſed, to drye or exhauſte.
                  
                     Explorator, an eſpie, or priuye ſerchour.
                  
                     Exploratus, a, um, well knowen.
                  
                     Expono, ſui, nere, to expowne or declare, to ſet or brynge a thyng out of that, wherin it is. ſometyme to caſte out a thynge, to thintent that it may periſhe. Alſo to ſpend, to ſette forthe.
                  
                     Expoſitio, an expoſytion or declaration, of anye thynge diffyculte or harde to be vnderſtande.
                  
                     Expoſiti, chyldern caſt out, to be periſhed.
                  
                     Expoſititij, the ſame.
                  
                     Expoſco, expoſcere, to aſke or deſyre inſtauntely.
                  
                     Expoſtulo, aui, are, to complayne, to make a quarell. alſo to wyl. Expoſtulare iniuriam, To complayne of wronge or diſpleaſure, to hym that dothe wronge.
                  
                     Expoſtulatio, a quarell or complaynt.
                  
                     Expoſtulator, he that cōplayneth of wrong done by his frende.
                  
                     Exprimo, to preſſe or wring out, to expreſſe or declare playnely.
                  
                     Exprobro, aui, are, to imbraide or twyte. alſo to lay in reproche.
                  
                     Expromito, miſi, mittere, to promyſe or vndertake for an other.
                  
                     Expromiſſor, he that promiſeth, or is ſuretie for an other.
                  
                     Expromo, prompſi, mere, to ſhewe forthe, or open.
                  
                     Expugno, pugnaui, are, to wynne by aſſault or force.
                  
                     Expulſo, aui, are, to meue a thyng with moche thruſtynge, or to put awaye.
                  
                     Expulſor, & expultrix, a putter awaye, man or womanne.
                  
                     Expungor, geris, expungi, to be cancelled or put out, or raſed. it is alſo ſpoken of iuges, whan they be put out of cōmiſſion. It is alſo to quyte, as, Munus munere expungitur, One good tourne is quyte with an other.
                  
                     Expungo, punxi, pungere, to putte awaye, or remoue.
                  
                     Expuncti, were ſouldiours diſcharged, or put out of wages.
                  
                     Expuo, pui, puere, to ſpytte out.
                  
                     Exputo, aui, are, to ſhrede or loppe a tree, to vnderſtande perfytely.
                  
                     Exquiliae, a mountayne in Rome, where watche was kepte.
                  
                     Exquilinus mons, the ſame mountayne.
                  
                     Exquiro, exquiſiui, exquirere, to ſerche out.
                  
                     
                     Ex ſyngrapha agere, to do thinges extremly or rigorouſly: as it were that one ſued another vpon an oblygation ſealyd.
                  
                     Exta, the inwarde: as the harte, the lyuer, the lunges or lightes, and the ſplene.
                  
                     Extemplò, forthwith.
                  
                     Extemporaneus, ea, eum, ſodayne.
                  
                     Ex tempore, ſodaynly, without ſtudy, or for the tyme.
                  
                     Extemporalis, & extemporanea oratio, an oration or matter ſpoken or wrytten without ſtudye.
                  
                     Extendo, di, dere, to extende.
                  
                     Extenuo, aui, are, to mynyſhe or make lytle.
                  
                     Exter, tera, terum, ſtraunge, comen farre of.
                  
                     Exterus, tera, terum, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Exterebro, aui, are, to perce through. Alſo to enſerche curiouſly.
                  
                     Extermino, aui, are, to dryue out, or pulle downe.
                  
                     Pacuuius.
                     Exterminatus, banyſſhed.
                  
                     Externo, aui, are, to make madde.
                  
                     Externus, na, num, whyche is not of that countrey, a ſtraunger.
                  
                     Extero, teri, terere, to beate out. alſo to whette or grynde.
                  
                     Exterreo, ui, rere, to put in feare.
                  
                     Extilio, aui, are, to droppe out.
                  
                     Extimeſco, extimui, extimeſcere, to dreade moche.
                  
                     Extimus, a, um, the outwardemoſt, or laſte.
                  
                     Extinguo, xi, guere, to put out, proprely as fyre, whiche may be efteloones kendlyd: ſometyme it ſignifieth to flee, or deſtroye: ſometyme to make a diſtynction or dyuerſitie betwene thynges.
                  
                     Extiſpices, ſotheſayers by lookynge in the inwardes of beaſtes.
                  
                     Extiſpicium, & extiſpicina, the crafte of ſoth ſayenge.
                  
                     Exto, extiti, extare, to be, to remayne, to be apparant.
                  
                     Extollo, extuli, extollere, to aduant or praiſe.
                  
                     Extorqueo, torſi, quēre, to fynde oute the trouthe by tourmentes, to take awaye by force, or plucke away.
                  
                     Extorris, is he that is made to voyde, or is dryuen out of his countrey: alſo a vagabūd.
                  
                     Extra, without.
                  
                     Ex tripode, whan we ſpeake of thynges, whiche are very true, and nat to be douted, as it were ſpoken of goddis own mouthe.
                  
                     Extrarius, he that is not of the ſame houſe or kynredde.
                  
                     Extrema linea, is ſpoken, where a man wold ſignifie a thing to be laſte, & after all other.
                  
                     Extremis digitis attingere, to towche with the fynger toppes, is ſpoken, where is ſygnified, that a manne hath vnneth touched or felte a thynge.
                  
                     Extra telorum iactum, out of arowe ſhotte, out of gunne ſhotte, ſignifieth out of daunger, or in ſafegarde.
                  
                     Extremus, a, um, ſometyme it ſignifyeth the begynnynge, ſommetyme the ende, ſomme tyme the warſte.
                  
                     Extrico, aui, are, to delyuer, to ſhake of any thynge that letteth.
                  
                     Extrinſecus, outwarde.
                  
                     Extro, aui, are, to goo out.
                  
                     Extrorſum, from without.
                  
                     Extrudo, ſi, dere, to thraſte oute.
                  
                     Extruo, ſi, truere, to ordeyne, to buylde or ſette vppe.
                  
                     Extubero, aui, are, to ſwelle moche.
                  
                     Extundo, tudi, tundere, to fynde oute with moche labour.
                  
                     Exturbo, aui, are, to put away, or to put oute or from a thynge by vyolence.
                  
                     Exubero, aui, are, to abounde.
                  
                     Exuccum, without iuyce.
                  
                     Exudo, aui, are, to ſende forth lycour.
                  
                     Exugo, exugi, gere, & exugeo, to ſucke out.
                  
                     Exul, exulis, a banyſhed man.
                  
                     Exulo, aui, are, to be banyſſhed, to lyue in exyle.
                  
                     Exultabundus, reioyſynge very moche.
                  
                     Exulto, aui, are, to reioyce excedyngely, to bragge, to leape oute.
                  
                     Exundo, aui, are, to ouerflowe.
                  
                     Exuo, ui, uere, to putte of, to diſpoyle, or vnclothe.
                  
                     Exupero, aui, are, to excede.
                  
                     Exurdo, aui, are, to make deaffe.
                  
                     Exuuiae, clothynge. Alſo hydes or ſkynnes of beaſtes. Exuuiae ſerpentis, an Adders ſkynne.
                  
                     Exybaphon, a ſalate of herbes
               
            
            
               
                  ¶F Ante A.
                  
                     
                        FABA, a beane.
                  
                     Faba cudetur in me, The beane ſhall be knockyd on me, ſygnyfyeth the peine or blame ſhal light on me.
                  
                     Fabacia, a beane cake.
                  
                     Fabalia, the refuſe or offall of beanes.
                  
                     Fabariae Calendae, the Calendes of Iune.
                  
                     Fabarius, fabaria, fabarium, pertaynynge to beanes.
                  
                     Fabella, a ſhorte tale.
                  
                     Faber, fabri, almooſt euerye craftes manne that warkethe with the hande. Faber lignarius, a carpenter: Faber ferrarius, a ſmith. Auri faber, a goldeſmythe.
                  
                     
                     Faber, fabra, fabrum, pertaining to a ſmith.
                  
                     Fabre, workemanly.
                  
                     
                        Faber
                              •
                           ime,
                      kunningly, very craftily, or wel.
                  
                     Fabranus, the propre name of a man.
                  
                     
                        Fabiro
                              •
                           ,
                      in the ancient tyme was taken for a maynteyner.
                  
                     Fabius, the name of a noble Romayne.
                  
                     Fabrefacio, fabrefeci, fabrefacere, to warke cunnyngly, to buylde.
                  
                     Fabrica, a warkehouſe, or forge, ſometyme the frame or warke.
                  
                     
                        Fabr
                              ••
                           us,
                      a noble Romayne, who beinge wonderful pore, not withſtandyng refuſed a great ſome of money, ſent to him by king Pirrhus, towchynge with his handes all his membres, and ſaying vnto the kynges meſſangers: As longe as he mought rule all that, whiche he touched, he coulde lacke nothynge.
                  
                     Fabrico, caui, are, & Fabricor, cari, to make, to inuente.
                  
                     Fabrilis, fabrile, bilonging to handy craftis.
                  
                     Fabula, a fable or tale.
                  
                     Fabula palliata, a comedy of Greke.
                  
                     Fabula togata, a comedy of latyne.
                  
                     Fabulator, a teller of fables.
                  
                     Fabulor, aris, ari, to talke.
                  
                     Fabuloſus, moche talked of.
                  
                     Facerſo, ceſsi, ceſſere, to go aboute to doo a thynge▪ ſomme tyme to go awaye. Faceſſe hinc, Get the hens. Faceſsit ubi negotium, he putteth the to buſyneſſe.
                  
                     
                        Fa
                              •
                           etiae,
                      mery wordes or deedes withoute diſhoneſtie.
                  
                     Facetus, ta, tum, mery, pleaſant.
                  
                     Facete, meryly, pleaſantly.
                  
                     Facies, a face, ſometyme the proporcion of all the body.
                  
                     Facile, lyghtly, or eaſily, withoute lette or doubte.
                  
                     Facilis, facile, lighte, eaſye, good to be entreated.
                  
                     Facilitas, eaſyneſſe, gentylneſſe.
                  
                     Facinoroſus, full of myſchief, vngracious, harmefull.
                  
                     Facinus, an acte or dede. ſommetyme an ylle dede.
                  
                     Facio, feci, facere, to doo, to be occupied, to make. Facio plurimi, I make moch of. Floccifacio, I ſette not a ſtrawe by it. Facere uerba, to ſpeake. Facere lucrum, to wynne. Facere ſumptum, to beſtowe coſte. Facere iter, to go or ryde. Facere terrorem, to put in feare. Facere copiam, to gyue leaue. Facere iacturam, damnum, naufragium, to loſe, to take harme, to go to wrecke. Facere, is alſo to ſacrifyce, to profyte. Faciam ut te plarimum amem, I woll loue the moche. Fac te eſſe qui ſum, ymagin that thou were as I am. Facere conuicium, to rebuke, or putte to rebuke. Facere nomina, to gette dettours, as by lendyng: as they do nowe by exchaunge, and in ſhyftes, proprely called vſury: and in bargaynes of corne, cattell, and other lyke, or in letting of landes.
                  
                     Factio, a diuiſyon of people in ſondry opynions. alſo an acte.
                  
                     Factitius, a, um, made or counterfayte.
                  
                     Factito, aui, are, to do often tymes.
                  
                     Factor, oris, a maker, a factour.
                  
                     Factum, a dede.
                  
                     Factum at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         tranſactum, done and brought to good paſſe.
                  
                     Factura, the warke.
                  
                     Facturio, iui, ii, ire, to deſyre to do.
                  
                     Factus, tus, the dede.
                  
                     Facula, a lynke, or lyttel torche.
                  
                     Facularii, torche bearers.
                  
                     Facultas, tatis, power to do or ſpeake. ſome tyme rycheſſe. alſo facultie.
                  
                     Facundus, a, um, eloquent, well ſpoken.
                  
                     Facundia, eloquence, or ſweete and pleaſant ſpeche.
                  
                     Faecatum uinum, wyne that drynketh of the lyes.
                  
                     Faeciniae uuae, grapes, whereof commethe wyne, hauynge moche lyes.
                  
                     Faeculentum, full of lyes or dregges.
                  
                     Faecutinus, na, num, pertaining to dregges.
                  
                     Faex, faecis, lyes, dregges, or groundes of any kynde of lycour.
                  
                     Fagus, gi, a beche tree.
                  
                     Fala, a tower made of tymber.
                  
                     Falcarius, he that fyghteth with a byll.
                  
                     Falcarius, ia, um, pertaynyng to a bylle.
                  
                     Falcatus, ta, tum, hooked, alſo any thynge, wheron be hookes or other lyke thynge.
                  
                     Falcicula, a lyttell hoke or byll.
                  
                     Falcidia lex, wherby legacies were defalcate or cutte of, where the fourthe part of the goodis were not aſſignid to the heires.
                  
                     Falcifer, he that beareth a byll or booke.
                  
                     Falcito, aui, are, to cut with a byll or hooke.
                  
                     Falco, aui, are, to cutte of or mowe.
                  
                     Falco, conis, a hawke.
                  
                     Falernus, a countrey in Campania, now in the royalme of Naples, wherin grewe the beſte wynes of Italy, callyd falernum.
                  
                  
                     Faliſci, people in Italye. Alſo a kynde of puddynges.
                  
                     Fallaciae, deceytefull wordes.
                  
                     Fallaciter, deceytefully.
                  
                     Fallax, acis, a perſon deceytefull.
                  
                     Fallo, fefelli, fallere, to deceyue, alſo to be hydde.
                  
                     Falſarius, a forger of wrytynges.
                  
                     Falcidicus, & falſiloquus, a lyer, or falſe reporter.
                  
                     
                     Falſifico, aui, are, to forge dedes, writinges, or ſeales.
                  
                     Falſitas, tatis, falſehode.
                  
                     Falſo, aui, are, to forge.
                  
                     Falſum habere, to deceyue.
                  
                     Falx, falcis, a hooke or bylle.
                  
                     Fama, fame or renome. ſomtyme opinion.
                  
                     Famelicoſus, often hungrye.
                  
                     Famelicus, ca, cum, hungrye.
                  
                     Famen, faminis, ſpeche.
                  
                     Fameo, famui, ere, to be hungry.
                  
                     Fames, hungre.
                  
                     Famiger, geris, a ſpreder of fame.
                  
                     Famigerabilis, famous.
                  
                     Famigerator, a tellar of newes or tydynges, or a ſpreder of fame.
                  
                     Famigerulus, the ſame.
                  
                     Familia, a houſeholde, a family, or kynred.
                  
                     Familiaria, were places of buryall for men and their ſeruantes.
                  
                     Familiaris, are, pertaynyng to houſeholde, alſo familyar.
                  
                     Familiariter, famylyarly.
                  
                     Famoſus, a, um, famous, as well in good, as in ylle.
                  
                     Famulanter, humbly, ſeruyſably.
                  
                     Famularius, a, um, ſeruiſable.
                  
                     Famulatio, houſeholde, or meyny.
                  
                     Famulatus, & famulitium, ſeruyce.
                  
                     Famulus, & famula, a houſholde ſeruant.
                  
                     Famulor, ari, to ſerue.
                  
                     Fanaticus, madde. In the olde tyme before that Chriſte expelled the dyuel, whan that dyuelles were honoured in ydols, certaine perſones, aſwell men as women, were poſſeſſed with dyuels, which lad them, where they lyſted, agaynſte their propre wylles, and cauſed them to ſpeke wonderful thinges, ſome alſo ſodaynely, and often tymes telle what ſhoulde happen: wherfore they were thought to be inſpired with goddis: thoſe perſons were called Fanatici. Some tyme Fanaticus, is taken for the keper of the Temple or chappell, where the deuyll gaue anſweres.
                  
                     Faneſii, people in the northe partes of the worlde, whoſe eares be ſo great, that with them they keuer all their bodies.
                  
                     Fanum, a Temple, where the dyuell gaue anſweres out of an ydoll.
                  
                     Far, farris, ſometyme ſygnyfyeth all maner of corne. All be it among auncient phiſytions it is taken for wheat meale.
                  
                     Caellu
                           •
                         lib. 15.
                     Farratia, amonge the olde Romaines were the ceremonies of matrimonie.
                  
                     Farcimen, minis, a puddynge.
                  
                     Farcio, ciui, cire, to ſtuffe. Alſo to franke or fede, to be farre, to cramme.
                  
                     
                        Farfarus, or Farfar,
                      a ryuer of Syrie.
                  
                     Faris, fatus ſum, fari, to ſpeake.
                  
                     Farraca, meates made of meale.
                  
                     Farrago, ginis, a myxture of ſondrye kyndes of grayne and corne. Sometyme it is taken for a myxture of thynges good and badde.
                  
                     Farreatio, a ſacrifyce made with cakes.
                  
                     Farreum, a wheaton cake.
                  
                     Farrinus, na, num, & farrinaceus, a, um, pertaynynge to wheate.
                  
                     Farrinariū, a place where wheate or meale is kepte.
                  
                     Farcilis, le, any thynge ſtuffed.
                  
                     Fartile, ſtuffynge, or that wherewith any foule is crammed or franked.
                  
                     Fartim, full ſtuffed or crammed.
                  
                     Fartores, & fartrices, puddynge makers.
                  
                     Fartum, a puddynge.
                  
                     Fartura, the crafte or maner of ſtuffynge or crammynge.
                  
                     Fas, lefull before god.
                  
                     Faſcelis, a name of Diana.
                  
                     Faſcia, a ſwathell or ſwathynge bande, or other lyke thynge. ſometyme any gyrdell.
                  
                     Faſcior, faſciari, to ſwathe a chylde.
                  
                     Faſciculus, a grype, or thyng bounden togither. It is alſo a noſegay, or any thynge knytte togyther, whiche maye be borne in a mannes hande.
                  
                     Faſcino, aui, are, to tranſforme by inchauntment, or to bewytche.
                  
                     Faſcinus, & faſcinum, & faſcinatio, an inchauntmente to transfourme or disfygure any thynge. whiche ſo inchanted, is of the cōmune people called, taken, or forſpoken, or forlooked.
                  
                     Faſciola, a lyttell bande.
                  
                     Faſcis, is a burdeyn or knytche of wodde, or any other thyng. Alſo Faſcis ſagittarum is taken for a ſheffe of arrowes.
                  
                     Faſces, roddes bounden togyther, and an axe in the myddell, whiche were borne before the chiefe offycers of Rome, in declarynge their authoritie, whereof ſome had ſyxe, and ſome mo.
                  
                     Faſellus, a boote.
                  
                     Faſti dies, were certayne days, wherin the offycer of Rome, called Praetor, mowghte ſpeake onely theſe three wordes, Do, dico, addico. It maye be nowe vſed for holy dayes.
                  
                     Faſti, were certayne bokes, wherin were conteyned certayne ceremonies and cauſes of ſondrye thynges amonge the Romaynes, concerninge their feaſtes and ſolemnities, whyche were longe kepte from the knowlege of the common people, vntyll they at the laſte were deuulgate by one Caius Flauius.
                  
                     
                     Faſtidio, iui, ire, to contemne with diſdayne, to abhorre or haue in abomination.
                  
                     Faſtidioſus, a, um, full of diſdayne.
                  
                     Faſtiditus, ta, tum, hatred, abhorred, abhomyned.
                  
                     Faſtidium, hated, proprely where one abhorreth the ſight or preſence of any thing.
                  
                     Faſtigio, aui, are, to make or rayſe vp in heyght.
                  
                     Faſtigium, an altitude, or the top or height of any thynge. Sometyme it ſignifieth the ſtate of a perſone in any dignitie, ſomtyme the ende of a thynge.
                  
                     Faſtigium imponere, is ſpoken whan a man wyll ſignifye a matter or thynge to be fynyſſhed and brought to a poynt.
                  
                     Faſtus, tus, hautenes of mynde, pryde.
                  
                     Fatalis, le, pertaynynge to deſtenye, fatall. ſomtyme mortall.
                  
                     Fateor, faſſus ſum, fateri, to affirme, to confeſſe.
                  
                     Fathiſco, ſcere, to gape wyde, as the erthe dothe in a great drythe.
                  
                     Fatidicus, fatidica, a reder or teller of deſtenyes, or a ſouthſayer.
                  
                     Fatifer, fatifera, a brynger of deth or peſtylence.
                  
                     Fatiloqua, a witche.
                  
                     Fatigo, aui, are, to make wery, to trouble moche, to ſtryke, to ſtere or prouoke, to reſtrayne or lette.
                  
                     Fatiloquus, fatiloqua, a ſothſayer.
                  
                     Fatiſco, fatiſcere, to be wery.
                  
                     Fator, aris, ari, to ſpeake moche.
                  
                     Fatuitas, atis, folyſhnes.
                  
                     Fatum, the ordinance and diſpoſition of almyghty god. Deſteny, goddis prouidence. ſomtyme deth.
                  
                     Fatiuis, an ydiote, that lacketh naturall knowlege.
                  
                     Fauentia, a citie in Italye.
                  
                     Faueo, ui, fauere, to fauour.
                  
                     Fauere linguis, to kepe ſilence.
                  
                     Fauilla, a ſperke of fyre.
                  
                     Fauni, goddis of the woodes.
                  
                     Fauonius, one of the wyndes, called the ſouthweſt wynde.
                  
                     Gel.
                     Fauorabilis, fauoured of many.
                  
                     Fauorinus, the name of a philoſopher.
                  
                     Fauſtulus, a ſhepeherde, whiche was the nouriſher of Romulus and Remus.
                  
                     Fauſtus, a, um, proſperous.
                  
                     Plaut.
                     Fauſtè, proſperouſely.
                  
                     Fauulus, a lyttell hony combe.
                  
                     Fauus, a hony combe.
                  
                     Faux, faucis, a cheke.
                  
                     Fauces, ſtrayght paſſages.
                  
                     Fax, facis, a torche, a candell, or other lyke thynge, whiche brennynge gyueth lyght.
                  
                     Faxim, let me do.
                  
                     Faxint, let them do.
                  
                     Faxo, I wyll or ſhall do.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶F Ante E.
                  
                     FEbricito, aui, are, to be ſycke in a feuer.
                  
                     Febricula, a lyttell feuer.
                  
                     Febriculoſus, he that hath often the Feuer.
                  
                     Febrilis, le, pertaynyng to a feuer.
                  
                     Febrio, iui, ire, to haue a feuer.
                  
                     Febris, a feuer.
                  
                     Februarius, the monthe of Februarie.
                  
                     Februo, aui, are, to pourge ſowles by ſacrifyce or prayer.
                  
                     Februa, ſacrifices and ceremonies for purgynge of ſowles.
                  
                     Februatus, ta, tū, that which was ſo purged.
                  
                     Februum, in the Sabines tounge is callyd purgynge or clenſynge.
                  
                     Faecialis, was a certayne offycer of armes, whiche denounced warre or peace, where as was hoſtilitie or cauſe of battayle: whiche may nowe be taken for an ambaſſadour, ſent for ſuche a purpoſe, or for an Heralde.
                  
                     Fel, fellis, the gaulle. ſometyme it is taken for griefe of the mynde.
                  
                     Felis, a Catte: ſommetyme it ſygnifyeth a weaſyll.
                  
                     Fello, aui, are, to ſoucke.
                  
                     Femen, minis, plurali femina, the inner and backe parte of the thygh.
                  
                     Feminalia, the keuerynge of the thighes.
                  
                     Femur, femoris, the thygh. ſome englyſſhe it the hamme.
                  
                     Femoralia, breeches.
                  
                     Feneſtella, the propre name of a ſtory wryter, whiche flouriſhed in the later dayes of Tyberius Ceſar.
                  
                     Feneſtra, a wyndowe, ſometyme an entrie into a thynge.
                  
                     
                        Feneſtratus, ta, tum, open.
                        Plaut. 
                        Nulla eſt feneſtratior domus,
                      No howſe is more open.
                  
                     Feneſtrenula, a lyttell wyndowe.
                  
                     Ferabites, wylde.
                  
                     Ferae, ferarum, feras, wylde beaſtes.
                  
                     Feralis, le, deedly or mortall, lamentable.
                  
                     Feralia, & feralis dies, a day dedicate to the infernall goddis, to pacifie them towarde the ſoules departed.
                  
                     Feralia, were alſo the ſacryfyces doone for ſowles.
                  
                     Feralia amicula, wyndynge ſhetes, and ſuche lyke thynges, wherin deade bodyes were lappyd.
                  
                     Feralia officia, ſolēnities about deed bodie
                        •
                     
                  
                  
                     Feralis cultus, mournynge apparayle.
                  
                     Feralis dies, the daye of buryenge.
                  
                     Ferax, acis, fruiteful, or that bryngeth forth

moche fruite.
                  
                     Ferbeo, bui, ere, to boyle or ſethe.
                  
                     Ferculum, a dyſſhe with meate. Alſo a pagent, caryed or borne to be loked on. ſometyme it ſignifieth the ſtage or place, wherin the pagent is.
                  
                     Ferè, almoſte, nygh, welnygh.
                  
                     Ferentarii, men armed in lygyt harnes, redy to come quickly to ſocours: whiche ſought with dartes, ſwordes, or ſlynges.
                  
                     Ferentinum, a citie, whiche after Plini. ſtandeth in the fyrſt region of Italye.
                  
                     Ferentum, a towne of the Sabius, or Samnites.
                  
                     Ferettius, a name of Iupiter, gyuen by Romulus, the firſt kynge of Romanes.
                  
                     Feretrum, a beere, wheron deed bodies are borne. ſomtyme a thinge, wheron ymages, relikes, or iewelles are borne.
                  
                     Feretrus, a mountayne, of whiche the houſe of Pheretre was named, of which the duke of Vrbyne is deſcended.
                  
                     Feriae, feriarum, ferias, holy dayes.
                  
                     Ferinus, na, num, wylde as a beaſt.
                  
                     Ferio, percuſsi, ferire, to ſtryke, to ſtablyſhe, to knocke.
                  
                     Ferire foedus, to make a league or truſe.
                  
                     Ferire iugulum, to ſlee, to hit the marke.
                  
                     Ferior, aris, ari, to ceſſe from labour.
                  
                     Feriatus, vnoccupyed or ydell.
                  
                     Feritas, tatis, a naturall wyldnes.
                  
                     Fermé, almoſte, welnygh.
                  
                     Fermenteſcere, to increaſe or waxe.
                  
                     Fermento, taui, are, to meddel or myxt well togyther, as leuen with dow. alſo to leuen.
                  
                     Fero, fers, tuli, ferre, to beare, to ſuffre, to leade or brynge, to ſaye, to name, to deſyre, to brynge forth, to haue, to boſte. Ferre ad populū, to aſke the people aduyſe. To take away, to receyue, to optayne, to accuſtome.
                  
                     Ferre fortunam, to vſe fortune: Ferre in oculis, to fauour moche.
                  
                     Ferre acceptum, to receyue, to wryte that whiche is receyued, to knowlege to haue receyued a benefyte or profyte.
                  
                     Ferre expenſum, to ſpende or laye out, to wryte expenſes, to beſtowe.
                  
                     Ferocio, ciui, cij, cire, to be fierſe.
                  
                     Ferocitas, tatis, fierſnes.
                  
                     Ferociter, fierſely.
                  
                     Feronia, the goddeſſe of woodes. alſo a citie vnder the hyll Soractes.
                  
                     Ferox, ferocis, fierſe, hardy.
                  
                     Ferramentarij, they whiche warke in yron.
                  
                     Ferramentum, an inſtrumēt or tole of yron.
                  
                     Ferraria, an yron Myne.
                  
                     Ferrarius, a, ū, ꝑtaynyng to yron, or of yron.
                  
                     Ferre iudicem, to agree to the ſentence or iudgement.
                  
                     Ferreus, ea, cum, of yron.
                  
                     Ferro, aui, are, to ſette yron on.
                  
                     Ferratus, ta, tum, hauyng yron on it, or cloſyd in yron.
                  
                     Ferrugineus, a, um, grene coloure.
                  
                     Ferrugo, ginis, ruite of yron, a murray colour, ſome calleth it a ſadde blewe.
                  
                     Ferrum, yron, ſometyme weapon.
                  
                     Ferrumen, minis, glewe, ſyſe, ſowder, or ſuche other byndynge or cleauynge matter.
                  
                     Ferrumino aui, are, to ioyne or myxe togyther, proprely mettalles, to ſowlder.
                  
                     Fertilis, le, fertile, or fruitefull.
                  
                     Fertum, a Cake made of ſondry graynes and ſpyces.
                  
                     Ferueo, es, is, iui, ere, to be chauffed or hette.
                  
                     Feruefacio, to cauſe to boyle.
                  
                     Feruidus, a, um, feruent, dilygent.
                  
                     Ferula, a rodde or ſtycke, wherwith chyldrens handes be ſtriken in ſchooles. alſo a cane or rede. alſo a potte ſtycke.
                  
                     Ferulatius, a, um, lyke a cane or rede.
                  
                     Feruor, oris, heate.
                  
                     Ferus, a, um, wylde, cruell, terrible.
                  
                     Feritas, tatis, wyldenes, crueltie.
                  
                     Feſcenini, verſis ſunge at weddinges.
                  
                     Feſſus, a, um, werye.
                  
                     Feſtinanter, haſtily, quyckely, or ſwyftly.
                  
                     Feſtinató, ſpedily, in haſte.
                  
                     Feſtino, aui, are, to make haſt, to be troublid.
                  
                     Feſtinus, a, um, haſty, quycke.
                  
                     Feſtina lentè, ſpede the ſlowely, is ſpoken, where a man wyll ſygnifye a thynge to be done, neither to haſtyly nor to ſlowely, but in a conuenient temperance. See my booke of the Gouernour, in the chapiter of Maturytie.
                  
                     Feſtinatio, haſte or ſpede.
                  
                     Feſtiuitas, tatis, myrthe.
                  
                     Feſtiuo, aui, are, to kepe holy day.
                  
                     Feſtiuus, a, um, mery, prouokynge myrthe, ioyous. alſo pertaynyng to holy dayes.
                  
                     Feſtuca, the yonge tender ſpring of a tree, or herbe. Alſo a moote.
                  
                     Feſtus, ta, tum, feaſtfull or ſolemne.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶F Ante I.
                  
                     FIber, a beaſte called a beuer, whiche is alſo called Caſtor, whoſe ſtoones are vſed in medicine, and are called Caſtoreum. It is alſo a kynde of waſpes.
                  
                     Fibrae, are the extreme partes of the liuer, the hart, or the lunges, or of other thinges wherin is any diuyſyon, they maye be called lappes, brymmes. Alſo the ſpires of herbes or trees newe ſprongen.
                  
                     Fibula, a buckle of a girdell, or other thing lyke therto.
                  
                     
                     Fibulo, aui, are, to buckle, to ioyne togither tymber, or bordes, or other lyke thinges.
                  
                     Ficaria, a fygge tree.
                  
                     Ficarius, an eater of fygges.
                  
                     Ficedula, a byrde.
                  
                     Ficetū, a place where figge trees do grow.
                  
                     Ficetor, oris, he that loueth or gadereth fygges.
                  
                     Ficolea, a ſtaffe or ſtake of a fygge tree.
                  
                     Ficoſus, full of ſores in the heed or berde.
                  
                     Fictilis, fictile, erthen, or made of erthe.
                  
                     Fictinus, tia, um, fayned, or diſſembled, or counterfayte.
                  
                     Fictor, oris, a counterfayter, a fayner.
                  
                     Ficulnea, a fygge tree.
                  
                     Ficulneus, a, um, & ficulnus, a, um, of a fygge tree.
                  
                     Ficus, in the maſculyne gender is a fygge: in the feminine gender, is a figge tree. it is alſo a ſoore or ſcabbe, growyng in the places of a mans body, where that heare is.
                  
                     Fidei cōmiſſarius, a feoffe of truſt.
                  
                     Fide bona, without fraude or couyne.
                  
                     Fideicommiſſum, a feoffement of truſte.
                  
                     Fidei cōmitto, miſi, tere, to infeffe.
                  
                     Fideſuſſor, oris, a ſuretie, or borowe.
                  
                     Fidelia, a veſſelle ſeruynge to dyuers pourpoſes.
                  
                     Fidelis, faithfull, loyall, truſly, or ſure.
                  
                     Fidelitas, tatis, faythefulneſſe, loyaltie, or ſuretie.
                  
                     Fidem aſtringere, to promyſe faithfully.
                  
                     Fidem fallere, to breake promyſe.
                  
                     Fidem labefactare, to loſe credence.
                  
                     Fides labefactata, credence loſte.
                  
                     Fide ſua, mea, tua, iubere, to vndertake.
                  
                     Fidena, a towne in Italy.
                  
                     Fidentia, confidence.
                  
                     Fides, fidei, belefe, truſte, promyſe. It is a ſtablenes and truthe in promyſes and couenauntes. It is alſo a faythfull execution of thinges commytted or promyſed.
                  
                     Fidem habere, to beleue.
                  
                     Fidem accipere, to be beleued.
                  
                     Fidem liberare, to kepe promyſe.
                  
                     Fides, fidis, the ſtrynge of any inſtrument. ſometyme a harpe or lute.
                  
                     Fides publica, the credence or promyſe of all the people and rulers.
                  
                     Fidicen, cinis, a harpe: it maye be called a fyddell. it is alſo he that playeth on the inſtrument.
                  
                     Fidicina, a woman harper or luter.
                  
                     Fidicula, a rebecke, or gytterne.
                  
                     Fidiculae plurali, a tourment made with cordes or ſtrynges, wherwith menne be tourmented, to make them to confeſſe treaſon or felonye.
                  
                     Fido, fiſus, ſum, fidere, to truſte.
                  
                     Fidutia, truſt, confidence: ſomtyme hope: it is proprely that truſte, wherin any thyng is deliueryd by one man to an other, to the intent that he ſhall redelyuer it, whan he is required.
                  
                     Fiduciaria poſſeſsio, a poſſeſſion to an other mans vſe, or vpon condicion.
                  
                     Fiduciaria mancipatio, aut uenditio, a ſtate in landes made vpon confidence of truſte, or a morgage.
                  
                     Fidus, a, um, truſty.
                  
                     Figmentum, the warke or warkemanſhyp: ſometyme a lye, or a thing fayned.
                  
                     Figo, xi, figere, to thruſte in.Columel. Virg. Ge. lib. 4. ſommetyme it ſygnifyeth to driue or faſten in the erthe. Palum humi fixit, He droue the ſtake into the grounde. alſo to plant or ſette. Ipſe feraces Figat humo plantas, He wolle ſette in the grounde the fruitefull plantes.Iunenal. Sometyme to ſtryke.
                  
                     Figlina, ae, a potters warkehowſe, or potters crafte.
                  
                     Figlina, plurali, veſſell of erthe.
                  
                     Figulus, a potter.
                  
                     Figura, a fygure.
                  
                     Figuro, aui, are, to make or fourme.
                  
                     Filiaſter, a ſonne in lawe by an other wyfe, or an other huſbande.
                  
                     Filius terre, a newe begunne gentylman, or a gentylman of the fyrſte heed.
                  
                     Filicula, ferne growynge on trees, callid in a greke name polypodion.
                  
                  
                     Filius, a ſonne, filia, a doughter.
                  
                     Filii, ſomtime dothe conteyne both ſonnes and doughters.
                  
                     Filiſtim, a countreye, that is nowe callyd Aſcalon.
                  
                     Filix, licis, ferne.
                  
                     Filum, a threde. ſometyme the proporcion of a thynge.
                  
                     Filo, aui, are, to ſpynne or make a threde.
                  
                     Fimbria, the ſkyrtes or hemme of a garmente.
                  
                     Fimetum, a dunge hylle.
                  
                     Fimum, a boxe, out of the whiche men doo caſte dyſe.
                  
                     Fimus, dunge of cattell.
                  
                     Finalis, le, fynall, or laſte.
                  
                     Findo, fidi, findere, to cutte, to cleue.
                  
                     Fiſsilis, le, that whiche may be cutte.
                  
                     Fiſſura, a cutte or clefte.
                  
                     Fingo, xi, gere, to make, to forme, to fayn.
                  
                     Finio, iui, ire, to fynyſhe or ende.
                  
                     Finis, the ende, the concluſyon. alſo intente or purpoſe, whervnto any other thing hath relation, or is made or done for.
                  
                     Fines plurali, the borders or marches of a countrey, boundes.
                  
                     Finitimus, ma, um, nygh ioynynge.
                  
                     
                     Finirio, a definition.
                  
                     Finitor, oris, a ſetter of boundes.
                  
                     Fio, fieri, to be, to be eſtemed.
                  
                     Firmamentum, a ſuertie or ſtabylitie. alſo that, whyche is called the grounde of a cauſe or matter. Alſo the firmament or heuen vyſyble.
                  
                     Firmo, aui, are, to make ſtable or ſure.
                  
                     Firmus, ſtable, conſtant, well fortified.
                  
                     Firmitas, & firmitudo, ſtablenes, conſtāce, ſureneſſe.
                  
                     Fiſcalis, le, pertaynynge to the kynges treaſure.
                  
                     Fiſcella, a chiefe fate. Alſo it is a thynge made with withes and halters, wherewith cattell were ſo moſelled, that they mought not byte anye yonge ſprynges or buddes of trees.
                  
                     Fiſcellus, a lyttell hyll in Italye, not farre from Tyber.
                  
                     Fiſci, fiſcinae, fiſcellae, greate ſachels, wherin were put great ſommes of money.
                  
                     Fiſcus, the priuate treaſure of princis.
                  
                     Fiſcum, the kynges eſcheker.
                  
                     Fiſcina, a greatte baſkette.
                  
                     Fiſcibilis, le, that maye be cutte or ſlytte. fiſcilis, the ſame.
                  
                     Fiſtula, a pype, as well to conuey water, as an inſtrument of muſyke. Alſo the we ſell or throte bolle. alſo a tappe or faucette. alſo a diſeaſe or ſoore, whiche commeth of a putrified humour, and contynually rūneth.
                  
                     Fiſtuloſus, full of holes lyke a ſpunge▪
                  
                  
                     Fiſtuca, an inſtrumente, wherwith pi
                        ••
                     s of wodde be dryuen into the ground. and ſtones in pauynge, called a rammer.
                  
                     Fiſtucatio, pylinge, or pauynge.
                  
                     Fitiges, be beaſtis of Aethiope, of a browne colour, hauynge two pappes in the breſte, as man hath: nor they be not ſo wylde, but they may be tamed, nor ſo tame, but they woll hurte thoſe, that greue them.
                  
                     Fixus, a, um, fyrme, faſte.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶F Ante L.
                  
                     FLabellum, an inſtrument, wherwith in the heate of ſommer wynde is fanned blowen into mēs viſages, to koole thē.
                  
                     Flabrum, a blowynge or puffe of wynde.
                  
                     Flacceo, & flacceſco, ere, to wydder, or waxe feble.
                  
                     Flaccidus, a, um, wythered, feeble, weake, hangynge downewarde, lollynge, or flaggynge.
                  
                     Flaccum, bruyſed.
                  
                     Flaces, the ortes of olyues.
                  
                     Flagella, the ſmalle braunches or twigges of trees or vynes. ſometyme ſcourges or flayles, wherwith corne is threſhed.
                  
                     Flagello, aui, are, to ſcourge, to the threſſhe, to blame or rebuke.
                  
                     Flagitioſus, an vngracious perſone, full of myſchiefe.
                  
                     Flagitium, an yll or myſcheuous dede, worthy rebuke and punyſhement.
                  
                     Flagito, aui, are, to aſke importunately and with clamoure.
                  
                     Flagratores, they whiche for moneye doo ſuffre them ſelfes to be beaten.
                  
                     Flagrio, onis, a ſlaue.
                  
                     Flagro, aui, are, to bourne with a flame of fyre. Sommetyme to loue or deſyre inordynately.
                  
                     Flamea, clothe or ſylke of vyolette colour.
                  
                     Flaminica, the prieſtes wyfe, or a wedding gowne of vyolet colour.
                  
                     Flameum, a typpet of vyolet ſylke, whiche the newe wedded wyfe dyd weare.
                  
                     Flamen, hoc, the blaſte in an inſtrument.
                  
                     Flamen, the great prieſte amonge the gentyles.
                  
                     Flaminia, the houſe of the archeprieſte.
                  
                     Flamineum, a kerchiefe or typpette.
                  
                     Flamma, a flame. ſometyme peryll.
                  
                     Flameſcere, to be inflamed.
                  
                     Flammeus, ea, eum, burnynge or flamynge.
                  
                     Flammiuomus, ſendyng out flames.
                  
                     Flandria, a countrey called Flaunders.
                  
                     Flaueo, & flaueſco, aui, ere, to be lyke golde, or of yelowe colour.
                  
                     Flauus, a, um, yelowe, or of the coloure of golde.
                  
                     Flebilis, le, lamentable.
                  
                     Flecto, & flexo, xi, tere, to bowe, to bende, to leade.
                  
                     Flegma, fleume.
                  
                     Fleo, eui, ere, to wepe.
                  
                     Fletus, wepynge.
                  
                     Flexanima oratio, an oration or ſpech, wherby a mans mynde is ſtirred to pitie, reioyſynge, or other lyke affection.
                  
                     Flexilis, le, any thynge that may be eaſylye bowed or bente.
                  
                     Flexura, the bowynge.
                  
                     Fligo, xi, ctum, to tourment or vexe.
                  
                     Flo, aui, are, to blowe. alſo to make coyne of mettall.
                  
                     Floces, lyes or draſtes of wyne.
                  
                     Flocci, flockes of the ſhearynge of wollen clothes.
                  
                     Flocculi, fyne flockes.
                  
                     Floccifacio, & floccipendo, I ſet nought by.
                  
                     Floralia, florales ludi, plays made in the honour of Flora, an harlotte, whiche gaue a great treaſure vnto the people of Rome.
                  
                     Floreo, rui, ere, & florido, aui, are, to flouriſh or to haue floures. Alſo to excell. ſomtime

to proſper.
                  
                     Flos, floris, a floure.
                  
                     Floreſco, ſci, ſcere, to bourgen or to brynge forth floures.
                  
                     Floreus, a, um, made of floures.
                  
                     Floridus, da, dum, garnyſhed with floures. ſometyme freſhe or luſty.
                  
                     Floriger, eris, bearynge floures.
                  
                     Florulentus, ta, tum, full of floures.
                  
                     Fluctio, onis, the reume or poſe.
                  
                     Fluctiuagus, wandring in riuers or waters.
                  
                     Fluctuo, aui, are, to be toſſed as a ſhyppe is in the ſee. alſo to doubte.
                  
                     Fluctuatim, troublouſly, doubtfully.
                  
                     Fluctuoſus, a, ū, troublous, vnquiete, ſtormy.
                  
                     Fluctus, a floudde, a waue of water ſtyred by tempeſte.
                  
                     Fluentum, a ryuer, or ſtreame.
                  
                     Flueſcere, to be reſolued or relented.
                  
                     Fluidus, da, dum, flowynge, relentyd, reſolued.
                  
                     Fluito, aui, are, to flowe contynually, ſometyme to flytte or ſwymme.
                  
                     Flamen, inis, a great ryuer. ſometyme the courſe of the water.
                  
                     Flumineus, a, um, of the ryuer.
                  
                     Fluminoſus, a, um, full of ryuers.
                  
                     Fluo, xi, ere, to rounne, as water dothe, to procede or come of a thynge, or to growe.
                  
                     Fluor, fluxus, & fluxio, a flyxe.
                  
                     Fluta, a fyſhe, lyke to an eele, callyd a Lampreye.
                  
                     Fluuialis, le, of the ryuer.
                  
                     Fluuiatilis, le, that whiche is in the ryuer.
                  
                     Fluuius, a floudde or ryuer.
                  
                     
                        Fluxu
                              •
                           a,
                      lecherye.
                  
                     Fluxus, a, um, vnſtable, or that whyche dureth but a whyle, large, or wyde, relented, lecherous, and wanton.
               
            
            
               
                  F, Ante O.
                  
                     FOcale, a kerchiefe, whiche menne and womenne dydde weare aboute theyr cheekes.
                  
                     Focaneus, a braunche of a vyne, whyche groweth out of a twyſte or forked bough.
                  
                     Focaria, a fyre panne.
                  
                     Focatius, bread baken on the hote coles.
                  
                     Focillo, aui, are, to nouryſhe.
                  
                     Focula, nouriſhynge meates.
                  
                     Foculo, aui, are, to nouryſhe or ſuſtayne.
                  
                     Foculus, a little panne, wherin fyre is borne.
                  
                     Focus, a panne or herthe, wherein fyre is. ſometyme it ſygnifieth fyre. ſomtyme priuate houſes or tenementes.
                  
                     Fodico, aui, are, to dygge.
                  
                     Fodina, a place where a thyng is dygged.
                  
                     Fodio, fodi, fodere, to delue.
                  
                     Foecundo, daui, are, to make fruitefulle, 
                        〈◊〉
                      plentuouſe.
                  
                     Foecundus, a, um, plentuous, or fruitefull.
                  
                     Foecunditas, plentie.
                  
                     Foedo, aui, are, to polute or defyle, to deſtroye, to rent or teare, to conſume.
                  
                     Foedero, aui, are, to confederate.
                  
                     Foederatus, a confederate.
                  
                     Foedifragus, a breaker of leage or truſe, or entercourſe.
                  
                     Foedus, da, dum, fowle, defourmed, curſed, or cruelle.
                  
                     Foedus, deris, a leage betwene princis, an entercourſe, a truſe after battayle: ſometyme it ſignifyeth a lawe made in the tyme of warres.
                  
                     Foelicitas, tatis, felycitie, proſperitie, abundaunce of all thynges.
                  
                     Foelicito, aui, are, to make proſperous.
                  
                     Foelix, licis, hauing abūdance of al thinges, proſperous, commodious, or profytable.
                  
                     Foemina, a womanne. Alſo in beaſtes the female.
                  
                     Foenatius, ia, um, pertaynynge to haye, as Falces foenariae, hookes or ſythes for to cutte haye.
                  
                     Foenebris, bre, pertaynyng to vſurye, or vnreaſonable gayne.
                  
                     Foeneratitius, a, um, the ſame.
                  
                     Foenerator, oris, an vſurer or lender for vnreaſonable gayne.
                  
                     Foenero, aui, are, & foeneror, rari, cum datino, to lende for vſurie. Foeneror cum ablatiuo, To borowe, or make a ſhyfte, or to laye to morgage.
                  
                     Foeniculum, fenell.
                  
                     Foenile, an hey howſe.
                  
                     Foeniſecium, haye harueſt.
                  
                     Foeniſex, ſecis, a mower of haye.
                  
                     Foenograecum, fenegreke.
                  
                     Foenum, haye.
                  
                     Foenus, noris, vſurye, vnreaſonable, or vnlefull gayne, commyng of that thyng, whiche is lente.
                  
                     Foeteo, tère, to ſtynke.
                  
                     Foetidus, a, um, ſtynkynge.
                  
                     Foetifico, aui, are, to brynge forth, moſt cō
                     monly as a beaſt or a byrde dothe.
                  
                     Foeto, taui, are, the ſame.
                  
                     Foetor, oris, ſtynche, or yll ſauour.Varro
                  
                  
                     Foetuoſus, a, um, full of bredynge.
                  
                     Foetura, the tyme from the conception vnto the byrthe. Alſo the increaſe of cattell. ſometyme it ſignifieth the increaſe or commynge forth of other thinges.
                  
                     Foetus, tus, all thynge that is brought forth by generation, ſomtyme the fruite of trees.
                  
                     Foetus, ta, tum, full, or great with yonge, as a woman with chylde or a beaſte.
                  
                     
                     Foliacius, a, um, full of leaues.
                  
                     Foliatus, ta, tum, leaued, or hauyng leaues.
                  
                     Folium, a leafe.
                  
                     Follico, caui, care, to ſnuffe or fetche backe wynde with the noſethrylles.
                  
                     Folliculus, the huſke, wherein the eare of wheate or other corne is incloſed, whan it is grene, called the hoſe. Alſo for a ſacke, wherin corne is putte.
                  
                     Follis, a belowe, wherwith fyre is blowen. alſo a ball blowen full of wynde: ſemblably a bedde ſtuffed onely with wynde. it is alſo a bagge, wherin money is.
                  
                     Fomentum, a nouriſhment of natural heate. It is alſo any thynge layde to the bodye in the fourme of a playſter, to mytygate the peyne or griefe of any diſeaſe, callyd fomentation.
                  
                     Fotus, the ſame.
                  
                     Fomes, fomitis, any matter, wherwith fire is kendlyd and kepte burnynge. ſometyme it ſygnifieth that, whych feruently ſtyreth vs to do any thynge.
                  
                     Fons, fontis, a fountayne or well.
                  
                     Fontanus, a, um, of a fountayne: as Aqua fontana, well water.
                  
                     Fonticulus, a lyttell well or ſprynge.
                  
                     Foramen, minis, a hole.
                  
                     Foras, without.
                  
                     Foratia, a market woman, whyche ſelleth egges, chykens, and other lyke thynges at the markette.
                  
                     Foratus, tus, a hole.
                  
                     Forbea, a kynde of hotte meate.
                  
                     Forcipes, a payre of tonges or other lyke inſtrument.
                  
                     Forcus, a propre name of a man.
                  
                     Forda, a mylche cowe that bryngeth forth caulfes.
                  
                     Forem, res, ret, I ſhuld or had be, thou ſhuldeſt or had be, he ſhulde or had ben.
                  
                     Fore, to be hereafter.
                  
                     Forenſia, habytes or robes, worne onely in places of iugement.
                  
                     Forenſis, ſe, pertaynyng to places of iugemente or courtes, where lawes be exercyſed: alſo a iurrour.
                  
                     Fores, doores.
                  
                     Forfices, ſheares.
                  
                     Forficuli, lyttell ſheares.
                  
                     Fori, the hatches of a ſhyp, or place where men beinge in the ſhyppe, do walke vp and down. Alſo ſtages or galeries, from whēs the noble men of Rome beheld the playes callyd Circenſes.
                  
                  
                     Foruli, huches, wherin bokes were kepte: nowe be they taken for keuerynges of bookes.
                  
                     Foria, dunge that is lyquide or thynne.
                  
                     Forica, commune draughtes or Iakes.
                  
                     Foriculae, lyttell doores.
                  
                     Forinſecus, without.
                  
                     Forio, iui, ire, to diſcharge the bealy of ordure.
                  
                     Foriolus, loſe bealy, or he that hath a laſke.
                  
                     Forma, forme or ſhappe. ſomtyme beaultie.
                  
                     Formiae, a towne in Campania.
                  
                     Formica, an Emote, or Ant, or Piſmere.
                  
                     Formicatio, that whiche is commonly callyd a rynge worme.
                  
                     Formidabilis, le, that whiche is to be drad.
                  
                     Formido, dinis, drede or feare.
                  
                     Formido, aui, are, to haue great feare.
                  
                     Formidoloſus, he that feareth other: alſo he that is feared of other.
                  
                     Formo, aui, are, to forme, to make in facion.
                  
                     Formoſus, a, um, fayre.
                  
                     Formucales, a peyre of tonges.
                  
                     Formula, an inſtrument or dede in writing. a ſtyle in wrytynge, and a fourme in pleadynge.
                  
                     Formula iniuriarum, an action of treſpas.
                  
                     Formulam intendere, to brynge an action.
                  
                     Fornacalia, dayes whan the women dydde nought els but bake breadde.
                  
                     Fornax, a chymney, or ouen.
                  
                     Fornax calcaria, a lyme kylle.
                  
                     Fornax lateraria, a brycke kyll.
                  
                     Fornicarii, they which haue ſtalles or bouthes vnder the vaultes or arches of churches or palayces, where they ſel theyr wares to them that paſſe by, as they do in weſt mynſter halle.
                  
                     Fornicarius, ia, um, pertaynyng to lechery.
                  
                     Fornico, aui, are, to make an arch or a vault.
                  
                     Fornicor, ari, to commytte fornication.
                  
                     Fornix, nicis, an arche or a vaulte.
                  
                     Foro, aui, are, to perce or boore a hole.
                  
                     Forpices, cyſſars to clyppe heare.
                  
                     Fortè, peraduenture, perchaunce.
                  
                     Fortaſſé, fortaſsis, forſan, forſitan, the ſame.
                  
                     Forteſco, ſci, ſcere, to waxe ſtronge.
                  
                     Forticulus, a lyttell ſtronge.
                  
                     Fortifico, aui, are, to fortifie or make ſtrōge.
                  
                     Fortis, ſtronge, puiſſant, valyant of corage. alſo fayre, ſometyme ryche.
                  
                     Fortitudo, dinis, ſtrength, valyant courage.
                  
                     Fortuitus, ta, tum, that hapneth by chaunce.
                  
                     Fortuna, fortune.
                  
                     Fors fortuna, good fortune or chaunce.
                  
                     Fortunatae inſulae, the fortunate ilandes, be ſo callyd of the abundaunce of fruites, of whiche Strabo writeth .li.i.
                  
                     Fortunatim, fortunately.
                  
                     Fortunatus, ta, tum, fortunate.
                  
                     Fortuno, naui, are, to make proſperous, to augment with good fortune.
                  
                     Forum, a market, where thynges be ſolde.

Alſo a place where iudgementes are practiſed, and matters in lawe pleaded. Forum whan it is taken for a market, hath cōmonly an other worde ioyned therwith, as Forum boatium, the markette where cattell to ſolde. Forum holitorium, the markette where herbes be ſolde. Forum piſcarium, the fyſhe markette.
                  
                     Forum Iulium, a region or coūtrey of Italy whiche ſomtyme was called Iapidia.
                  
                  
                     Forum Cornehi, a cytie of Italye, whyche nowe is callyd Imola.
                  
                  
                     Foſſa, a dyche, or dyke, or a mote.
                  
                     Foſsilis, le, that whiche is dygged, or maye be dygged.
                  
                     Foſsio, dyggynge.
                  
                     Foſsitius, a, um, that is dygged.
                  
                     Foſſor, oris, a digger or dycher.
                  
                     Foſſula, a lyttell dyche.
                  
                     Foſſura, a dyggynge,
                  
                     Fotus, ta, tum, nouriſhed.
                  
                     Fouea, a denne.
                  
                     Foueo, ui, uere, to nouryſhe, to ſuſtayne, to maynteyne, to weate or waſhe a thynge, to ordeyne or ſette, to defende.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶F Ante R.
                  
                     FRaceſco, ſci, ſcere, to putrifie for age.
                  
                     Fracidus, da, dum, more than rype, rotten as fruite is.
                  
                     Fraeno, aui, are, to brydell, to reſtrayne.
                  
                     Fraenum, a brydell.
                  
                     Fraenum mordere, to take the bytte in the teethe, ſygnifieth to ſet naught by.
                  
                     Plautus in Amp.
                     Fraetus, ta, tum, truſlynge, ayded.
                  
                     Fraeti uittute & uiribus, ayded with ſtrength and puiſſance.
                  
                     Fraga, ſtrawberies.
                  
                     Frageſco, ſci, ſcere, to braſte.
                  
                     Fragilis, le, brokell, ſoone broken.
                  
                     Fragilitas, brotylnes, inconſtancy.
                  
                     Fragiliter, weakely, inconſtantly.
                  
                     Fragitides, the two great veynes, whyche do appere on eyther ſyde of the necke.
                  
                     Fragmen & fragmentum, a pece or gobette of a thynge broken.
                  
                     Fragor, oris, the noyſe, whyche is made at the fallynge of any great thynge, ruſhyng.
                  
                     Fragoſus, a, um, vneaſy to clymme.
                  
                     Fragro, aui, are, to render a great ſauour.
                  
                     Fragrans, tis, hauyng great or ſote ſauour.
                  
                     Framea, a ſpeare, or iauelyn.
                  
                     Frango, fregi, frangere, to breake.
                  
                     Franoſus, a deceyuer.
                  
                     Frater, tris, a brother.
                  
                     Fraterculus, a lyttell or yonge brother.
                  
                     Fraterne, brotherly.
                  
                     Fraternus, na, um, of a brother.
                  
                     Frater patruelis, a brothers ſonne.
                  
                     Fratilli, the fringe of tapeſry, that hangeth next the grounde.
                  
                     Fratrare, proprely is ſayde of chyldernes breſtes, whan they do growe, to waxe imbocyd.
                  
                     Fratria, a brothers wyfe.
                  
                     Fraudo, aui, are, to begyle, to diſappoynte.
                  
                     Fraudare genium, not to ſatisfie the neceſſitie of nature, or carnall appetite.
                  
                     Fraudulenter, deceytefully.
                  
                     Fraudulentus, full of deceyte.
                  
                     Frauduloſus, a begyler.
                  
                     Fraus, fraudis, deceyt. Alſo peryll, danger.
                  
                     Fraxinus, an aſhe.
                  
                     Fraxo, aui, are, to go in watche.
                  
                     Fregella, a lyttell towne in Italy.
                  
                     Fremitus, a rorynge, proprelye of waters. ſometyme a murmuryng, rumble, or noyſe of people aſſemblyd togyther.
                  
                     Fremo,, mi, mere, to rore or make a noyſe lyke great waters.
                  
                     Frendeo, dui, dere, to grynde the tethe togyther for angre or payne. Alſo to grunte or grone for peyne.
                  
                     Frequens, eutis, acuſtomed, moche hanted, alſo aſſembled togither, abundant.
                  
                     Frequens Senatus, al the Senatours aſſemblyd togyther.
                  
                     Frequentia, greatte haunte, and companye of folke.
                  
                     Frequento, taui, tare, to haunte, to goo togyther.
                  
                     Frequentatio, an hauntynge, an aſſembly.
                  
                     Fretum, a narowe parte of the ſee, where it is mouynge and troublous. Sometyme it is taken generally for the ſee.
                  
                     Friabilis, le, ſoone broken in ſmalle pieces.
                  
                     Fribolus, almoſte worthe an halfepeny.
                  
                     Frico, caui, cui, care, to rubbe.
                  
                     Frictus, fricatio, & frictio, rubbyng.
                  
                     Frigefacio, feci, facere, to coole.
                  
                     Frigefio, frigefieri, to be colde.
                  
                     Frigeo, gui, & frixi, to be colde or ſlowe.
                  
                     Frigero, aui, are, to coole.
                  
                     Frigeſco, ſcere, to waxe colde.
                  
                     Frigidulus, a, um, ſomewhat colde.
                  
                     Frigidus, da, dum, colde, daungerouſe, or noyfull.
                  
                     Frigilla, a byrde, which ſyngeth in the cold wether, a ruddocke.
                  
                     Frigo, xi, & frigui, gere, to frye.
                  
                     Frictus, & frixus, a, um, fryed.
                  
                     Frigorificus, ca, cum, made colde.
                  
                     Frigus, goris, colde. ſometyme feare.
                  
                     Frigutio, tiui, tiri, to leape vp, or hoppe.
                  
                     Frio, aui, are, to breake ſmalle, ſpecially betwyxte the fyngers.
                  
                     Friſii, people by Holande.
                  
                     
                     Frit, the grayne in the toppe of the eare, whiche is laſſe than a corne.
                  
                     Fritilla, a froyſe or pancake.
                  
                     Fritillus, a boxe, out of the which diſe were caſte on the tables.
                  
                     Friuolarius, he that ſelleth ſtuffe of lyttell valewe.
                  
                     Friuolus, a, um, vayne, lyght, of none eſtymation or value.
                  
                     Frixorium, a fryenge panne.
                  
                     Frondarius, ia, ium, of leaues.
                  
                     Frondatio, a ſlyppynge of of leaues. Alſo brouſynge.
                  
                     Frondator, oris, a brouſer, a wodlopper.
                  
                     Frondeo, & frondeſco, deſcere, to beare or haue leaues.
                  
                     Frondeus, ea, eum, that is of leaues.
                  
                     Frondo, daui, are, to brynge forth leaues.
                  
                     Frondoſus, a, um, full of leaues.
                  
                     Frons, tis, the foreheed, the frunt. Alſo it ſignifieth ſhamefaſtnes. alſo countenance.
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        raſmꝰ in Chiliad.
                     Frontem ferire, is ſpoken where a man ſygnyfyeth, that one diſdayneth extremely an nother.
                  
                     Frons, frondis, the leafe of a tree, with the braunches.
                  
                     Frondifer, bearynge leaues.
                  
                     Frontale, the hedſtall of an horſe.
                  
                     Fronto, tonis, he that hath a brode forhed.
                  
                     Frontoſus, hauynge a greatte forehed, or not abaſhed.
                  
                     Fructifer, bearynge fruite.
                  
                     Fructificus, & fructuoſus, fruitefull.
                  
                     Fructuarius, he that taketh the frute or profite of a thynge. Pernour of profytes.
                  
                     Fructuarius, ria, rium, that whiche beareth fruite, or doth pertayne to fruite.
                  
                     Fructus, tus, & ti, fruite. alſo al profite or reuenues that cometh of the grounde.
                  
                     Fruges, aut frux, frugis, increaſe of all thoſe thynges, whiche the erth bryngeth forth, moſte proprely of grayne or corne. ſometyme it ſignifieth rent or reuenues.
                  
                     Frugi, moderate, profitable, neceſſary.
                  
                     Frugi homo, a good man, a thryfty man, an honeſt man, temperate in expenſes.
                  
                     Frugalitas, tatis, moderation in liuing, ſpeciallye in apparaylle and dyete, ſobre rule, alſo ſuffyciencye.
                  
                     Frugalior, frugaliſsimus, more temperate, moſte temperate.
                  
                     Fruiſcor, ſci, to vſe at lybertie.
                  
                     Frumen, the vppermoſt part of the throte, the gargyll.
                  
                     Frumentaceus, of corne.
                  
                     Frumentarius, ia, ium, pertayning to corne.
                  
                     Frumentario, takynge of corne.
                  
                     Frumentator, toris, a taker or pourueyour of corne.
                  
                     Frumentor, aris, to gather or puruey corne.
                  
                     Frumentum, all corne, that hath berdes or eyles. it is moſte vſed for wheate or rye.
                  
                     Frunitus, wyſe in vſynge of a thynge.
                  
                     Fruor, fretus ſum, frui, to vſe with dilectation and profyte.
                  
                     Fruſtatim, in piecis or gobettes.
                  
                     Fruſtillatim, piece meale.
                  
                     Fruſtra, in vayne.
                  
                     Fruſtro, aui, are, & fruſtror, aris, ari, to deceyue. alſo to do a thyng in vayne, or vainly to employe.
                  
                     Fruſtum, a piece or gobette.
                  
                     Fruſtulum, & fruſtillum, a lyttell gobette.
                  
                     Fruſus, a kynde of brembyls, whoſe pryckes be not hooked.
                  
                     Frutex, that which hath a great ſtalke, and yet it is no tree, as fenelle, caules, certayne malowes, and other lyke herbes. ſomtyme it is taken for the ſtemme or ſtalke.
                  
                     Frutetoſus, a, um, hauynge abundaunce of ſuche great herbes.
                  
                     Frutetum, ſeu fruticetū, a place where groweth herbes with great ſtēmes or ſtalkes.
                  
                     Fruticeſcere, to be a ſtalke.
                  
                     Frutico, aui, are, & fruticor, fruticaris, ari, to ſpringe in ſtalke.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶F Ante V.
                  
                     FVcilis, le, falſe, colouryd.
                  
                     Fucinus, a lake in Italy.
                  
                     Fuco, caui, care, to lay on a colour.
                  
                     Fucatus, ta, tum, coloured or paynted, as ſome women be.
                  
                     Fucus, a dorre or bee without ſtynge, whyche entreth into hyues, and eateth vp hony. Alſo payntynge, where oone colour is layde on an nother. It is alſo vſed for deſceyte or falſehode.
                  
                     Fuga, flyght.
                  
                     Fugax, gacis, he that flyeth lyghtly. Alſo it ſignifieth ſwyfte.
                  
                     Fugio, gi, gere, to flye, to runne awaye, to eſcape, to forgette.
                  
                     Fugiens laboris, abhorring labour or peyn.
                  
                     Fugitiuarius, a, um, ſtartyng away, flyttyng.
                  
                     Fugitiuae aquae, waters, which be taken out of a commune ryuer by ſtelthe.
                  
                     Fugitiuus ſeruus, he that runneth frome his maiſter, wyllyng neuer to returne, or goth to a place, from whens he ſuppoſeth that his mayſter can neuer recouer hym.
                  
                     Fugito, taui, tare, to vſe to runue away.
                  
                     Fugo, aui, are, to dryue away.
                  
                     Fulcio, ſi, cire, to ſupporte, to fortyfie.
                  
                     Fulcra, beddeſtedes.
                  
                     Fulgeo, ſi, gere, & fulgo, gi, ere, to ſhyne.
                  
                     Fulgetrum, a leame of lyghtnynge.
                  
                     
                     Fulgidus, da, dum, bryghte.
                  
                     Fulgor, bryghtneſſe.
                  
                     Fulgur, uris, uel oris, lyghtnynge.
                  
                     Fulguratio, the lyghtnynge whenne it is in the clowdes.
                  
                     Fulgurator, the ſender of lyghtnynge.
                  
                     Fulgutio, riui, rire, to caſte lyghtnynge.
                  
                     Fulgutitas, lyghtnes or bryghtnes.
                  
                     Fulguto, aui, are, to ſende forth lyghtning.
                  
                     Fulica, a ſe byrd, more thā a culuer, & black.
                  
                     Fuligo, ginis, the ſoote of a chymney.
                  
                     Fullo, onis, a fuller of clothe.
                  
                     Fulmen, minis, lyghtnynge.
                  
                     Fulmino, aui, are, to lyghten.
                  
                     Fultura, a ſhore.
                  
                     Fuluus, ua, um, a colour mixte of grene and redde, a darke yelowe.
                  
                     Fumatium, a ſmoky place, where wine was layde, to the intent that it moughte the ſoner ware olde. alſo the ſhanke or tonell of a chymneye.
                  
                     Fumifico, aui, are, to make ſmoke, to incēſe.
                  
                     Fumigo, aui, are, to parfume.
                  
                     Fumo, aui, are, to ſmoke.
                  
                     Fumus, ſmoke.
                  
                     Funale, a torche.
                  
                     Funales equi, horſes, whiche coupled with an halter, dyd go before the charyot.
                  
                     Funambulus, he that walketh on a rope.
                  
                     Funda, a ſlynge. Alſo a caſtinge nette, a ſach
                        •
                     ll or purſe lyke a nette. Alſo a cerkle of golde, or other mettalle, wherein ſtones he ſette.
                  
                     Fundamen, & fundamentum, a fundacion.
                  
                     
                        Fundibula
                              ••
                           ,
                      ſlyngers of ſtones.
                  
                     Funditores, the ſame.
                  
                     Fundito, aui, are, to poure out often.
                  
                     
                        Fund
                              •••
                           s,
                      from the foundation vtterly.
                  
                     Fundo, aui, are, to founde, to make ſtable.
                  
                     Fundo, fudi, fundere, to yette or caſt mettall, to powre out, to ſheede, to throwe downe, to ſcatter, to gyue aboundantlye, to ſpeake moche, to lay downe.
                  
                     Fundum, the bottome of a thynge.
                  
                     Fundus, that whyche is vſed to be callyd lande or ſoyle.
                  
                     Funebris, bre, funeralle.
                  
                     Funepeus, a goer on a corde.
                  
                     Funerale, pertaynynge to funeralles.
                  
                     Funereus, rea, reum, pertaynynge to the deed bodye.
                  
                     Funero, aui, are, to burye.
                  
                     Funeſto, aui, are, to vyolate a place with a deed bodye.
                  
                     Funeſtus, ta, tum, vyolated with deade bodies. Alſo mortalle, blouddy. alſo pertaynynge to deed bodies or dethe.
                  
                     Funetum, bowed or howped, as ſomme vynes be.
                  
                     Fungor, functus ſum, fungi, to exercyſe an office. Fungi uita, to lyue. Functus uita, He that hath fyniſhed his lyfe.
                  
                     Fungus, a tadde ſtole, a mouſherom.
                  
                     Fungoſus, lyke a muſherom.
                  
                     Funiculus, a ſmall rope.
                  
                     Funis, a rope.
                  
                     Funus, funeris, funerall exequies, or ſolemnitie of burienge. Sometyme it ſygnyfieth the deed corps.
                  
                     Fuo, fui, futum, to be.
                  
                     Fur, furis, a thefe.
                  
                     Furax, acis, theuyſhe, a great picker.
                  
                     Furca, furcula, an hey forke.
                  
                     Furcifer, ciferis, a ſeruant, whiche for ſome lyghte offence, was compelled to beare a forke on his necke, hauynge both his handes bounden faſte thereto, and ſo to goo through the towne, confeſſynge his defaut, and exhortynge other, that they ſhulde not in lyke caſe offende, whyche was a greate reproche.
                  
                     Furcilis, a dungeforke.
                  
                     Furcilla, an heyforke, alſo a galowes.
                  
                     Furfur, uris, branne.
                  
                     Furfureus, & furfuraceus, a, um, of branne.
                  
                     Furiae, the furyes of Helle, whyche were thre, Alecto, Tiſiphone, Megêra.
                  
                  
                     Furiatus, a, um, furyous.
                  
                     Furibundus, a, um, woode or very madde.
                  
                     Furio, aui, are, to make madde or woode.
                  
                     Furioſus, a, um, madde, or wodde, frantyke.
                  
                     Furnaceus, a, um, baken in an ouen.
                  
                     Furnaria, bakers crafte. Alſo a womanne baker.
                  
                     Furnus, an ouen.
                  
                     Furo, furi, furere, to be woode for angre.
                  
                     Furor, aris, ari, to ſteale.
                  
                     Furor, roris, madneſſe: Alſo furye, whyche is a vehement concytation or ſtyrrynge of the mynde.
                  
                     Furtim, by ſtelthe, priuilye.
                  
                     Furtificus, a pycker or priuye ſtealer.
                  
                     Furtiuus, a, um, that which is done by ſtelth, or very pryuyly.
                  
                     Furtum, thefte. it is defyned to be a deceitfull handlynge or vſynge of any thynge, or the poſſeſſion therof, to haue therby gayne or auauntage, whiche is by the lawe of nature prohibited to be ſuffred. It is ſomtime any act that is done priuily, or to the intent it ſhuld be ſecrete.
                  
                     Furti teneri, aut obſtringi, to be anſwerable to felonye.
                  
                     Furuae hoſtiae, ſacrifice doone to Pluto and Proſerpine.
                  
                     Furunculus, a litle thefe, alſo a beeſt called a Stote, that killeth rabettis. It is alſo a ſore callid a felon. alſo a ſore callid a cattisheer.
                  
                     
                     Fuſcina, a ſpeare with many teethe, wherwith fyſhers do take troutes, or yeles, by throwynge of it, a troute ſpeare, an yele ſpeare.
                  
                     Fuſcinula, a fleſhe hooke.
                  
                     Fuſcus, ca, cum, browne of colour, not fully blacke.
                  
                     Fuſile, that whiche may be molten.
                  
                     Fuſim, abrode, as it were molten.
                  
                     Fuſe, in lengthe, longe.
                  
                     Fuſores, melters,
                  
                     Fuſorius, a, um, pertaynynge to meltynge, As Ars fuſoria, the crafte of meltyng. Vas fuſorium, a meltynge potte.
                  
                     Fuſus, a, um, molten.
                  
                     Fuſus, ſi, a ſpyndell.
                  
                     Fuſtigo, are, to beate with a ſtaffe.
                  
                     Futilis, le, that whiche wyll be ſoone powred out.
                  
                     Futilis, he that ſpeketh all that he knoweth ſhortely or vnaduiſedly.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶G Ante A.
                  
                     
                        GABALVS, a galowe tree or gybet, whereon men be hanged.
                  
                     Gabata, a potagedyſhe.
                  
                     Gabinus, a garment with two lappes, wherof the one caſte backward, dyd gyrde him that did were it. whych garment the conſule ware, whan he denounced warres.
                  
                     Gades, two yles by the further partes of Spayne, beyonde Granade.
                  
                     Gaetuli, people in Affrike.
                  
                     Gaetulia, a countrey in Affrike.
                  
                     Gagates, a ſtone called Ieate.
                  
                     Galactophagus, an eater of mylke.
                  
                     Galactopota, a drynker of mylke.
                  
                     Galatae, people that inhabyte Galatia.
                  
                     Galbanus, a gumme of a certayn tree, whiche is moche vſed in playſters.
                  
                     Galbinus, a, um, delycate, wanton.
                  
                     Galbuli, thynges whiche do hange on cypreſſe trees, lyke ſmall heares.
                  
                     Galea, an helmet or ſalette.
                  
                     Galenus, the name of a noble phiſition.
                  
                     Galerita, a larke.
                  
                     Galêrus, & Galerum, a hat. alſo a pirwike.
                  
                     Galla, a fruite called Gaulles.
                  
                     Gallicanus, a, um, of Fraunce.
                  
                     Gallia, Fraunce.
                  
                     Gallicia, a royalme in Spayne, callydde Galyce.
                  
                     Gallicinium, the tyme whanne the Cocke croweth.
                  
                     Gallicus, ca, cum, Frenche.
                  
                     Gallina, a henne.
                  
                     Gallinaceus pullus, a chyke.
                  
                     Gallinaceus, a howſe cocke.
                  
                     Gallinarium, a place where pultry is kept.
                  
                     Gallinarius, & gallinaria, he or ſhe that kepeth pultrye.
                  
                     Gallus, a, um, frenche.
                  
                     Gallo, are, to be madde.
                  
                     Gallograetia, a countreye in Aſia, callyd alſo Galatia.
                  
                  
                     Gallus, a cocke, a Frencheman, a prieſte of Cybeles, callyd the mother of the goddes,
                  
                     Gamale, a towne in Iudea.
                  
                     Gammarus, a fyſhe callyd a lopſtar.Saluſtius.
                  
                  
                     Ganea, & ganeum, a brothell houſe, a hous of baudry and ryotte. Alſo Ganea, is taken for gluttonye.
                  
                     Ganeo, onis, a Ruffyan, a haunter of bandy houſes, a ryotter. Alſo a rauyner of delycates, a frauncher.
                  
                     Ganges, a greatte ryuer, whiche enuyronneth India, wherin is founde bothe golde and precyous ſtones.
                  
                     Gangeticus, ca, cum, of that ryuer.
                  
                     Gangraena, a ſore callyd a cankre.
                  
                     Ganymedes, a Troyane chylde, whyche was fayned to be rauyſhed of Iupyter, and made his butlar.
                  
                     Gannio, nire, to bark or houle lyke a dogge.
                  
                     Gannitus, tus, barkynge, or howlynge.
                  
                     Garamantes, people in Affrike.
                  
                     Gargânus, a hylle in Apulia.
                  
                     Gargara, a mountayn, & alſo a citie in Aſia.
                  
                     Gargariſſo, are, to gargaryſhe or waſhe the mouthe and throte of a man.
                  
                     Garrio, ire, to bable.
                  
                     Gariophylum, a ſpyce callyd cloues.
                  
                     Garrulus, a babblar.
                  
                     Garum, ſawce mude with fyſhe.
                  
                     Garumna, a ryuer in Fraunce.
                  
                     Gaudeo, gauiſus ſum, gaudere, to reioyce, to be gladde.
                  
                     Gaudere in ſinu, to reioyſe by hym ſelfe.
                  
                     Gaudium, ioye, myrthe, an affection of the mynde, conceiued of an opinion of a thing good or pleaſaunt.
                  
                     Gaulus, a lyttell rounde bote.
                  
                     Gauſape, a mantell to caſte on a bedde: alſo a carpette to lay on a table, ſome calle it a daggeſwayne.
                  
                     Gauſapina, a certayne garment.
                  
                     Gaza, the treaſure of a kynge.Curtius.
                  
                  
                     Gazophilaciū, a place where treſure is kept
               
            
            
               
                  ¶G, Ante E.
                  
                     GEbenna, a hyll and towne in Sauoy, nowe called Geneura.
                  
                     Gedeon, the name of a iuge in Iſrael.
                  
                     
                     Geenna, is taken in holy ſcripture for hell.
                  
                     Gela, a ryuer in Syetle.
                  
                     Gelabilis, le, that maye be froſen.
                  
                     Gelaſco, ſcere, to be froſen.
                  
                     Gelaſini, the Fooreteethe, whiche be ſhewed in laughynge.
                  
                     Gelaſinus, he that laugheth to make other men laughe.
                  
                     Gelicidium, a froſte.
                  
                     Gelidus, a, um, colde as yſe.
                  
                     Gelo, aui, are, to freeſe.
                  
                     Geloi, fyeldes in Sycile.
                  
                     Geloni, a people nowe callyd Tartariens.
                  
                     
                        Gel
                              •
                           ,
                      vſe, ſommetyme colde.
                  
                     Gemellas, lyttell or ſmalle twynnes.
                  
                     Gemibundus, full of waylynge.
                  
                     Geminus, a, um, the noumbre of two. Alſo geminus, is a twynne, where many chyldren are borne at one burdeyne, althoughe they be thre or mo. Alſo it is the name of a man, whiche in hebrewe is Thomas.
                  
                     Gemino, aui, are, to double.
                  
                     Gemma, the yonge budde of a vyne. Alſo a precious ſtone.
                  
                     Gemmo, aui, are, to budde or ſprynge, as a yonge graffe or vyne dothe.
                  
                     Gemmaſcere, to begynne to budde.
                  
                     Gemmatus, a, um, budded.
                  
                     Gemo, mui, ere, to grone, or to wayle, or to make a lamentable noyſe.
                  
                     Gemoniae ſcalae, a place frome whenſe the bodyes of perſonnes condempned were throwen downe.
                  
                     
                        Gemo
                              ••••
                           ,
                      women great with chylde.
                  
                     Gemmſa, a corne, or lyke griefe vnder the 
                        •
                     yttell too.
                  
                     Gena, the eye lydde. It is ſommetyme taken for the chekes.
                  
                     Genauius, a, um, glouttonous.
                  
                     
                        Gene
                              •
                           logia,
                      a pedegrewe.
                  
                     Gener, he that maryeth my doughter.
                  
                     Generalis, le, generall.
                  
                     Generatim, generally.
                  
                     Genero, aui, are, to ingender.
                  
                     Generoſus, a, um, of a gentyl or noble kind.
                  
                     Geneſis, generation.
                  
                     Genethliacus, an aſtronomer, or other lyke, whiche by the ſterres ſet at a mannes natiuitie, telleth his fortune.
                  
                     Genialis homo, a manne in his houſe verye lyberall and freſhe.
                  
                     Geniculatim, ioynted, as a wheate ſtraw is.
                  
                     Geniculum, the ioynt of a ſtrawe, or ſtalke of an herbe.
                  
                     Geniſta, broome.
                  
                     Genitalis, le, pertayning to the byrthe of a man. genitale ſolum, the naturall countrey or place, where a manne is borne. genitalis dies, the daye of natiuitie. genitale ſemen, the ſede of generation, genitalia, the membres of generation.
                  
                     Genimen, generation.
                  
                     Genitor, a father.
                  
                     Genitrix, a mother.
                  
                     Genitura, ſometyme generation, ſometyme the ſede of generation.
                  
                     Genitiuus, a, um, that hath power to ingender, or that whiche procedeth with generation. genitiuae notae, markes, wherewith a man is borne.
                  
                     Genitus, ta, tum, begotten, ingendred.
                  
                     Genius, an aungell. Amonge the Paynims ſome ſuppoſed it to be the ſpirite of a man. Some dydde put two gouernours of the ſowle, a good and an euyll, Bonus genius, & malus genius, whyche neuer departed from vs. ſometyme it is taken for nature it ſelfe, or dilectation meued by nature.
                  
                     Genii, men, whiche do gyue all their ſtudye to eatynge and drynkynge.
                  
                     Geniae, olde veckes full of vnhappynes.
                  
                     Genio dare operam, to lyue voluptuouſely.
                  
                     Genium defraudare, to abſteyne from all thynges pleaſaunt.
                  
                     Genocha, a beaſt laſſe than a fox, of colour betwene blacke & yelow, medlid with black ſpottes, whiche wyll ſoone be made tame.
                  
                     Gens, gentis, a people, ſometyme a kinred.
                  
                     Gentiana, an herbe callyd Gencyan.
                  
                     Gentilis, a kynſeman of the ſame name and ſtocke. ſometyme it ſignyfyeth a gentyle or paynyme. ſomtyme a countrey man.
                  
                     Gentilis, le, propre, or familyar to that people, or kynrede.
                  
                     Gentilitas, tatis, gentilitie, the multitude of the people or famyly.
                  
                     Gentilitium nomen, the ſurname or ancyent name of a mans auncetours.
                  
                     Gentilitius, a, um, of the people or nation, gentilitia ſacra, ceremonyes of that countrey or people.
                  
                     Genu, a knee.
                  
                     Genua, a great cite callid Geane.
                  
                     Genuini, the innermoſte cheke teethe.
                  
                     Genuinus ſermo, the natural ſpeche or mother tunge.
                  
                     Genus, generis, is the begynnynge of euerye thynge, eyther of the perſone that ingendred it, or of the place, where it was ingendred. Oreſtes a Tantalo ducit genus, Oreſtes hathe his begynnynge of Tantalus, or is of the bloudde of Tantalus. Plato genere Athenienſis eſt, Plato is of his bloudde or auncetrye an Athenyens. Alſo it ſygnifieth kynde. genus uitae, a kynd of lyfe. genus mortis, a kynd of deth. genus animalium, a kynde of beaſtes. Alſo it ſignifieth that, whiche conteineth many ſondry

kyndes, as Animal comprehendeth a man, a byrde, a fyſhe, and euery of them is genus to that, whiche in theym is comprehended. As a brute beaſt is genus to a horſe, a lyon, a bulle, a dogge, &c. A byrde is genus to an egle, a crowe, a larke, a ſparowe. &c. A fiſhe is genus to a whale, a porpeſe, a haddocke, a playce. &c.
                  
                  
                     Geographia, the deſcription of the erth.
                  
                     Geomancia, ſuperſtitious warkinge in ſorcerye, by cerkles and prickes in the erthe.
                  
                     Geometer, a geometritian.
                  
                     Geometria, geometry, meaſuring and proporcionyng of fygures in the erthe.
                  
                     Georgica, pertaynynge to huſbandry.
                  
                     Germani, Germaynes, or Almayns, They be alſo bretherne of one father and oone mother.
                  
                     Germania, the countrey named Germany, or Almayne.
                  
                     Germen, minis, a branche of a tree or herbe.
                  
                     Germino, aui, are, to branche out.
                  
                     Gero, geſsi, gerere, to beare. ſometyme it ſignifieth to haue.
                  
                     Gerere magiſtratum, to exerciſe an offyce.
                  
                     Geſta, & geſtaetes, actes, thynges practiſed or doone.
                  
                     Gerrae ſiculae, tryfles.
                  
                     Gerres, fyſhe of the kynde of herrynges, it may be called pylchardes.
                  
                     Gerrones, talkers of tryfelyng thinges, or lyght matters.
                  
                     Gerulus, a porter, or a man hyred to carye bourdeynes.
                  
                     Gerula, a mayde that kepeth a chylde.
                  
                     Geruſia, a place where the Senate dyd aſſemble, a parlyament houſe.
                  
                     Geryon, onis, the name of a king of Spain, whiche was ſlayne by Hercules.
                  
                     Geſa, a haulberde.
                  
                     Geſſoriacum, as ſome men do ſuppoſe, was the towne, whiche is now named Caleys.
                  
                     Geſtamen, minis, what ſoo euer is borne, a burdeyn or caryage.
                  
                     Geſtatorium, that wherin any thyng is caried or borne, a flagon, a horſe lytter.
                  
                     Geſtatio, the exerciſe, where a man is borne or caried on any thinge.
                  
                     Geſticularius, a, um, pertaynyng to ſygnes or tokens of myrthe, with meuyng the body or handes.
                  
                     Geſticulator, he that playith with puppettꝭ.
                  
                     Geſticulor, aris, to make ſuche ſygnes or tokens of myrthe, as in daunſynge.
                  
                     Geſtio, iui, ire, to ſhewe the affections of the mynde by meuyng of the body, or any part therof▪ ſomtyme it ſignifieth to delite.
                  
                     Geſtito, taui, are, to beare or were oftētimes
                  
                     Geſto, aui, are, to beare longe. Geſtat ventrē, ſhe to with chylde.
                  
                     Geſtuoſus, full of tokens of myrthe.
                  
                     Geſtus, ta, tum, borne, or done.
                  
                     
                        Geſtus, 
                              •
                           u
                              •
                           ,
                      geſture, or coūtenance with menynge of the body.
                  
                     Getuli, a people in Affrike.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶G, ante I.
                  
                     GIarus, a littell ile in the ſee called Ionium, wher vnto menne condempned were exyled.
                  
                     
                        Gibber, & gibboſus, & gibberoſus,
                      he which hath a croked backe, or a great bunche on any parte of the body.
                  
                     Gibbus, & gibba, a great bunche.
                  
                     Gigantomachia, a battayle of geantes.
                  
                     Gigas, gigantis, a gyaunt.
                  
                     Gigno, genui, gignere, to ingender or gette.
                  
                     Giluus, ua, um, yelowe colour.
                  
                     Gingeria, uel gigeria, a mete made of ſondry kindes of fleſhe, or of garbage of foule.
                  
                     Gingiuae, the iawes, wherin the teth be ſet.
                  
                     Gingiuerim, ſiue gingiberim, gynger.
                  
                     Gingrio, gingrii, ire, to cry like a gooſe.
                  
                     Gion, a greate ryuer in Egypte, otherwiſe callyd Nylus.
                  
                     Girgillus, a rele, wheron threde is woūden Gith, a ſede, whiche is nowe callyd Nigella Romana: it is blacke lyke to oynyon ſede, and is very ſoote, and the ſauoure thereof exhauſteth reumes of the heed.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶G ante L.
                  
                     GLaber, bra, brū, ſmothe, without hear.
                  
                     Glabella, the ſpace betwen ye browes.
                  
                     Glabreſco, ſcere, to be without heer, or ſmothe.
                  
                     Glabreta, a place, hauynge nothynge growynge in it.
                  
                     Glabriones, they which lacke heare.
                  
                     Glacialis, le, where yſe is.
                  
                     Glacior, aris, ari, to be froſen.
                  
                     Glacies, yſe.
                  
                     Glacitare, to make a noiſe like a gander.
                  
                     Gladiatores, were men, whiche faught vnarmed with ſwordes.
                  
                     Gladiatorius, ria, rium, pertainynge to that maner of fyghtynge.
                  
                     Gladiatura, the arte or feate to fyghte with a ſworde.
                  
                     Gladiolus, a lytel ſworde or wodknyfe. alſo the name of an herbe lyke to ſedge.
                  
                     Gladius, a ſword, alſo a kind of fiſhe, which hath a bone in his forheed like to a ſworde.
                  
                     Glandatio, fedynge of ſwyne with maſte, callyd paunage.
                  
                     Glandium, glandionica, the parte of a bore next the necke, the ſhelde or gammonde.
                  
                     Glans, glādis, maſt growing on okes, bech, cheſtons, and other lyke, it is alſo a pellette

of leade. Alſo a kernell growyng betwene the ſkynne and the fleſſhe, it is more ouer the foreparte or nutte of a mans yerde.
                  
                     Glandifer, fera, diferum, that whiche beareth maſte.
                  
                     Glaphirus, a, um, iocunde, pleſant, ingraued, polyte, holow, famous, ſubtyll.
                  
                     Glarea, ſande, proprely ſandy grauel.
                  
                     Glareoſus, a, um, ſandy.
                  
                     Glaſium, an herbe lyke to plantayne, whiche maketh a blewe colour,Caeſar. wherwith the auncient Butons dyed their vyſages. ſome men englyſhe it woadde.
                  
                     Glaucinum, oyle, whiche dothe come from the olyues before they be preſſed.
                  
                     Glauciolus, a horſe with a wall eye.
                  
                     Glaucium, an herbe, which crepeth on the erthe nygh to ſalt waters.
                  
                     Glaucoma, matis, & glaucomatum, ti, & glaucoma, mae, an humour in the eien, lyke cryſtall, whiche letteth the ſyght.
                  
                     Glaucopis, pidis, a man or womanne with graye eyes.
                  
                     Glaucus, ca, cum, gray colour.
                  
                     Glaucus ſubſtantinum, a god of the ſee. alſo many men were called by that name. alſo the name of a fyſſhe.
                  
                     Gleba, a turfe or piece of erthe.
                  
                     Gleſſum, cryſtall, or beryll.
                  
                     Glycyrrhiza, lykoreſſe.
                  
                     Glis, itis, a fielde mous, whiche ſlepeth all the wynter.
                  
                     Glis, gliſsis, potters claye.
                  
                     Glis, glitis, a thyſtell.
                  
                     Gliſco, ſci, ſcere, to growe, to waxe fatte, to couerte or deſyre feruently.
                  
                     Globo, aui, are, to gather rounde.
                  
                     Globus, & globum, a boule, or other thing very rounde. Alſo a multitude of menne or beaſtes gathered rounde togither.
                  
                     Globoſus, a, um, rounde as a boule.
                  
                     Glocido, aui, are, to cackle as a henne doth.
                  
                     Glocio, cire, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Glomero, aui, are, to wynde in rounde. alſo to gather togither in an heape.
                  
                     Quint.
                     Gloria, the conſent of good mē in the praiſe of a man or woman, callid renome, glory.
                  
                     Glorior, aris, to auaunt, to thintent to haue praiſes, to extolle with boſtynge.
                  
                     Glorioſus, a, um, renomed, ſomtyme in the yll part, vaynglorious, or boſting him ſelfe.
                  
                     Glos, glotis, the ſyſters huſbande, or brothers wyfe.
                  
                     Gloſſa, a gloſe, or expoſition of dark ſpech.
                  
                     Gloſſemata, wordes not moche vſed.
                  
                     Gloſſematicus, he that maketh a commente on a boke.
                  
                     Glubo, bi, bere, to pulle of the barke or rynde of a tree.
                  
                     Gluma, the huſke of wheate.
                  
                     Gluo, glui, ere, to ſtreyne or wringe harde.
                  
                     Gluten, & glutinum, glewe.
                  
                     Glutinamentum, al glewyſhe matter.
                  
                     Glutino, aui, are, to glewe or ioyne.
                  
                     Glutio, tiui, tire, to ſwalowe.
                  
                     Gluto, tonis, a glutton.
                  
                     Glyciamerides, a kynde of meate.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶G, ante N.
                  
                     GNafalon, a certayne floxe.
                  
                     Gnarus, a, um, ſkylfull.
                  
                     Gnarè, ſkylfully.
                  
                     Gnaritas, tatis, ſkylfulnes.
                  
                     Gnomones, the teethe, wherby the age of an horſe is knowen. They be ſommetyme taken for that, whiche ſheweth the houres in a clocke or diall.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶G, ante O.
                  
                     GObius, a fyſhe, callyd a gogeon.
                  
                     Goaetia, a ſpice of wytchecrafte.
                  
                     Gomor, a meaſure among the iewes.
                  
                     Gomorrha & gomorrhum, a citie in Iudea whyche was conſumed for horryble ſynne agaynſt nature.
                  
                     Gonorrha, a diſeaſe, wherby a mans ſeede gothe from hym vnwyttyngly.
                  
                     Gorgia, the name of a great rhetorician.
                  
                     Gorgones, monſtruous womenne, whyche were vanquyſhed by Perſeus.
                  
                     Gortys, a citie of Candy.
                  
                     Goſſampinus, a tree, which beareth cotten.
                  
                     Goſsipium, cotten.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶G, ante R.
                  
                     GRabatus, a cowche.
                  
                     Graculus, a byrde callyd a Iaye.
                  
                     Graculo cum fidibus nihil, The Iaye hath nought to do with the harpe. whyche is ſpoken of theym, whyche lackynge eloquence or good letters, doo ſcorne theym that haue it.
                  
                     Gracus, & graculus, a chough or cadeſe.
                  
                     Gracchus, the name of a noble famylye or houſe in Rome.
                  
                     Gracilis, le, gracilentus, ta, tū, leane, or ſclender, ſometyme ſofte.
                  
                     Gracile, ſclenderly.
                  
                     Gracilitas, cilitatis, leanneſſe, ſclendernes, or ſofteneſſe.
                  
                     Gradus, a greeſe or ſteppe, a degree in conſanguinitie.
                  
                     De gradit delici, to be caſte downe from his place: wherby is ſygnifyed to be abaſſhed or moued from conſtancy of mynde.
                  
                     
                     Deturbari gradu, hath the ſame ſignificatiō.
                  
                     Gradior, to go by ſteppes, or ſteppe.
                  
                     Gradator, a great goer.
                  
                     Gradatii equi, amblynge horſes.
                  
                     Gradatio, a fourme of ſpeakynge, when of the fyrſt ſentence ſpringeth the ſeconde, of the ſeconde the thyrde, and ſo forthe.
                  
                     Gradatim, in order, or by courſe.
                  
                     Gradiuus, one of the names of Mars.
                  
                     Gradior, eris, greſſus ſum, to go.
                  
                     Graecus, a man borne in Grece, a Greeke.
                  
                     Graecus, a, um, of Grece.
                  
                     Graecia, Grece.
                  
                     Graecanicus, ca, cum, come out of Grece.
                  
                     Graecoſtaſis, a place where Ambaſſadours adode, vntylle they were ſente for into the Senate.
                  
                     Graiugenae, Grekes.
                  
                     Graecor, caris, ari, to ryotte in bankettynge and rybaudrye.
                  
                     Gralae, crouches, or ſtyltes.
                  
                     Grallatores, they whiche do go on ſtyltes.
                  
                     Grammatica, grammer.
                  
                     Grammaticus, he that teacheth grammer, or expoundethe authours, a profounde grammaryan.
                  
                     Grammatiſta, a ſmatterer in grammer, a meane grammarian.
                  
                     Grāmaticus, ca, cū, pertaynynge to grāmer.
                  
                     Grammaticé loqui, to ſpeake congruely.
                  
                     Grammatocyphon, he that wrytethe on his knee.
                  
                     Grammatophylatium, the place where the recordes, or commune writinges be kepte.
                  
                     Grammataeus, a chauncellour.
                  
                     Gramme, a length without breadth.
                  
                     Grammia, the fleume in the eyen.
                  
                     Gramen, graſſe: ſometyme all herbes togyther, the ſwarthe.
                  
                     Graminoſus, a, um, growen with graſſe or herbes.
                  
                     Grando, dinis, hayle. Alſo a puſhe lyke to a boyle in the fleſſhe, whiche greueth a man whan it is touched.
                  
                     Grandinoſus, a, um, full of hayle.
                  
                     Grandiuatus, ta, tum, hurt or wounded with haylle.
                  
                     Grandebalae, heares in the arme holes.
                  
                     Grandis, grande, auncient, or great.
                  
                     Grandiuſculus, la, lum, ſomwhat great, or of good age, well ſtryken in yeres.
                  
                     Granditas, tatis, the aboundaunce of yeres, auncientie.
                  
                     Grandeuus, very olde.
                  
                     Grandiloquus, eloquente, he that ſpeaketh as it were with a greatte magnyfycence in wordes.
                  
                     Grandiloquentia, a ſtately eloquence.
                  
                     Grandio, diui, ire, to make great.
                  
                     
                        Grande ſ
                              •
                           o, ere,
                      to waxe great.
                  
                     Granum, grayne or corne.
                  
                     Granarium, a gray
                        •
                     arde, wherein corne is kepte.
                  
                     Graphis, phidis, the arte of portraiture.
                  
                     Graphium, a penſyll, wherwith menne doo write in tables.
                  
                     Graphicus, ca, cum, kunnyngly, or perfectly wrought.
                  
                     
                        Graphicus homo, a propre man.
                  
                     Graphice, proprely well, and kunnyngly.
                  
                     Graphiarium, a caſe, wherin penſiles were kepte, it may be called a pennar.
                  
                     Graſſator, he that by highe wayes, lyeth in awayt to robbe or ſlee men, an extorcioner.
                  
                     Graſſor, aris, ari, to robbe or ſlee men paſſynge by the hyghe wayes. Alſo to goo or come on one with a violent rage. Therfore in a ſodayn and violent peſtilence, it is ſaid, morbus graſſatur, The ſycknes kylleth mē ſodaynely.
                  
                     Gratia, grace, ſomtyme it ſignifieth thanke, ſometyme a benefyte, ſometyme rewarde▪ alſo peace or loue, ſometyme cauſe or reſpect, alſo prayſe.
                  
                     Gratus, ta, tum, thankfull, pleaſant, acceptable.
                  
                     Gratioſus, very thankfull. Alſo in fauour, with the people, or well eſtemed.
                  
                     Gratis, an aduerbe, betokenynge withoute rewarde: ſometyme without deſerte.
                  
                     Gratuitus, ta, tum, without rewarde or vnhyred.
                  
                     Gratuitó, an aduerbe ſygnifienge, of good wyll, without benefite.
                  
                     Grates, thankes.
                  
                     Gratificor, ari, to gratifie, or doo a thynge thankfull, or to conferre a benefite, or doo a good tourne.
                  
                     Grator, ari, to giue thankes to god with offrynges, alſo to reioyce of good fortune.
                  
                     Gratulor, ari, with a datiue caſe, to be ioyous for hym ſelfe or an other for any good thynge that hath hapned.Liuius. 
                     Tibi de hac tua fcelicitate gratulor, I am ioyous with the, or as gladde as thou arte, of this proſperitie that thou arte in. Sometyme it ſygnifyeth to gyue thankes vnto god: but with an accuſatiue caſe it ſignifieth to take thankfully any acte.
                  
                     Grauis, graue, heuy, greuouſe, ſommetyme ſubſtancial, graue, or hauyng grauitie, contrary to lyghtnes or wantonnes, alſo great or puiſſant, ſometime olde or aged, ſomtime ſure or conſtent, ſommetyme plentuous or full. Terra grauts, lande laded with corne.
                  
                     Grauiter, et graue, greuouſely, heuily, ſubſtancially, moche, wiſely, ſadly.
                  
                     Grauatus, greued.
                  
                     
                     Grauedo, dinis, heuyneſſe, griefe, diſeaſe. Somtyme the mutre or reume of the heed.
                  
                     Grauedinoſus, he that hath a heuye heed.
                  
                     Grauedinoſus, a, um, that whiche maketh a heuy heed.
                  
                     Graueolentia, ſtenche or ſtynke.
                  
                     Grauo, aui, are, to greue, to burden, or lade.
                  
                     Grauor, ari, to be grieued, or to take grieuouſelye.
                  
                     Grauate, & grauatim, greuouſly, or diſpleſantly, or paynfully.
                  
                     Graueſco, ſcere, to be laded.
                  
                     Grauida mulier, a woman great with child.
                  
                     Grauido, are, to gette a woman with chyld.
                  
                     Grauaſtellus, aged.
                  
                     Grex, gregis, a flocke, as well of menne, as of cattelle.
                  
                     Gregarius miles, a ſouldiour taken at aduenture, not choſen.
                  
                     Gregarius paſtor, the chiefe ſhepard, whiche hath the charge of the hole flocke.
                  
                     Gregarius canis, a curre dogge.
                  
                     Gregalis, le, cattell, whiche is in the flocke.
                  
                     Gregatim, in ſondry flockes.
                  
                     Gremtale, an apron.
                  
                     Greſſus, a ſteppe, or goinge.
                  
                     Greſsibile, apte to goo.
                  
                     Greſſutus, ta, tum, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Groſſus, a, um, greatte.
                  
                     Groſsi, greene fygges.
                  
                     Groſſuli, yonge fygges.
                  
                     Groſsipion, ſeu groſſapinus, a tree, wherof commeth cotton.
                  
                     Groſſapina, cotton.
                  
                     Grus, gruis, a Crane.
                  
                     Gruo, gruere, to crye lyke a Crane.
                  
                     Grumus, a barowe, or hyllocke.
                  
                     Grumma, a thynge, wherwith grounde is meaſured.
                  
                     Grumia, a mydde place, from whenſe goth foure wayes.
                  
                     Grunnio, ire, to grunt lyke a ſwyne.
                  
                     Grundio, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Gryllus, a beaſte, more than a graſſehoppe, whiche deſtroyeth corne.
                  
                     Gryphus, a grype or gryffon. alſo a captious, an inſoluble, or diffuſe argumente, a ryddyll.
                  
                     Grypus, a noſe ryſynge in the myddell.
               
            
            
               
                  G, ante V.
                  
                     GVla, the throte, ſometyme glottony.
                  
                     Guloſus, a glutton.
                  
                     Guliocae, the grene ſhale of the walle nutte.
                  
                     Gummi, gūme, whiche droppeth frō trees.
                  
                     Gummatus, ta, tum, dreſſed with gumme or raſed.
                  
                     Gummarae arbores, Trees that bryngethe forthe gumme.
                  
                     Gumminum, oyle made of gumme.
                  
                     Gurges, gurgitis, a ſwallowe or depe pyll in a water, or a goulfe.
                  
                     Gurgito, aui, are, to ſwolowe or deuoure.
                  
                     Gurgulio, gulionis, the gully or gargylle of the throote, or throote bolle. It is alſo a worme that bredeth in barnes, and eateth vppe corne.
                  
                     Gurguſtium, a darke and vyle habitation, a cabban or cotage.
                  
                     Guſtus, tus, taſte.
                  
                     Guſtatus, tus, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Guſto, aui, are, to taſte.
                  
                     Guttus, a cruet, or other lyke thynge, oute of the whiche lycour is poured dropping.
                  
                     Gutta, a droppe.
                  
                     Guttatim, by droppes.
                  
                     Gutturnium, a lauer, or yewer.
                  
                     Guttur, gutturis, the thro
                        •
                     e.
                  
                     Gutturoſus, he that hath a ſwollen throte.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶G, ante Y.
                  
                     GYgaeus, a laake of Lydie,
                  
                     Gygemorus, a lyttell hylle, not farre from Theſſalye.
                  
                     Gyges, the name of a kynge of Lydia, alſo a ryuer of Lydia was callydde by the ſame name.
                  
                     Gymnaſtes, he that teacheth chylderne to exercyſe them in wraſtlynge, or other like.
                  
                     Gymnaſium, a place, where is commune exercyſe of the bodye. Sommetyme a ſchoolehouſe.
                  
                     Gymnaſticum, the arte of exercyſe.
                  
                     Gymnaſiarches, the chiefe mayſter of the ſchole or place of exercyſe.
                  
                     Gymnoſophiſtae, phyloſophers of Inde, whiche went alway naked.
                  
                     Gymnici iudi, playes exercyſed naked.
                  
                     Gymnus, a beaſte, whyche commethe of a horſe and an aſſe mare.
                  
                     Gynoecium, a nourcerye.
                  
                     Gyneconitus, that parte of the houſe, whyche ſerueth onely for women.
                  
                     Gynephilus, a great louer of women.
                  
                     Gypſus, playſter.
                  
                     Gypſo, aui, are, to playſter.
                  
                     Gyrus, a cyrcute or compaſſe.
                  
                     Gyro, gyraui, gyrare, to compaſſe or goo in cyrcuite.
                  
                     Gyttheum, a towne, whiche Hercules and Apollo, layenge there aſyde theyr ſtryfe and debate, buylded togyther, and the inhabytauntes of the ſame towne are called Gyttlietes.
               
            
            
               
               
                  
                     
                        HABEO, MABVI, HAbere, to haue, to hold, to poſſede or occupie, to eſteme or ſuppoſe, to call, to dwelle, Penſi habere, to take hede. Fruſtra habere, to deceyue. Habere bene ſeu male, to doo or proſper well or yll. Bene haber, it is wel. Res ita ſe habet, the thinge is at this point. In cuſtodiis haberi, to be kepte in pryſone. Fortunas ſuas uenales habuit, he hath ſolde all his goodes. Habeo tibi fidem, I put my truſte in the. Habeo rationem, I haue buſynes, or I haue to do. Habere rem, to medle with a woman. Habere rem cum aduerſario, to contend. Habere gratiam, to thanke. Habeo audire, I can here. Habeo polliceri, I canne promyſe. Habet fruſtra, He is dyſappoynted.
                  
                     Habitus, habitus, the fourme or ſtate of the body, ſometyme of other thynges, Alſo apparayle. Alſo it ſygnyfyethe a qualytie or propretie, whiche a manne hath conceiued by education, longe exercyſe, or cuſtome, habyte.
                  
                     Habitudo, dinis, the ſame.
                  
                     Habitior, oris, more corporate.
                  
                     Habilis, le, hable.
                  
                     Habena, the rayne of a brydell.
                  
                     Habito, taui, are, to dwelle.
                  
                     Habitaculum & habitatio, a dwellyng place or habitation.
                  
                     Hactenus, hytherto, ſo moche.
                  
                     Hadrianopolis, a citie in Thracia.
                  
                     Hadrobalum, a kynde of ſwete ſmellynge gumme, that groweth in Media.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶H, ante Ae.
                  
                     HAedui, people in Fraunce, whiche be nowe callid Burgonyons, and Burbonoyſes.
                  
                     Haedus, a kydde.
                  
                     Haedina caro, kyddes fleſhe.
                  
                     Haedile, a ſtable, wherin kyddes be kepte.
                  
                     Haedera, Iuye tree.
                  
                     Haederatius, ia, ium, of Iuye.
                  
                     Haematices, the ſanguinarie or blode ſtone.
                  
                     Haemonia, the countrey callid Theſſaly.
                  
                     Haemorrhois, a diſeaſe in the fundemēt lyke teates or wartes, out of the whiche iſſueth bloudde, callyd emorrodes or pyles. Alſo a ſerpent, of whom if a man be ſtryken, he bledeth to dethe.
                  
                     Haereo, haeſi, haerére, to cleaue or ſtycke to a thynge. ſometyme to doubte.
                  
                     Haeret in te omnis culpa, In the is putte all the blame.
                  
                     Haereſco, ſcere, to ſticke faſt, or be thruſte in.
                  
                     Haeſito, aui, are, idem quod haereo.
                  
                  
                     Haeres, haeredis, an heyre, or he, which ſuccedeth an other in his landes or goodes.
                  
                     Haereditas, tatis, inheritance or ſucceſſion.
                  
                     Haereditarius, ia, ium, pertaynynge to inheritance. Bona haereditaria, goodes whiche do come by inheritaunce.
                  
                     Haeredipeta, crauers of goodes, flatteryng men to be their heires.
                  
                     Haeredium, lande, wherin a man hath a ſtate of inheritaunce.
                  
                     Haeredidum, a lyttel inheritance.
                  
                     Haereſis, haereſios, a ſecte, an hereſy, an obſtynate opynion.
                  
                     Haereſiarches, an arche heretike.
                  
                     Haereticus, an heretike.
                  
                     Hagnus, a lambe.
                  
                     Hagnellus, a lyttell lambe.
                  
                     Hagninus, a, um, of a lambe.
                  
                     Halec, lecis, a fyſſhe callyd herryng. Alſo a ſawce made of fyſhe.
                  
                     Haleſius, a ryuer nat farre from Aetna.
                  
                     Halialmon, a ryuer of Macidon.
                  
                     Halietus, an Egle, that haunteth aboute the ſee.
                  
                     Halieutica, bokes contayninge the properties of fyſhes.
                  
                     Halimon, a thorne lyke to a whyte thorne, growynge by the ſee ſyde, and hath leaues lyke to an olyue tree, but they be broder.
                  
                     Halo, aui, are, to ſende forthe ſauour.
                  
                     Halitus, breathe or vapour.
                  
                     Halo, the cirkle or garlande aboute the Moone.
                  
                     Halicarnaſus, a citie in the laſſe Aſia.
                  
                     Halophanta, a great lyer.
                  
                     Haloſis, the captiuitie.
                  
                     Halito, aui, are, to vapour out.
                  
                     Halizones, people of Paphlagonie, ſo called bycauſe they ar inuironned about with the See.
                  
                     Hallucinor, ari, to be in a dreame, to be deceyued, to erre, or to take a matter wrong.
                  
                     Hamadriades, Nymphes or fayries of the woddes.
                  
                     Hamus, a booke. ſometyme a chayne.
                  
                     Hamo, aui, are, to crooke.
                  
                     Hamatus, mata, tum, to be furnyſſhed with hookes.
                  
                     Hamiota, uel hamota, an angler or fyſſher with an angle or hoke.
                  
                     Hamatilis, le, pertaynynge to a hoke. piſcatus hamatilis, fyſſhynge with a hooke, or anglynge.
                  
                     Hamonus, a, um, a colour ſomwhat redde.
                  
                     Haphe, a colour on the body, lyke to them that be leperous.
                  
                     Hammon, onis, Iupiter in the egiptian tūge
                  
                     
                     Harena, uide ante in arena.
                  
                  
                     Hariolus, a ſotheſayer.
                  
                     Harmonia, harmonie or melody.
                  
                     Harpaſa, a towne of Aſia.
                  
                     Harpe, a ſworde lyke to a ſythe.
                  
                     Harpago, aui, are, to take by violence.
                  
                     Harpago, ginis, a grapull of a ſhyppe. alſo a coupers inſtrument, wherwith he dryueth on howpes, an addyſſe.
                  
                     Harpa, & harpax, acis, a grapelyng yron, for to cloſe ſhyppes togyther: alſo a poll with a hoke on the ende, that ſhypmen vſe.
                  
                     Harpocrates, the god of ſylence.
                  
                     Harpocratem reddere, to put one to ſilence.
                  
                     Harpalice, a womans name, the doughter of Harpalus kynge of Thrace.
                  
                     Harpyiae, monſtruous byrdes, hauyng maydens vyſages, and talons of a meruaylous rapacitie. wherfore men that be rauenous, and great gatherers of goodes, be named ſometyme Harpy
                           •
                        ae.
                  
                  
                     Haruſpex, ſpicis, a dyuynatour, or tellar of thynges to come by the lokynge in the bowelles of beaſtes. Alſo he, whiche obſerueth tymes in doinge of thynges.
                  
                     Haruſpicina, the arte of hym, whyche is a dyuinatour.
                  
                     Haruſpicium, the diuynation or tellynge of thynges to comme, by the lokynge in beaſts bowelles.
                  
                     
                        H
                              ••
                           pis, pidis,
                      the bowyng made lyke a cer
                     
                        ••••
                      
                     
                        •
                     n roufes of houſes, or of a whele.
                  
                     
                        H
                              ••
                           a,
                      a ſpeare.
                  
                     
                        H
                              ••••
                           pu
                              •
                           ae,
                      were without yron: and in the olde tyme were gyuen for a price to theym that vanquiſhed firſte in battayle.
                  
                     
                        H
                              ••
                           ati,
                      ſpeare men.
                  
                     
                        Ha
                              ••
                           le,
                      a ſpeare ſtaffe.
                  
                     
                        H
                              •••
                           a
                              •
                           ium,
                      ſeliynge vnder the ſtanderde.
                  
                     Haitam abiicere, ſygnifieth to leaue ſute, to diſpayre of the matter in variance.
                  
                     Hauicus ludus, reunnynge at the tylte with ſpeares.
                  
                     Haud, in no wyſe.
                  
                     Vergil
                           •
                        us.
                     Haurio, ſiui, iui, rii, ire, to drawe or take out, to here, to ſee, to take a thyng gredylye, to wounde, to fatigate or make wery, to make empty, to conſume. Haurire ſupplicia, to ſuffre punyſhement or peynes.
                  
                     Hauſtus, tus, a draught in drynkynge.
                  
                     Hauſtum facere, to drynke.
                  
                     Hauſtrum, a bucket to drawe water.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶H, Ante E.
                  
                     HEautontimorumenon, the name of one of the comedyes of Terentius, whiche is as moche to ſaye, as tourmentynge hym ſelfe.
                  
                     Hebdomas, madis, & hebdomada, ae, a wike. Alſo the numbre of ſeuen in dayes, yeres, or other tyme.
                  
                     Hebenus, a tree, wherof the wod is blacke lyke geate, and it beareth neyther leaues, nor fruite.
                  
                     Hebes, hebetis, dulle.
                  
                     Hebeo, & hebeſco, ere, to be dull.
                  
                     Hebeto, aui, are, to be duſtre or made darke.
                  
                     Hebetudo, dinis, dulneſſe, or duſkyſhenes.
                  
                     Hebiones, of men in olde tyme were callid poore folkes.
                  
                     Hebraicus, Hebrician or of Hebrewe.
                  
                     Hebron, a vyllage by Ieruſalem.
                  
                     Hebrus, a ryuer in Thracia.
                  
                     Hecameda, the daughter of Arſinoi, whiche was gyuen to Neſtor for a gyfte.
                  
                     Hecatombe, a ſacrifice, wherein were kylled a hundred beaſtes.
                  
                     Hecatompolis, a countrey hauyng an hundred cities therin.
                  
                     Hecatompus, he that hath an hundred fete.
                  
                     Hecate, a name of the mone.
                  
                     Hecta, the yexinge of a man. alſo a lyttelle puffe, whiche riſeth in breadde whanne it is baken.
                  
                     Hectica febris, the feuer that conſumeth.
                  
                     Hector, the ſonne of Priamus.
                  
                     Hecyra, a mother in lawe.
                  
                     Hedonius, expenſes in voluptuous thingis.
                  
                     Heiulo, aui, are, to wayle, crienge out.
                  
                     Heliocaminus, a place whiche is hette with the ſonne.
                  
                     Helcium, the harneys of carthorſes, wherby they drawe.
                  
                     Helenium, an herbe commonly called Enula campana, in englyſhe Helycampane.
                  
                     Heliopolis, a cytie in Grecia called alſo Corinthus.
                  
                     Heliochriſos, an herbe hauynge a yelowe floure. A marygolde.
                  
                     Helioſcopium, a lyttell tree lyke to a fygge tree, and hath leaues lyke a plane, but greatter and blacker.
                  
                     Helioſelinum, an herbe lyke to Smallage, whyche groweth in watery groundes, and hath but one leaſe.
                  
                     Heliotropium, a flowre whiche in the ſonne ryſynge dothe open, and at the ſonne ſette cloſeth. Some ſuppoſeth it to be Marygoldes or ruddes.
                  
                     Helix, icis, of ſome men is taken for a kynde of wyllowe tree, of ſome men for yuie.
                  
                     Hellas, ladis, the countrey of Grece.
                  
                     Helleborus, an herbe, the rote wherof purgeth melancoly.
                  
                     Hellenes, the ſonne of Deucalion, of whom the Grekes were named Hellenes.
                  
                  
                     Helleſpontus, an arme of the ſee. whyche

deuideth Grece and Aſ
                           •
                        e.
                  
                  
                     Heloi, in hebrewe ſignifieth god almighty.
                  
                     Helorus, a ryuer in Sycile.
                  
                     Heluatia, a garment which was vſed in Lidia, and was of the color of a cowes hyde.
                  
                     Heluela, ſmall wortes.
                  
                     Heluetii, people called Suycers, or Suyches, by deſyre of warres, ennemyes to all mankynd: ſubiectes neither to god not to Prynce.
                  
                     Heluo, onis, he whiche in eatyng and drinkyng ſpendeth al his ſubſtance, a reueller. ſomtyme a glutton onely.
                  
                     Heluo librorū, an inſaciable reder of bokes.
                  
                     Heluatio, reuell, or ſpendynge in ryot.
                  
                     Heluor, aris, ari, to ſpende in ryot.
                  
                     Heluolum, a colour betwene redde & white lyke the coloure of clothe, called frenche tawnye.
                  
                     Helxine, an herbe, which hath ſtalkes ſomwhat redde, and ſmal burres on the toppe, whiche do cleaue faſte vnto clothes.
                  
                     Hem, an interiection of blamynge, diſdaynynge, meruaylynge, or ſhewynge.
                  
                     Hemeridion, whiche dureth but one day.
                  
                     Hemerodromus, a currour, which runneth many myles in one day.
                  
                     Hemicranea, a peyne in halfe the heed, callyd the mygrim.
                  
                     Hemicyclum, a compaſſe chayre.
                  
                     Hemicyclus, an halfe cerkle.
                  
                     Hemina, a meaſure of licour or corne, whiche may nowe be taken for a pottell.
                  
                     Hemiola, gayne of all, and halfe as moche, as of .iiii. s. be gotten .vi. s.
                  
                     Hemiolus, a proportion in Arithmetike, cō
                     taynynge the hole noumbre, and halfe that nombre: as one to thre .xv to ten.
                  
                     Hemiomū, an herbe good agaynſt all yexis.
                  
                     Hemis, halfe.
                  
                     Hemiſpherium, half the compaſſe of the viſyble heuen or firmament.
                  
                     Hemiſtichium, halfe a verſe.
                  
                     Hemitogium, halfe a gowne.
                  
                     Hemitritaeus, an halfe tercian feuer, whoſe courſe is in euery .xxxvi. houres, or whych hath the courſe of a tercyan.
                  
                     Hemodes, certayne iles in the douche ſee.
                  
                     Hemerobius, one dayes ſuſtynaunce. alſo a worme, whiche lyueth but one day.
                  
                     Hemichorium, halfe a daunce.
                  
                     Hemus, a mountayne in Grece in the realm of Thrace, which is ſyxe myles in height.
                  
                     Hendecaſyllabus, a verſe of a .xi. ſyllables.
                  
                     Henula, a lyttell chappell.
                  
                     Hepiolus, a flye lyke a butterflye, whyche flyeth at nyght into the leame of a candell.
                  
                     Hepſema, muſte boiled to the thyrd part.
                  
                     Heptapolis, was ſommetyme the name of Egypte, by reaſon of ſeuen cities, whyche fyrſte were in it.
                  
                     Hepthemimeris, where a ſyllable naturally ſhort, is made longe in a verſe, which doth happe in the begynnynge of the fyrſt fote.
                  
                     Hera, the name of Iuno.
                  
                     Heraclea, a town in the cōfines of Europa.
                  
                     Heraclee, a towne very nere to Naples.
                  
                     Heracleon, an herbe lyke to Organum, it groweth in watry places, and hath a floure lyke a lylle: and whan the floure is fallen, it hath a heed lyke popie. It is alſo an nother herbe growynge in plaſhes, hauynge a lyttell ſtalke, whiche excedeth not foure fyngers hygh, hauynge a redde floure, and leaues lyke Coriander: this herbe healeth all woundes, if it be layde vnto them. It is called Heraclion ſyderion.
                  
                  
                     Heracleotica nux, a walle nurte.
                  
                     Heraclides, the name of a philoſopher.
                  
                     Heraclitus, a philoſopher, whiche alwayes wepte, whan he behelde the people: his warkes of a purpoſe were obſcure 
                        •
                      harde to be vnderſtande.
                  
                     Heraclius, the name of an Emperour, it is alſo a touche ſtone.
                  
                     Herba, an herbe. Alſo generally all thynge that groweth on the erthe, not being wod. ſomtyme a wede.
                  
                     Herbam dare aut porrigere, where a manne yeldeth hym, or confeſſeth hym ſelfe to be vanquyſhed.
                  
                     Herbula, a lyttell herbe.
                  
                     Herboſus, a, um, full of herbes or graſſe.
                  
                     Herbaceus, a, um, of herbes or graſſe.
                  
                     Herbidus, a, um, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Herbarius, he whiche knoweth the propreties of herbes, and maketh medycynes of theym.
                  
                     Herbarius, ia, ium, pertaynynge to herbes.
                  
                     Herbare, to brynge forthe herbes.
                  
                     Herbeſco, ere, to make herbes or wedes.
                  
                     Herceus, one of the ſurnames of Iupiter.
                  
                     Hercinia, a great wodde in Get many, whiche is in breadth .ix. dayes iourney.
                  
                     Herculanus, na, num, of Hercules.
                  
                     Hercules, the ſonne of Iupiter & Alcumena.
                  
                     Hercle & Hercule, an affirmatiue othe.
                  
                     Herculeius, a Romayne, whiche fauoured the parte of Marius.
                  
                     Herculeus, ea, eum, puiſſant or mighty.
                  
                     Herebus, the depeſt place in hell.
                  
                     Heri, yeſterday.
                  
                     Hericius, an yrchin or hedgehogge.
                  
                     Herillus, a philoſopher of Calcidonie.
                  
                  
                     Herma, an ymage of Mercurius. It is alſo an image, the heed wherof may be chāgid.
                  
                     Hermae, be alſo Images ferte or layde on Sepulchres.
                  
                     
                     Hermathena, an ymage contaynyng the figures of Mercury and Pallas.
                  
                     Hermaphroditus, the ſonne of Mercurye & Venus. Alſo he that is both man & woman.
                  
                     Hermerotes, ſmall images, proprely of lytell chyldren with whynges.
                  
                     Hermes, is, & hermetis, Mercurye.
                  
                     Hermodōcus, a philoſopher of Epheſie.
                  
                     Hermogenes, a propre name.
                  
                     Hermoglyphus, a grauer of ymages.
                  
                     Hermon, a lyttelle hylle that ſtandethe on Iordane.
                  
                     Hermopolis, the name of a citie that Hermes buylded.
                  
                     Hermupoa, an herbe callyd Mercury.
                  
                  
                     Hermus, a ryuer, which in the middes, parteth the fyldes of Smyrnee: and fallynge from the hylle Dorylao, dyuideth Phrigia from Car
                        •
                     a.
                  
                     Hernia, the diſeaſe, wherof men be called broſten: for that their bowels, or other matter, is fallen into their coddes.
                  
                     Hernici, people in Campania.
                  
                     Hermoſus, he that is broſten.
                  
                     Herodius, a byrde named a faucon.
                  
                     Herodes, the ſonne of Antipater, whyche in the .x. yere of Auguſtus, was of the Romaynes declared kynge of Iewes, and he reigned .xxxvii. yeres.
                  
                     Heroida, a noble woman.
                  
                     Heroicus, ca, cum, noble, or pertaynynge to nobleneſſe.
                  
                     Herpeta, a terter.
                  
                     Herſilia, the name of Romulus wyfe.
                  
                     Herus, a lorde or maſter.
                  
                     Heſperia, Italy. Heſperia ultima, Spayne.
                  
                     Heſperus, the weſte ſterre.
                  
                     Heſperides, the thre daughters of Atlas, whiche kepte the gardens, wherin grewe the golden appuls, that were taken awaye by Hercules.
                  
                     Heſperidum horti, the gardeynes, wherein were the golden appulies, nowe callyd Orenges.
                  
                     Heſternus, na, num, of yeſterdayes.
                  
                     Heſtiaea, is a parte of Theſſaly ſayth Strabo, and Ptol. and in Homerus, it is a town in Euboea. Stephanus ſayth, it is a Cytie in Acarnania.
                  
                     Heterogenus, na, um, of an other kynde.
                  
                     Hetruria, the countrey of Thuſcan wherin the citie of Florence is.
                  
                     Heu, alas.
                  
                     Heus, howe.
                  
                     Hexaclinum, a parlour, wherein ſyxe perſones may ſoupe.
                  
                     Hexagonum, ſyxe cornerde.
                  
                     Hexameron, of ſyxe dayes.
                  
                     Hexametrum, a verſe of ſyxe fete.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶H ante I.
                  
                     HIarbas, the ſonne of Iupiter, whiche was kynge of the Getulians.
                  
                     Hiacynthus, an herbe with a pourple floure, and hath a rounde roote.
                  
                     Hiacynthinae ueſtes, garmentes of pourple colour.
                  
                     Hiato, aui, are, to gape often.
                  
                     Hiatus, tus, a gapynge.
                  
                     Hibiſcus, an herbe lyke to malowes, hauing a gretter lefe, and a heary ſtalke, holyhok.
                  
                     Hic, this man. alſo here or in this place.
                  
                     Hiera, an yle betwene Sicile and Liparis. Alſo the name of a way, of a womanne, the wyfe of Thelaphus kynge of Miſie.
                  
                     Hieranthemis, the floure of the herbe Camamele.
                  
                     Hierapicra, a medycyne to pourge flewme and cholere.
                  
                     Herapolis, a citie in Aſia.
                  
                     Hierarchia, the holy gouernaunce, or principalytie.
                  
                     Hieri, people beyonde Sauromatas.
                  
                     Hierobotane, an herbe callyd holy herbe.
                  
                     Hieroceps, an yle in Cyprus, nere to Paphꝰ.
                  
                     Hierocomion, a laſerhouſe.
                  
                     Hieroduli, miniſters in temples & churches.
                  
                     Hierogliplicae, myſtical letters or cyphers.
                  
                     Hieron, uel hiereon, a chappell.
                  
                     Hierophanta, the declarer of myſteries or holy ſcripture.
                  
                     Hieroſolyma, Ieruſalem.
                  
                     Hierotheus, the propre name of a man.
                  
                     Hila, a ſmall gutte or ars gutte.
                  
                     Hilareſco, ſcere, to be mery.
                  
                     Hilaria plurali, the .viii. calendes of Aprile, whan the day & nyght haue equall houres.
                  
                     Hilaris, re, & hilarus, mery, or ioyous.
                  
                     Hilaritas, tatis, myrthe.
                  
                     Hilarius, the propre name of a man.
                  
                     Hilaro, aui, are, to make one mery or ioyous.
                  
                     Hilarodus, a ſynger of a wanton and delycate ſonge.
                  
                     Hilum, the lyttell blacke, whyche is in the ende of a beane. It is ſometyme taken for nothynge or nought.
                  
                     Himera, a ryuer in Sycile, deuided into two partes, the oone freſſhe water, the other ſalte.
                  
                     Hin, a meaſure of the Iewes, whiche contayned of wyne or water, the weyghte of xviii. pounde.
                  
                     Hinnio, iui, ire, to neygh lyke a hors.
                  
                     Hinnulus, a fawne or hynde calfe.
                  
                     Hio, aui, are, to gape.
                  
                     Hippacen, cheſe made of mares mylke.
                  
                     Hippaco, aui, are, to fetche breth quyckely.
                  
                     Hippagium, cariage on horſebacke.
                  
                     Hippago, ginis, a ferybote.
                  
                     
                     Hipparclius, the maiſter of the horſes.
                  
                     Hippeas, a kynde of crabbe fyſhe.
                  
                     Hippiades, ymages of womenne on horſebacke.
                  
                     Hippias, a philoſopher, whiche was expert in all ſciences and craftes.
                  
                     Hippiatrus, an horſe leche.
                  
                     Hippo, maſcul, gen. the name of .ii. cities.
                  
                     Hippocampae, fyſhes lyke horſes.
                  
                     Hippocentaurus, a beaſte beynge halfe a man, halfe an horſe.
                  
                     Hippocomus, an horſeſkorcer.
                  
                     Hippocrates, the name of a phiſytion moſte excellente.
                  
                     Hippocrene, a fountayne in Boeotia.
                  
                  
                     Hippodame, mes, & hippodamia, miae, the name of a woman.
                  
                     Hippodamus, a breaker of horſes.
                  
                     Hippodromus, a brode way, wherin many horſes may runne togither.
                  
                     Hippoglotios, an herbe called Alexander.
                  
                     Hyppolytus, the ſonne of Theſeus, who at the complaynte of Phedra his ſtepmother, was purſewed by his father, and he in a charyot fleynge, was ouerthrowen amonge the ſharpe ſtones, and rente all to pieces. Afterwarde Aeſculapius reuyued hym, and reſtored hym to helthe. wherefore he wolde be called Vi
                           •
                        bius, that is to ſaye, twyſe a manne, foraſmoche as he had twiſe lyued.
                  
                     Hippomachia, tournayenge on horſebacke and iuſtynge.
                  
                     Hippomanes, an herbe, wherof yf horſes bone eate, they forthewith rounne madde. It is alſo a venomous humour, rounnynge out of the ſhappe of a mare, whiche yf a man happe to receyue inwarde, he ſhall be madde. Plinius ſaythe, that it is a lyttelle fleſhe in the forheed of a colte, whan he is newe foled, blacke, and as moche as a date, whiche the mare plucketh awaye with hyrrethe, as ſoone as ſhe hath foled: and if any man do take it away before her, ſhe neuer after wyll loue hir fole.
                  
                     Hippomarathron, an herbe lyke fenell, but hauynge greatter leaues.
                  
                     Hipponomus, a herde or keper of horſes.
                  
                     Hippopera, a maale or bougette.
                  
                     Hippopodes, people in the Scythik occean whiche haue fete lyke horſes.
                  
                     Hippopotamus, a beaſt lyuyng in the ryuer of Nyle, hauyng fere lyke an oxe, his back and mane lyke a hors, & neyeth like a hors, a wynding tayle, and tuſked lyke a boore.
                  
                     Hippoſelinum, an herbe lyke parcely, and groweth in drye groundes, whereof horſes do gladly eate.
                  
                     Hippotela, a fole of an aſſe.
                  
                     Hippotoxata, an archer on horſebacke.
                  
                     Hippuris, an herbe called in latine Equiſetū, or cauda equina, in englyſhe, horſetayle.
                  
                     Hir, Hiris, the palme of the hande.
                  
                     Hira, the gutte, whiche is called Ieiunum.
                  
                  
                     Hircipilus, a man that is hear
                        •
                     e.
                  
                     Hircoſus, a, um, that ſtynketh lyke a gote.
                  
                     Hirquitalus, a chylde, whiche paſſethe the age of .xiiii. yeres, and begynneth to be ſtyrred with lecherye.
                  
                     Hirquitallire, to enter into that age, or aptnes to lecherye.
                  
                     Hircquus, the corner of the eie, alſo he that is gog
                        •
                     e eyed.
                  
                     Hirculus, a kynde of ſpikenarde.
                  
                     Hircus, a gote bucke. it is alſo the ranke ſauour, which iſſueth out of the arme holes.
                  
                     Hircinus, a, um, gotyſhe.
                  
                     Hirrio, iui, ire, to narre lyke a madde dogge.
                  
                     Hirſutus, ta, tum, rough.
                  
                     Hirtus, ta, tum, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Hirudo, inis, a horſeleche, or blode ſucker.
                  
                     Hirundo, inis, a ſwalowe.
                  
                     Hiſciacus, he that gapeth moche.
                  
                     Hiſco, ſci, ſcere, to gape as one doth for ſluggiſhenes, after ſlepe, or for lacke of ſlepe. Alſo it is to proffre to ſpeake, or open the mouthe to ſpeake.
                  
                     Hiſmaelita, a faraſyn.
                  
                     Hiſpalis, a citie in Spayne, nowe callydde Sibyle.
                  
                     Hiſpania, a countreye in the weſte parte of Europa callyd Spayne, and was ſometyme callid Iberia, and Heſperia, & is inuyronned on the ſouthe part with the ſee, callid Mare mediterraneum, whiche dyuydeth Europa from Affrica: on the northe parte with the ſee called Mare Cantabricum, on the weſte with the great occian ſee with the mountaynes called Pyrenei, and the royalme of Fraunce. And this countrey is diuided by Pthelome into thre regiōs, Bethicā, wherin is Granado, Siuyle, Corduba. &c. Luſytaniā, wherin is Portugal, Galicia. &c. Tarraconenicin, wherin is Caſtyl, Lyons, and Arragon. At this tyme it conteyneth fyue relmes, Granado on the ſouth part toward Affrike, Portugall on the weſt, Galicia and Biſcay on the north, Arragon on the caſte part, Caſtyl and Lions in the myddell.
                  
                     Hiſpidus, a, um, briſtled or rough heared.
                  
                     Hiſtoria, a ſtorye.
                  
                     Hiſtoricus, a writer of ſtories.
                  
                     Hiſtrio, onis, a player in enterludes and ſtage players.
                  
                     Hiſtrionicus, ca, cum, pertaining to players.
                  
                     Hiſtrix, icis, 
                     
                        •
                      beaſte hauyng ſharpe prickes on his backe, called a porkpine.
                  
                     Hiulco, aui, are, to make to gape or chinke.
                  
                     
                     Hiulcus, ca, cum, gapynge, or chynked, as the grounde to in a great drythe.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶H Ante O.
                  
                     HOc, this or that.
                  
                     Hodie, to daye.
                  
                     Hododocus, a robber by the hyghe waye.
                  
                     Hodoeporicum, a boke to carie in iourney, whiche may be called a iournall.
                  
                     Hodoeporus, a trauayler by the waye.
                  
                     Holocauſium, proprely the beaſte, whiche hauynge his bowelles taken out, is layde hole on the aulter and bourned.
                  
                     Holographum, a teſtament all writen with the hande of the teſtatour.
                  
                     Holor, oris, a ſwanne.
                  
                     Holoſerica ueſtis, a garment all of ſylke.
                  
                     Holus, alias Homolus, a hylle of Theſſaly.
                  
                     Homeromaſux, ticis, the reprocher of Homere, generally Homeromaſtices, be taken for all reprochers, and falſe correctours of lerned menne.
                  
                     Homerus, the poete of all other moſte famous and excellent, who wrate the battaile betwene the Grekes and Troyanes wonderfull eloquently: but howe truely, wyſe me may coniect. Alſo he wrote the trauayle of the prudent Vlyſſes. Finally both wor
                     
                        •••
                      are worthy to be radde, for the meruailous inuention, and profytable ſentences in them contayned.
                  
                     Homicida, a murderer, a mankyller.
                  
                     Homicidium, mourder, or manſlaughter.
                  
                     Homilia, a Sermone.
                  
                     Homo, a lyuynge creature, hauynge capacitie of reaſon, ſubiecte to death, a manne, woman, or chylde.
                  
                     Homocapnus, a man, whiche ſitteth alway in the ſmoke, or by the fyre.
                  
                     Homoeoſis, a ſimylitude.
                  
                     Homogalactos, a foſter brother.
                  
                     Homogenes, of one kynde.
                  
                     Homogloſſus, of the ſame tonge or lāgage.
                  
                     Homoleum, a cappe of the olde facion.
                  
                     Homologia, a cōfeſſion, conſent or couenāt
                  
                     Homomeria, lykenes in partis or membres
                  
                     Homonoea, the propre name of a woman, wherby is ſignified concorde.
                  
                     Homonymon, of like name.
                  
                     Homo triū literarū, ſignified ſomtime in mokage a man of a noble linage, bicauſe noble men wrate their forenames,Eraſmꝰ in Chiliad. their names & ſurnames with thre letters, as. P. Cor. Scipio, C.I. Caeſ. It is ſommetyme taken for a thefe, bycauſe in Fur are but thre letters.
                  
                     Homouſios, of lyke ſubſtaunce.
                  
                     Homoſipyi, they whyche ſleepe together vnder one ruffe.
                  
                     Honeſtas, tatis, honeſtie.
                  
                     Honeſto, aui, are, to rewarde with honour.
                  
                     Honeſtus, ta, tum, honeſte.
                  
                     Honor, oris, honos, noris, honour, dignitie, ſometyme beautie, alſo reuerence, honeſty.
                  
                     Honorarium, a preſent giuē to ambaſſadors, great officers, and iuſtices at their firſt cō
                     myng, or executing of their autorities.
                  
                     Honorem praefari, to ſpeake with reuerēce, as whan a thinge ſhall be ſpoken, which is vyle or diſhoneſte.
                  
                     Honoraria, playes made at Rome, to the honour of Bacchus.
                  
                     Honorarius, ia, um, pertaining to honour.
                  
                     Honorificens, honorificentior, honorificentiſsimus, a, um, vſynge or doinge thynges honourablye.
                  
                     Honorifico, aui, are, to do honor, or to honor
                  
                     Honorificus, ca, cum, that bringeth honour.
                  
                     Honoro, aui, are, to honour.
                  
                     Honorus, a, um, that is with honour.
                  
                     Hopiſtographi, rolles writen on both ſides.
                  
                     Hora, an howre.
                  
                     Horaeum, ſommer honye. It is alſo a ſauce made of fyſhe.
                  
                     Horarium, the ſpace of an howre.
                  
                     Horda, a cowe great with calfe.
                  
                     Hordearius, ia, um, pertaynyng to barley.
                  
                     Hordeum, barley.
                  
                     Horeſtes, the ſonne of kyng Agamemnon, whiche ſlewe his mother, bycauſe ſhe conſpired with Aegiſthus her aduouterer, to ſlee his father.
                  
                     Horia, a fyſhers bote.
                  
                     Horizon, tis, a cerkle dyuidynge the halfe ſphere, or ouer part of the firmament, from the other halfe, where, to our ſyght, it ſeemeth that the heuen toucheth the erthe.
                  
                     Hormeſion, a precious ſtone of the colour of fyre.
                  
                     Horminode, a grene ſtone, compaſſed with a cerkle of the colour of golde.
                  
                     Hornus, na, um, of this yeres, Hagnus hornus, this yeres lambe. Homae fruges, This yeres grayne.
                  
                     Hornotinus, a, um, of one yeres growynge.
                  
                     Horologium, a dyall or a clocke.
                  
                     Horomaſdes, among the Caldees was named the good god.
                  
                     Horoſcopos, the diligent markynge of the tyme of the byrthe of a chylde.
                  
                     Horoſcopo, are, to marke the howre.
                  
                     Horoſcopus, that part of the firmamēt, whiche euery houre riſeth from the caſt, aſtronomers do call it the aſcendent.
                  
                     Horoſcopus, pa, um, euery, thynge, wherein howres be marked.
                  
                     Horrearius, the keper of the barne.
                  
                     
                     Horreo, rui, ere, whan a man thynketh that his heare doth ryſe, alſo to quake for cold or feare. ſomtime to feare moche.
                  
                     Horreſco, ſcere, whan a man feleth within hym great colde or tremblynge to begyn, as in a feuer, or in a greatte feare: Somme tyme to quake.
                  
                     Horreum, a barne, wherin corne is layde. Sometyme a ſtore houſe, wherin any other thynge is kepte.
                  
                     Horribilis, le, horrible or terrible.
                  
                     Horrificus, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Horridulus, tymorous.
                  
                     Horridus, da, um, rough, alſo terrible.
                  
                     Horrifico, aui, are, to make aferde.
                  
                     Horripilo, aui, are, to be rough.
                  
                     Horriſonus, na, ſonum, hauynge a terryble ſowne or voyce.
                  
                     Horror, oris, tremblyng for colde or feare, alſo horryblenes.
                  
                     Hortatus, tus, exhortacyon.
                  
                     Hortenſia, the daughter of Hortenſius, a woman moſte eloquent.
                  
                     Hortenſius, an excellent oratour of Rome, of a wonderfull memorie.
                  
                     Hortor, aris, ari, to exhorte.
                  
                     Hortus, a knotte gardeyne, or a gardeyne for pleaſure, or an orcharde.
                  
                     Horula, a lyttell howre.
                  
                     Hoſtomaticus, ſyckely.
                  
                     Hoſpes, hoſpitis, a geſte, or mutual frendes dwellyng in ſondry countrays. alſo a ſtranger or a mā, inhabiting out of the coūtrey.
                  
                     Hoſpita terra, a countrey, wherby a manne maye peaſibly paſſe.
                  
                     Hoſpitalis, le, vſynge a gentyll entertaynement, or gladly receyuynge a ſtraunger.
                  
                     Hoſpitor, aris, ari, to receyue frendely into his howſe.
                  
                     Hoſsimi, they that be borne without noſethrylles.
                  
                     Hoſtia, an hooſte or ſacrifice offered to attayne vyctorie of ennemies.
                  
                     Hoſticus, ca, um, hoſtyle, or ennemye.
                  
                     Hoſtilis, le, pertaynynge to an ennemy.
                  
                     Hoſtimentum, recōpence, one for an other.
                  
                     Hoſtio, iui, ire, to recompence, to aſſwage, or abate, to offende.
                  
                     Hoſtis, an ennemye.
                  
                     Hoſtium, a meaſure of a hundred and forty buſhels. Alſo a doore.
                  
                     Hoſtorium, the ſtaffe, wherwith all meaſures be made euen, a ſtryke.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶H Ante V.
                  
                     HVber, bera, berum, fruitefull, or plentuouſe.
                  
                     Huber, eris, a pappe or vdder.
                  
                     Hubertas, tatis, plentye.
                  
                     Hubertim, plentuouſely.
                  
                     Huberrime, very plentuouſely.
                  
                     Hubero, raui, rare, to make plentuouſe or fruitefulle.
                  
                     Hubertus, ta, tum, aboundant or plentuous.
                  
                     Huc, hyther.
                  
                     Huic, to that place. Alſo to him or her.
                  
                     Hui, an interiection of ſcornynge.
                  
                     Huiuſmodi, & huiuſcemodi, ſuche.
                  
                     Hulula, a ſhriche owle.
                  
                     Hululo, aui, are, to howle.
                  
                     Humanitas, humanitie or nature of man. alſo doctrine, pertainynge to man.
                  
                     Humanitus, of men.
                  
                     Humaniter, gentylly.
                  
                     Humanus, na, um, gentyll, tractable, courteyſe, mercyfull and frendely.
                  
                     Humecto, aui, are, to make moyſte.
                  
                     Humeo, mui, ere, to be moyſte or wette.
                  
                     Humeſco, ſcere, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Humerus, the ſhoulder.
                  
                     Humidus, moyſte.
                  
                     Humigatus, wette.
                  
                     
                        Hum
                              ••
                           is, le,
                      baſe, lowe. alſo ſimple or pore, abiecte, vyle.
                  
                     Humilio, aui, are, to make lowe, poore, or abiecte.
                  
                     Humilitas, tatis, baſenes, or loweneſſe, humilitie, whiche as Speuſippus defyneth, is a gentylneſſe of the mynde, lackyng wrath or angre.
                  
                     Humo, aui, are, to burye, or hyde.
                  
                     Humor, oris, humour or moyſture.
                  
                     Humus, erthe beynge moyſte.
                  
                     Humi, a lowe on the grounde.
                  
                     Hunni, people which came out of Scithia, and inhabyted Hungarye.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶H Ante Y.
                  
                     HYacynthus, is a precious ſtone, of the colour of fyne golde, whiche beinge worne in ſuche wiſe, that it toucheth the fleſhe agaynſt the hart, or the vain, whiche comith from the hart into the left hād, preſerueth one frome the peſtilence. It is alſo a purple floure, whiche hath a rounde roote, ſome do ſuppoſe it to be callyd in englyſhe, flowre gentyll.
                  
                     Hyacinthina, were ſolempne ceremonyes done in the nyght.Hieronimus cōtra Iouinianū
                     
                  
                  
                     Hyapes, ſeuen ſterres, in whoſe ryſynge & goinge downe it alway rayneth.
                  
                     Hybrides, halfe wylde.
                  
                     Hyalargus, a glaſyer.
                  
                     Hyalus, glaſſe.
                  
                     Hyalinus, glaſye.
                  
                     Hyberia, a region in Aſia, ioyning to Armenie, enuyronned with the mountayns, callid Cauca
                        ••
                     . It is alſo the olde name of Spayn.
                  
                     Hyberna, places where men of warre doo reſte them in wynter.
                  
                     
                     Hybernacula, places prepared to winter in.
                  
                     Hybernia, Irelande.
                  
                     Hyberno, aui, are, to make abode in wynter.
                  
                     Hybernus, na, um, pertayninge to wynter.
                  
                     Hyberus, a greatte ryuer in Spayne, nigh to Tarrhacon.
                  
                     Hyble, uel hybles, a cytie in Sycile, and a mountayne nygh to it, whiche doth growe full of tyme: And therfore the hony, whiche is there, is of all other moſte pleaſant.
                  
                     Hybrida, is a dogge, ingendred betwyxte a hounde and a maſtyue, called a lymmar, or mongrell.
                  
                     Hybris, idis, a kynde of hawkes, whyche ſeldome is ſene in the daye, but ſeeketh his pray in the night.
                  
                     Hydaſpes, a great ryuer in Indie.
                  
                     Hyderon, a diſeaſe, whan the ſkynne is fylled with water.
                  
                     Hydraulis, an organ player.
                  
                     Hydra, a water ſerpent. It was alſo a monſter, with whom Hercules faught: and as ſoone as he had ſtryken of one heed of the monſter, immediately ſprange vp an other.
                  
                     Hydram ſecare, to medle with an endeleſſe matter, or where after one myſchiefe hapneth an nother.
                  
                     Hydria, a water potte.
                  
                     Hydrolapathon, water dockes.
                  
                     Hydromantia, diuination in callyng of ſpirit 
                        〈◊〉
                      to appere in water.
                  
                     Hydromel, water & hony ſodden togither.
                  
                     Hydropota, he that drinketh alway water.
                  
                     Hydrops, hydropis, the droppeſy.
                  
                     Hydrus, a water ſerpent.
                  
                     Hydruntes, a citie in Calabria.
                  
                     Hyemo, aui, are, to reſt in the wynter time.
                  
                     Hyems, wynter.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         de Animal.
                     Hyena, a beaſte lyke a wolfe, whiche hath a mane ouer all his backe and neck, but the heares be longer and harder.
                  
                     Hymber, a ſhowre of rayne or hayle.
                  
                     Hymen, a ſkynne in the ſecrete place of a mayden, whiche whanne ſhe is defloured, is broken.
                  
                     Hymenaeus, was called the God of maryage.
                  
                     Hymera, the name of a ryuer.
                  
                     Hymettus, a hyll by Athenes, where was hony of all other moſte precyous.
                  
                     Hymnus, a praiſe in a ſonge.
                  
                     Hyoſcyamos, an herbe called henbane.
                  
                     Hypoepa, a citie, where were meruayllous fayre women.
                  
                     Hypaetra, an aley in a gardayne, or galerye without any couerynge.
                  
                     Hypagogeus, an Inſtrumente, wherewith ſtones are polyſhed.
                  
                     Hypanis, a ryuer in Scythia.
                  
                     Hypata, a citie of Theſſaly.
                  
                     Hyperaſpiſtes, a protectour, a great ſhield.
                  
                     Hyperbaton, a longe dependynge, or ſuperfluous ſentence.
                  
                     Hyperbole, exceſſe in aduauncynge, or depreſſynge: As higher than heuen, whyter than ſnowe, ſwyfter than lyghtnynge, ſlower than a ſnayle, warſe than the dyuell.
                  
                     Hyperbolicus, ca, um, excedyng credence.
                  
                     Hyperborei, people in the northeaſte parte of the worlde.
                  
                     Hyperthyrum, that whyche is nexte ouer the browe of a manne. Alſo ſomme ſaye
                  
                     Hyperthyron, is a tranſumpte or haunce.
                  
                     Hypercatalecticum metrum, where aboundeth one ſyllable or two.
                  
                     Hyperion, the ſonne.
                  
                     Hyphen, where diuers wordes be pronoū
                     ced vnder one accent, as quādoquidem, utcun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     
                     ▪ 
                     &c.
                  
                  
                     Hypnales, adders, which ſtyngyng a man, he dyeth ſlepynge.
                  
                     Hypocauſtum, a hote howſe or ſtewe.
                  
                     Hypocriſis, falſe diſſimulation, fayned holyneſſe.
                  
                     Hypocrita, an hypocrite.
                  
                     Hypocondrium, the inwarde parte of the body aboue the nauil, & vnder the ſtomake.
                  
                     Hypodidaſcalus, an vſſher or ſubſtytute in teachynge.
                  
                     Hypogeum, a place vnder grounde.
                  
                     Hypomnema, matis, an expoſitiō or cōment.
                  
                     Hypopodion, a foote ſtoole.
                  
                     Hypoſtaſis, ſubſtaunce. it is alſo that, whiche dothe ryſe in vryne, where there is good digeſtion, if the reſydence be white, lyght, and ryſynge in facion lyke a peare, the ſmalle ende vpwarde.
                  
                     Hypothicos, a lynnen rochette.
                  
                     Hypothyron, a groundſyll or threſholde.
                  
                     Hypothyra, ſeu hypothyrides, the doore, or rather the place open, where the doore is.
                  
                     Hypozigia, all drawynge cattell.
                  
                     Hypſicratea, the wyfe of kynge Mythridates, whiche folowed hym in al his warres, beinge armed lyke a knyght.
                  
                     Hypſipile, a ladye, whyche loued Iaſon, and whanne he retourned not at the tyme, whiche he promyſed, ſhe threwe her ſelfe into the ſee.
                  
                     Hypethra, an alaye to walke in.
                  
                     Hyrcania, a countrey in Aſie.
                  
                     Hyſginum, a colour lyke ſcarlette.
                  
                     Hyſopus, & hyſopum, an herbe callydde Hyſope.
                  
                     Hyſterologia, & hyſteron proteron, a maner of ſpeakynge, where the laſte is ſette before the fyrſte, and as it is ſayd, the cart before the horſes.
               
            
            
               
               
                  
                     
                        IACCHVS, one of the names of Bacchus, called god of wynes.
                  
                     Iaceo, cui, cere, to ly. ſomtyme to be. In medio cā
                        pus iacet,
                     Saluſtius. In the middel is a feld. alſo to be deed. Ille iacet,
                     Lucanus. Cic. de ſinibus. he is deed. ſomtyme to be contēned or nought ſet by, Maximas uero uirtutes iacere neceſſe eſt, uoluptate domināte, Carnal dilectation ruling, nedes muſt excellent vertues be nothyng ſet by.
                  
                     Iacio, ieci, iacere, to throwe, caſte, or ſhoote, ſometyme to ſette or lay. Iacere fundamenta, to laye the foundation.
                  
                     Iacobus, a propre name.
                  
                     Iactanter, boſtyngely.
                  
                     Iactantia, booſte. Iactatio, idem.
                  
                  
                     Iactito, taui, tare, to boſte often.
                  
                     Iacto, aui, are, to throwe, to reuolue, or toſſe in the mynde, to vexe, to throwe downe & beate, to auaunt or glorie, to ſpeake vaynly, to ſette forth, to toſſe, to caſte out.
                  
                     Iactuoſe, braggyngly.
                  
                     Iactura, damage or loſſe, proprely as whan a man hath moche goodes in a ſhyppe, and by force of tēpeſt, is conſtrayned to throw it into the ſee, leſte the ſhyp ſhuld periſhe.
                  
                     Iaculatio, iaculamen, & iaculamētum, a ſhot, or caſt with a darte, or iauelyn.
                  
                     Iaculo, aui, are, to ſhoote or caſte farre.
                  
                     Iaculor, aris, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Iaculum, any thynge that maye be ſhotte or caſte farre, moſte commonly a dart or light iauelyn.
                  
                     Iaculus, a ſerpent, that lyeth vnder trees, and ſodaynly with a meruaylous vyolence perceth any beaſte, whiche happeneth to paſſe by hym.
                  
                     Iam, nowe.
                  
                     Iambus, a fote in meter, whiche hathe the fyrſt ſyllable ſhort, the other longe.
                  
                     Iam diu, longe agone.
                  
                     Iamdudum, now late, but a whyle ſens.
                  
                     Iamiam, euen nowe.
                  
                     Iam olim, nowe late.
                  
                     Iampridem, a lyttell whyle paſte, but late. ſometyme forthewith.
                  
                     Iam tum, fro that tyme.
                  
                     Ianiculum, a towne not farre from Rome.
                  
                     Ianira, the daughter of Ocean & Tethis.
                  
                     Ianitor, toris, a porter.
                  
                     Ianthina, violet colour, or purple.
                  
                     Ianua, a doore or yate.
                  
                     Ianuarius, the moneth of Ianyuer.
                  
                     Ianus, ſome ſuppoſe to be Saturne, ſome to be Iaphet, one of the ſonnes of Noe. Cicero calleth hym the ſuperiour worlde, or heuen, he was made hauynge two viſages, either bycauſe the heuen tournynge, the yere retourneth, where it beganne: orels bycauſe it knoweth what is paſſed, and aforeſeeth what ſhall happen. This god, or rather ydoll, had a temple in Rome, which in the time of warres was alway open, and in the tyme of peace was ſhutte. And therfore whan in ſtories mencion is made, that the temple of Ianus was ſhutte, than is it to be vnderſtande, that the Romaynes had peace vniuerſally.
                  
                     Iapetus, the father of Prometheus.
                  
                     Iapigia, a coūtrey in the realme of Naples.
                  
                     Iapix, gis, a wynde, which commeth out of the partes of Apulia, & is a weſtern winde.
                  
                     Iaſon, onis, he whiche firſte conquered the Fleece of golde.
                  
                     Iaſpis, pidis, a ſtone callyd Iaſper.
                  
                     Iatraleptes, a phiſition or ſurgion, whiche cureth with oyntmentes.
                  
                     Iatralepticé, curynge by oyntmentes.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶I Ante B.
                  
                     IBerus, a ryuer in Spayne.
                  
                     Iberia, the auncient name of Spayn, alſo an other countrey nye to Armeny.
                  
                     Iberi, & Iberes, Spanyardes.
                  
                     Ibi, there.
                  
                     Ibis, a foule or byrde of Egypte, whych is high, and hath ſtiffe legges, and a long byl. They profytte moche to the countreye in kyllyng and eating ſerpentes, whiche oute of Libia be caried into Egypt, with a ſowtherne wynde. Alſo it is taken for an enuyous perſon.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶I Ante C.
                  
                     ICaria, an yle in the ſee Icario, whiche is alſo called Icaros.
                  
                     Icarus, the father of the chaſt Penelope. There was alſo an other Icarus, whiche was the ſonne of Dedalus, who hauinge winges, with his father flewe out of the yle of Crete: but whan he flewe higher than his father commanded him, the waxe, wherwith the fethers of his winges were glued, being molten with the heate of the ſunne, and the fethers fallynge of, Icarus was conſtrayned to fall into the ſee, which was afterward callid Mare Icariū. Alſo Icarus is a mountain in the regiō of Athenes.
                  
                     Ichneumon, a beaſt in Egipte, of the greatnes of a catte, and is facioned like a mous, who crepeth into the body of a Cocodryl, whan he gapeth, & eatinge his bowels, ſleeth hym. It is alſo a kynde of waſpes.
                  
                     Ichnographia, an inſtrumente lyke a compaſſe, wherewith are made the deſcripcyons of the ſonne.
                  
                     
                     Ichnuſa, the yle nowe called Sardinia.
                  
                     Ichthiocolla, fyſhe glewe.
                  
                     Icthybolus, a fyſher.
                  
                     Icthyophagi, people whiche doo lyue by eatynge of fyſhe.
                  
                     Icthyopola, a fiſhmonger, or ſeller of fiſhe.
                  
                     Icthyopolion, a fyſhe markette.
                  
                     Icthyotrophia, a ponde or ſtewe, wherein fyſhes be fedde.
                  
                     Ico, ici, icete, ictum, to ſtryke.
                  
                     Icona, uel Icon, an ymage.
                  
                     Iconicus, ca, cū, ſo paynted or fourmed, that in euery membre the very ſimilitude is expreſſed.
                  
                     Iconiſmus, a deſcription.
                  
                     Iconium, a towne in the countreye of Capadocia, an other in Aſie the laſſe. it is alſo a mans owne image like him ſelfe.
                  
                     Icteros, a ſycknes called the Iaundiſe.
                  
                     Icterus, a byrde called a yelowe hamer.
                  
                     Ictericus, he that is diſeſed with the Iādis.
                  
                     Ictis, idis, a white weſyll, whiche deſtroyeth bee ſtalles, and eateth the hony.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶I Ante D.
                  
                     ID, that, Id quod res eſt, which is trouth.
                  
                     Id aetatis, of that age.
                  
                     Ida, a mountayn, which lieth nigh Troy.
                  
                     
                        Ide
                              •
                            dactili,
                      people called alſo Corybantes.
                  
                  
                     Ideus, a, um, of the mountayne of Ida.
                  
                     
                        Id
                              ••
                           ium,
                      a cytie in the yle of Cypres.
                  
                     Idalus, a mountayne & a wodde in Cypres.
                  
                     Idaſpes, a famous ryuer, whiche paſſeth by Parthia and Inde, wherin is golden grauell, and precious ſtones.
                  
                     Idcirco, therfore.
                  
                     Idea, a fygure conceyued in ymagynation, as it were a ſubſtance perpetuall: and lyke as of one ſeale procedeth manye pryntes, ſo of one Idea of a manne procedeth many thouſandes of men, and ſemblably of other Ideas procedeth thynges innumerable. So that Ideae, be as it were eternal examples, wherby all other thynges be created: and this is Idea, wherof Plato ſpeaketh.
                  
                     Idiopathia, the propre paſſion of a diſeaſe.
                  
                     Idem, the ſame thynge, or the ſame man.
                  
                     Identidem, efteſones, in the ſame wyſe.
                  
                     Ideo, for that cauſe.
                  
                     Idicus, ca, cum, of the mountayne of Ida.
                  
                     Idiographum, a priuate wrytynge.
                  
                     Idiographae literae, a priuate letter.
                  
                     Idioma, matis, a propre forme of ſpeche.
                  
                     Idiota, Idiotes, a man or woman vnlerned.
                  
                     Idolatra, a worſhypper of idolles.
                  
                     Idololatria, ydolatrie.
                  
                     Idolium, a lyttell ydoll.
                  
                     Idolothyſia, offrynges to ydols.
                  
                     Idolothytum, that which is offred to idols.
                  
                     Idolum, an ydoll.
                  
                     Idoneus, ca, eum, apte.
                  
                     Idula, a ſhepe that was offred euery Idus to Iupyter.
                  
                     Idumaea, a regyon in Syria, ioynynge to Egypte, and bordereth vpon Paleſtina.
                  
                     Idus, Ides of monethes, whiche do diuide Honas from Calendes.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶I Ante E.
                  
                     IEcur, coris, & iecinoris, the lyuer of a mā, or other thynge lyuynge.
                  
                     Iecuſculum, a lyttell lyuer.
                  
                     Ie iunium, faſtynge.
                  
                     Ieiuno, aui, are, to faſte or abſteyne.
                  
                     Ieiunum, the gutte, whiche goth downe to the fundement.
                  
                     Ieiunus, he that is faſtynge.
                  
                     Ientaculum, a breakefaſte.
                  
                     Iento, aui, are, to eate meate afore dyner.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶I Ante G.
                  
                     IGitur, therfore, from hensforth, afterwarde.
                  
                     Ignauia, cowardeneſſe.
                  
                     Ignauus, a, um, cowarde.
                  
                     Ignifacio, eci, facere, to ſette on fyre.
                  
                     Igneſco, ſcere, to be ſette on fyre, or to be made fyre.
                  
                     Ignarium, any thynge, oute of the whyche fyre may be beaten.
                  
                     Ignia, certayne fautes, whiche erthen pottes haue in the inealynge.
                  
                     Igniculi, are certayne prouocations, naturally gyuen to imbrace vertue.
                  
                     Igniculus, a ſperke of fyre.
                  
                     Ignio, iui, ire, to inflame.
                  
                     Ignipotens, one of the ſurnames of Vulcanus.
                  
                     Ignis, the fyre. Sometyme it is taken for an harlotte.
                  
                     Ignis ſacer, a ſore, wherin is an excedynge inflamation and burninge.
                  
                     Ignitabulum, a fyre panne.
                  
                     Igniuomus, he that ſpytteth fyre: the ſonne is ſometyme ſo called.
                  
                     Ignobilis, le, vnnoble, vnknowen, foolyſhe, of none eſtimation.
                  
                     Ignominis, without renoume.
                  
                     Ignominia, reproche, infamye.
                  
                     Ignorabilis, le, vnknowen.
                  
                     Ignoro, aui, are, to knowe not.
                  
                     Ignarus, ignorant, without knowlege.
                  
                     Ignorantia, ignorance, lacke of knowlege, and is referred to the wyt of the perſōne.
                  
                     Ignoratio, lacke to be knowen, and pertaineth to the thynge or acte.
                  
                     
                     Ignoſco, noui, noſcere, to lerne and knowe perfectly. Alſo to forgiue, to haue excuſed to knowe not, or be ignoraunt.
                  
                     Ignotus, vnknowen, alſo ignorant.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶I Ante L.
                  
                     ILa, the leeſte porcyon of a thynge, that may be imagined. Alſo the ſtuffynge of a puddynge, or other lyke thynge.
                  
                     
                        Ila, or Ilua,
                      an ylande in the Tuſcayne ſee.
                  
                     Ile, is that whiche is ſet in the higheſt part of a man.
                  
                     Ileoſus, the colycke, and he that hathe the colycke.
                  
                     Ileos, the colycke.
                  
                     Ilex, licis, a tree callyd holy, or holme.
                  
                     Ilia, the guttes.
                  
                     Iliacus dolor, the frettynge of the guttes.
                  
                     Ilias, adis, the warke of Homerus, of the ſyege of Troye.
                  
                     Iliberis, a citie in the prouince of Narbone.
                  
                     Iliceus, a, um, of holy or holme.
                  
                     Iligneus, a, um, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Ilione, the propre name of a daughter of Priamus.
                  
                     Ilioneus, the propre name of a Troyane.
                  
                     Iliſſus, the name of a ryuer in the prouynce of Athenes.
                  
                     Ilium, the palais of Priamus.
                  
                     Illaetabilis, le, without myrthe, or lackynge myrthe or pleaſure.
                  
                     Illatebro, aui, are, to hyde in corners.
                  
                     Illaudatus, not worthy to be named.
                  
                     Ille, he.
                  
                     Illecebrae, thynges dilectable, whiche draweth and allurethe the mynde to imbrace them, flyckerynge intycementes.
                  
                     Illecto, aui, are, to drawe pleaſantly.
                  
                     Illex, illegis, lawleſſe, alſo wanton. Illex oculus, a wanton eie.
                  
                     Illibatus, ta, tum, vntouched, vntaſted.
                  
                     Illiberaliter, vngentillye, excedyngely ylle, myſcheuouſly.
                  
                     Illicet, nowe go to, incontinent.
                  
                     Illiceo, illicui, cere, to prouoke or ſtyre pleaſauntlye.
                  
                     Illectus, ta, tū, pleſantly ſtired or prouoked.
                  
                     Illicium, a prouocation.
                  
                     Illico, anon, in the ſame place.
                  
                     Illido, liſi, dere, to driue or beate to a thyng.
                  
                     Illiſus, a, um, dryuen or beaten to.
                  
                     Illineo, iui, ire, to anoynte on.
                  
                     Illino, iui, ire, to annoynte harde, to ſpotte or ſoyle.
                  
                     Illix, licis, a prouocation or ſtyringe.
                  
                     Illuceo, xi, cere, & illuceſco, ſcere, to be light or cleere.
                  
                     Illudo, ſi, ere, to mocke, to hurte in iapyng, or playenge.
                  
                     Illuminus, a, um, without lyghte.
                  
                     Illunis, dark, whan the mone doth not ſhine
                  
                     Illuſtris, famous, clere, noble in renoume.
                  
                     Illuſtro, aui, are, to make lyght or cleere, to make famous or well knowen.
                  
                     Illuuies, vncleanneſſe, fylthyneſſe in manne or garment.
                  
                     Illiria, a countrey nowe called Slauonye, whiche hath on one parte Italy, on an nother part Germany, on the eaſt ſide Grece, on the weſte the Venyce ſee.
                  
                     Illiricus, ca, cum, of Illiria.
                  
                     Ilus, the kynge of Troyanes ſonne, that buylded Ilium.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶I Ante M.
                  
                     IMaginarii, baner bearers, wherin be ymages paynted.
                  
                     Imaginatus, ta, tum, fygured or fourmed into an ymage.
                  
                     Imagino, naui, nare, to make ymages, or to counterfayte.
                  
                     Imaginor, aris, ari, to imagyne.
                  
                     Imago, imaginis, an ymage, a ſymylitude,Vergilſus. a ſhethe, or caſe.
                  
                     Imaguncula, a lyttell ymage.
                  
                     Imaus, a mountayne in Iudea.
                  
                     Imbecillis, le, & imbecillus, a, um, feble.
                  
                     Imbecillitas, tatis, febleneſſe.
                  
                     Imbellia, cowardyſe.
                  
                     Imbellis, le, vnapte to warres, cowarde, or weake.
                  
                     Imber, a ſhowre.
                  
                     Imberbis, be, beardeleſſe.
                  
                     Imbibo, bi, bere, to drynke in.
                  
                     Imbrex, bricis, a ſpowte or gutter, oute of the whiche rayne is conuayed frome the houſe. It is ſometyme taken for the tyle or ſlatte, that lyeth on the houſe.
                  
                     Imbricium, the couerynge or eueiſynge of the howſe.
                  
                     Imbrico, to couer with tyle, or other lyke thynge.
                  
                     Imbricoſus, a, um, full of gutters.
                  
                     Imbrus, an Ilande of Thrace, and a towne in the ſame is ſo called.
                  
                     Imbrifer, bryngyng ſhowres.
                  
                     Imbubino, aui, are, to defyle with menſtruous flyxe.
                  
                     Imbulbito, taui, tare, to defyle with chyldes dyrte.
                  
                     Imbuo, bui, buere, to dye clothe or ſylke, to teache.
                  
                     Imitor, aris, ari, to folowe the exaumple of an nother.
                  
                     Immanis, ne, cruell, great, horryble.
                  
                     Immanitas, tatis, crueltie, greattenes.
                  
                     Immineo, nui, nere, to procure, to endeuour
                  
                     Imminuo, nuere, to cutte of.
                  
                     
                     Saluſtiꝰ in c
                           •
                        . Catil.
                     Imminuere ius, to defalcate or mynyſhe the auctoritie or ſtate of a perſon.
                  
                     Immiſſum, layde in to abyde, as a beame of a houſe, or other lyke thynge.
                  
                     Immitto, miſi, immittere, to ſende in. ſometyme it ſygnifieth to lette growe in length. Neque barbam immiſeris iſtam,
                     Lucilius lib 3 V
                           ••
                        g 
                           ••
                        ne. lib. 
                           •
                        . Neither let this berde growe in length. Reſpicimus dita illuuies, immiſſa
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         barba, we behelde, O what an horryble fylthyneſſe and a bearde growen in lengthe. Alſo to bryng or ſende on the contrary parte.Lact. li. 4. 
                     Hoc futurum eſſe dixerunt, ut poſt breue tempus immitteret deus regem, qui expugnater Iudaeos, It ſhoulde come to paſſe ſayde they, that god ſhulde ſende to the contrary parte a kynge, whiche ſhulde vanquyſhe the Iewes.
                        
                           〈1 paragraph〉
                        
                      
                     Alij Tarquinium a Cicerone immiſſum aiebant, ne C
                           •
                        a
                           •
                        ius, ſuſcepto malorum patrocynio rempub. turbater, Some ſayde, that Tarquine was brought in craftily by Cicero, leſt that Craſius, in takynge on hym the defence of myſdoers, ſhulde therby brynge ſedicyon into the weale publyke.
                  
                     Immo, but rather, ye rather.
                  
                     Immolo, aui, are, to offre in ſacrifyce.
                  
                     Immutus, exempt, without office or charge
                  
                     Imminutas, tatis, fraunches or libertie.
                  
                     Immunitus, ta, tum, not defended.
                  
                     Impago, ginis, a tenon, whiche is put into the mortals, alſo a pynne, whiche is driuen into tymber, to make it ioyne and abyde.
                  
                     Impeccabilis, he that neuer offendeth.
                  
                     Impedimentum, lette, impediment in warres. Impedimenta, is the caryage and traſyke, that goth with the hooſte.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈1 paragraph〉
                        
                     
                     Impedio, diui, dire, to lette, to ſtaye, or ſupporte, to defyle.
                  
                     Impeditus, is proprelye he, that hathe his fere ſo bounde, that he can not goo.
                  
                     Impedo, aui, are, to vnderſette.
                  
                     Impello, puli, pellere, to perſwade inſtantly, to inforce, to plucke downe, or infeble.
                  
                     Impulſo, aui, are, to perſwade often.
                  
                     Impulſus, perſwaded, prouoked, inforced.
                  
                     Impendeo, di, dere, to hange ouer.
                  
                     Impendiò, very moche, or more.
                  
                     Impendium, expenſe, or coſte.
                  
                     Impendo, di, dere, to ſpende or lay out money, to beſtowe, to lay out.
                  
                     Impenſa, benefytes.
                  
                     Impenſa, ae, expenſes.
                  
                     Impenſe, pro ualde. Eſt impenſe improbus, he is a very yll man.
                  
                     Impenſius, excedynge, more greuouſe, or diſpleaſunt.
                  
                     Impenſibilis, without conſyderation.
                  
                     Imperator, the chiefe capitayne in warres, nowe, the emperour.
                  
                     Imperioſus, a maiſterly manne, rigorous, or cruell in gouernaunce.
                  
                     Imperioſe, ſtately, rigorouſely.
                  
                     Imperitabundus, ful of rule, or ruling moch.
                  
                     Imperitia, lacke of knowlege.
                  
                     Imperitus, not expert, eaſy to be deceiued.
                  
                     Imperito, aui, are, to rule or gouerne.
                  
                     Imperium, a ſolemne commaundemente, a preeminence in gouernāce, autoritie royal.
                  
                     Impero, aui, are, to commaunde.
                  
                     Imperatum, commaunded.
                  
                     Impetus, tus, & impes, petis, violence.
                  
                     Impetigo, ginis, a rynge worme.
                  
                     Impeto, tiui, tere, to inuade.
                  
                     Impetrabilis, le, that may be gotē by deſire.
                  
                     Impetraſſo, petraſsi, ere, to gette by deſyre or inſtaunce.
                  
                     Impetritus, infyxed, mortayſed, as it were in a ſtone.
                  
                     Impetro, traui, trare, to obtayne by deſyre, or requeſte.
                  
                     Impiatus, not purged of ſynne.
                  
                     Impiger, diligent, not ſlowe, valyant.Plautus 
                           〈◊〉
                         capt. Terent. i
                           •
                         Phor.
                  
                  
                     Impingo, pêgi, impingere, to hytte oone in throwynge ſome thynge at hym. Impingere compedes, to putte on gyues. Dicam tibi, impingam grandem, I wyll laye a waighty matter vnto the.
                  
                     Impinguo, aui, are, to make fatte.
                  
                     Impius, cruell, hatynge god & good men.
                  
                     Impietas, pietatis, hatrede of god, crueltie, wyckedneſſe.
                  
                     Impie, wyckedly, cruelly.
                  
                     Implano, aui, are, to deceyue.
                  
                     Impleo, eui, ere, to fylle.
                  
                     Implexus, wounde in.
                  
                     Implico, caui, are, to wrappe in, to tye faſte,Plautus. to detayne. Implicat ad ſpeculum caput, ſhe bounde vp her heed at a glaſſe.
                  
                     Implicitus, ta, tum, wrapped or tied faſt togyther. Implicitus morbo, attached or detained with ſyckenes.
                  
                     Imploro, aui, are, to deſyre lamentably.
                  
                     Impluuia, a cloke to weare in the rayne.
                  
                     Impluuiū, a place in the houſe, where they vſed to receyue rayne water. It maye be englyſhed a lowuer.
                  
                     Impolitia, negligēce about the wele publike
                  
                     Impono, ſui, nere, to put one thyng on an other. alſo to gyue, to inioyne, to laye to ones charge.
                  
                     Imporco, aui, are, to make a balke in earing of lande.
                  
                     Importunus, na, ū, out of ſeſon, importunate.
                  
                     Importunitas, tatis, which hath no commoditie of tyme nor of place.
                  
                     Impos, poris, vnable, without power.
                  
                     Impoſtor, oris, he that deceyueth with promiſes, or ſelleth falſe ware for good.
                  
                     
                     Impoſturam facere, to deceyue in maner aforeſayde.
                  
                     Impotens, tentis, he that can not reſyſte his appetite or affections. ſometyme it is vſurped for puiſſaunt.
                  
                     Impotentia, debilitie, ſometyme immoderate power▪ alſo vnabilitie to reſyſte.
                  
                     Impraeſentia, & impraeſentiatum, at this time, or for this preſent tyme.
                  
                     Imprecor, aris, ari, to deſyre, to wyſhe.
                  
                     Impreſsio, ionis, a violent aſſaulte.
                  
                     Imprimo, impreſsi, imprimere, to prynte, to ſeale.
                  
                     Improbus, an yll man, diſhoneſt, obſtinate, wanton, malaperte, wyly, vnſacyable.
                  
                     Improbitas, bitatis, diſhoneſty, vnthriftines, wantonneſſe, obſtynacy, malapertenes, raueny, wylyneſſe.
                  
                     Improperium, imbraydynge of a defaulte.
                  
                     Impropero, aui, are, to imbrayde a manne with ſome defaute.
                  
                     Imprudens, imprudentis, vnware. Alſo not circumſpecte.Vergilius. ſometyme very circumſpect.
                  
                     Impubes, & impuber, a man chylde before the age of .xiiii. yeres, a mayden before .xii.
                  
                     Impudens, ſhameles.
                  
                     Impudenter, ſhamefully, diſhoneſtly, vnaduyſedly, wantonly.
                  
                     Impudicus, vnchaſte, vncleane in lyuynge.
                  
                     Impudicitia, vncleannes of lyuynge.
                  
                     Impune, without damage, without punyſhment or griefe, in vayne.
                  
                     Impunitas, tatis, lacke of punyſhement, libertie withoute punyſſhemente, pardon of punyſhement.
                  
                     Impurus, impura, purum, diſhoneſt, vile, reprocheable.
                  
                     Impuro, taui, tare, to repute or aſcribe, to lay the blame or defaute.
                  
                     Imputatus, ta, tum, vncutte, or neuer cutte.
                  
                     Imus, ma, mum, the loweſt or moſt lowe.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶I Ante N.
                  
                     IN, ſygnifieth in. Alſo In rempub. toward the publyke weale. In meam partem, on or for my part.
                  
                     In particidam, agaynſt a murderer.
                  
                     In nauem ingreditur, he went into the ſhyp. alſo it ſygnifieth ſpace of tyme. In noctem, vnto nyght. In lucem, vntyll day▪ alſo for.
                  
                     Vergilius.
                     In magno munere, for a great rewarde.
                  
                     In diem addicere, to fel vpon condicon, that a thynge be done by a day.
                  
                     In dies ſingulos, daye by daye.
                  
                     In horam, for oone houre. In horas, frome houre to houre.
                  
                     In manu uel manibus eſt, It is in his power, at hande, or eaſy, or in hande.
                  
                     In manum dari, to be gyuen a parte or ſeuerally.
                  
                     In medium afferre, to bryng forthe to a cō
                     mon vſe or commoditie.
                  
                     In mentem uenire, to come to mynde, or remembraunce, to be conſydered.
                  
                     In numerum, in order.
                  
                     In ordinem ducere uel cogere, to brynge downe from authoritie, to mynyſſhe eſtymation or power.
                  
                     In poſterum, finally, in concluſyon.
                  
                     In re tua, for thy profyte.
                  
                     In rem praeſentem uenire,
                     Budeus. where the landes in debate cometh in viewe, by the aſſignement of Iuges, vnto them whiche be called viewers, whiche ſhall ſee the boundes and quantitie of the lande in variance.
                  
                     In ſpem uenire, to begynne to hope.
                  
                     In rem praeſentem producere,
                     Plinius in epiſt. to brynge the matter to lyght, to expreſſe the thing perfectelye.
                  
                     In re praeſenti, in a playn and euident matter.Quintii.
                  
                  
                     In tempore, in ſeaſon, oportunately.
                  
                     Inacceſſa, an ylande of Egypte, to the whiche is no commynge.
                  
                     Inachus, the fyrſte kynge of Argiues.
                  
                     Inaneſcere, to be vayne, and of none eſtymation.
                  
                     Inaniloquus, a bablar.
                  
                     Inanimus, ma, um, without ſowle.
                  
                     Inanio, iui, ire, to make emptye.
                  
                     Inanis, inane, empty, vacaunt, ydell, lyght in eſtimation.
                  
                     Inanitas, & inanitio, emptynes, voydenes.
                  
                     Inareſco, ſcere, to drye vp.
                  
                     Inarime, an yle in the Tuſcayne ſee. Alſo a mountayne.
                  
                     Inaudio, diui, dire, to here.
                  
                     Inauditus, ta, tum, neuer harde of, ſtraunge to here.
                  
                     Inauris, a rynge, or other lyke thynge, hangynge at the eare.
                  
                     Inauro, aui, are, to make ryche.
                  
                     Inauſpicaid, vnluckyly.
                  
                     Inceduus, a, um, vnvſed to be cutte.
                  
                     Incero, aui, are, to keuer with waxe.
                  
                     
                        Incaleſco, 
                              •
                           ui, ſcere;
                      to be or waxe very hot.
                  
                     Incallidus, ſymple, without crafte or ſubtyltie.
                  
                     Incandeſco, dui, deſcere, to be verye hotte angrye.
                  
                     Incanto, taui, tare, to charme.
                  
                     Incantatio, & incantamentum, a charme.
                  
                     Incapiſtro, aui, ſtrare, to halter, or to bynde with a halter.
                  
                     Incaſſum, in vayne.
                  
                     Incautus, vnware.
                  
                     Incedo, ceſsi, cedere, to go or walke, to goo ſtately, to enter.
                  
                     
                     Incendo, di, dere, to inflame, to ſette fyre on a thynge.
                  
                     Incentio, onis, the ſowning of inſtrumentes.
                  
                     Incepto, aui, are, to begynne often.
                  
                     Incerniculum, a rayinge ſyue, wherin corne to clenſed, or it be ground. alſo a ſarcer.
                  
                     Incerno, ni, nere, to ſyfte in.
                  
                     Incerto, taui, tare, to make doubtefulle, or vncertayne.
                  
                     Incertus, ta, tum, vncertayne or doubtfull.
                  
                     Inceſso, ſsi, ſiere, to make angry, to do diſpleſure to one, to accuſe.
                  
                     Inceſto, aui, are, to pollute.
                  
                     Inceſtuoſus, he that dothe often pollute.
                  
                     Inceſtus, ta, tum, polluted.
                  
                     Inceſtus, tus, is lechery cōmitted with one, whiche is nygh of kynne or aliance to him that commytteth it.Seruius. Alſo it ſygnifyeth all maner of pollucion.
                  
                     Inchoo, am, are, to begyn, alſo to performe.
                  
                     Incido, di, ere, to cutte, to graue.
                  
                     Liuiu
                           •
                        .
                     Inciſa, loſte. Spe inciſa prius quam praedicta dies adeſſet, Hope beinge loſt, er euer the ſayd day was commen.
                  
                     Incido, di, ere, to happen, to fall ſodaynely, to come by chaunce.
                  
                     Incile, a gappe or trenche.
                  
                     Inciles, trenches, to conuay water from a ryuer, into a medow, or other low ground.
                  
                     
                        Inc
                              •
                           io, aui, are,
                      to blame or reproue.
                  
                     
                        Inc
                              •
                           tio, ni, nere,
                      to ſynge, proprely to fayne a ſmall breſte.
                  
                     Incipio, coepi, cipere, to begynne.
                  
                     Incuim, piece meale, gobet meale.
                  
                     Incino, onis, inciſion, or cuttynge.
                  
                     Inciſura, a cutte or garſe. Alſo Inciſurae, be the lynes in the palme of the hande.
                  
                     Incitabulum, incitamen, & incitamentum, a prouocation.
                  
                     Incitas, pouertie, neceſſitie.
                  
                     Incitega, a thynge wheron great veſſelles of wyne are couched.
                  
                     Incito, taui, tare, to prouoke.
                  
                     Inclamo, aui, are, to call for one, to cry oute on one, rebukefully to call in.
                  
                     Inclementer, withoute mercye, cruellye, ſharpely.
                  
                     Inclementia, crueltie, lacke of mercy.
                  
                     Inclino, aui, are, to inclyne or bowe downe.
                  
                     Includo, ſi, ere, to include or ſhutte in.
                  
                     Inclytus, ta, tum, glorious, famous.
                  
                     Incoctile, a potte, wherin meate is ſodden.
                  
                     Plautus in Pſeud.
                     Incoenatus, not hauyng ſouped. It incoenatus cubitum, He goth to bed ſupperleſſe.
                  
                     Incoenis, without ſupper.
                  
                     Incogitabilis, forgetfull, not conſyderynge what he dothe.
                  
                     Incogitans, vnaduyſed.
                  
                     Incognitus, ta, tum, vnknowen.
                  
                     Incolatus, dwellyng in a ſtraunge coūtrey.
                  
                     Incolo, ui, ere, to dwell in a plate.
                  
                     Incola, he that dwelleth in an other countrey, than where he was borne.
                  
                     Incolumis, hole without ſyckenes.
                  
                     Incolumitas, tatis, helthynes.
                  
                     Incomitatus, being without company alone
                  
                     Incommodo, aui, are, to hurte.
                  
                     In commune, equally.
                  
                     Incompactum, vnioyned, or yll ioyned.
                  
                     Incomprehenſus, not comprehended.
                  
                     Inconſiliari, to be callyd before the coūſell.
                  
                     Inconcinnus, a, um, vnmete, il proporcionid.
                  
                     Inconcuſſus, ſtable, that can not be ſhaken.
                  
                     Inconditus, ta, tum, out of order or facyonrude. Alſo weryſhe.
                  
                     Inconditus, ta, tum, vnmade, vnbuylded.
                  
                     Incongelabilis, le, that can not be froſen.
                  
                     Inconſultus, lackynge aduyſe, or conſyderation, he that wyll not aſke counſayle. Inconſultu meo, without my counſayle.
                  
                     Inconſutilis, without any ſeame.
                  
                     Inconſutus, ta, tum, vnſowed.
                  
                     Inconſyderatus, he that nothing cōſiderith.
                  
                     Inconſyderatè, vnaduyſedly.
                  
                     Incoxo, aui, are, to ſytte as women or taylours done without a ſtoole.
                  
                     Increatus, neuer created.
                  
                     Incredibilis, le, incredible, not to be beleued, meruaylous.
                  
                     Incrementum, increaſe.
                  
                     Increpito, aui, are, to blame or rebuke oftē.
                  
                     Increpo, pui, pere, to ſounde or make noyſe. alſo to rebuke, to prouoke.
                  
                     Increſco, eui, ſcere, to growe moch or more.
                  
                     Incubus, a ſpyrite, whiche aſſumynge the fourme of a man, medleth with womenne. Alſo that whiche is called the mare, wherwith men be oppreſſed in their ſlepe.
                  
                     Incubo, aui, are, to lye in or vpon, to cleaue to, to ſytte ouer a thynge, to ſyt on egges, as a henne dothe, to occupie, to poſſede, to imbrace, to nouryſhe, to dwell in, to care.
                  
                     Incubatio, & incubitus, lyenge in, ſyttynge to hatche egges.
                  
                     Incudo, donis, he that warketh on an anuil.
                  
                     Inculco, aui, are, to porre in.
                  
                     Incultus, a place vnhusbanded or vntilled.
                  
                     Incumbo, bere, to indeuour, to take in hād, to happe, to leane vppon, or fall on a thing.
                  
                     Incumbo ad ſtudia, I gyue my mynde to a thynge, I applye me.
                  
                     Incunabulum, a cradell.
                  
                     Incuria, neglygence, yll husbandrye.
                  
                     Incurro, rere, to rounne agaynſte oone, to rounne in.
                  
                     Incurſus, & incurſio, inuaſion of enemies.
                  
                     Incurueſco, ſcere to bow down, or be crokid
                  
                     Incuruo, aui, are, to make croked.
                  
                     
                     Incuruus, a, um, croked.
                  
                     Incus, udis, an andeuyle.
                  
                     Incuſo, aui, are, to accuſe.
                  
                     Incutio, cuſsi, cutere, to throwe in.
                  
                     Indago, aui, are, to ſeke or ſerche.
                  
                     Indago, ginis, ſerche.
                  
                     Inde, from thens, there, from thensforthe.
                  
                     Indecor, coris, not regarded.
                  
                     Indecorum, vnhoneſte.
                  
                     Indefenſus, without defence.
                  
                     Indefinitus, ta, tum, not determyned or diſcuſſed.
                  
                     Saluſtiꝰ in Iugurth.
                     Indemnatus, he that is condempned withoute makynge aunſwere.
                  
                     Indemnis, without hurt or harme, defendid.
                  
                     Indeprecabilis, he that wol not be intreatid or wyll not forgyue. Paena indeprecabilis, punyſhement without remiſſion.
                  
                     Index, dicis, he that accuſeth or appeacheth an other man. Alſo he that for to eſcape punyſhement, or for ſome rewarde, diſcloſith the conſpiracie, wherevnto he was made priuie. It is alſo the forefinger, and a touch ſtone to trie golde, alſo the table of a boke, whereby certayne chapyters or notes be founden.
                  
                     India, the countrey called Indie.
                  
                     Indicatio, eſtimation or valuation.
                  
                     Indicatura, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Indicatus, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Indicium, & indicina, a detection or accuſation.
                  
                     Indico, caui, care, to diſcloſe, to manyfeſte, & make openly knowen, to demonſtrate, to accuſe, to ſette or tell the price, to delyuer in poſſeſſion that whiche is bought.
                  
                     Indico, indixi, indicere, to denounce or declare ſolemnely, and for a greate cauſe. As battayle, faſtynges, funeralles, counſayls, triumphes, and other great thinges. Alſo to ſette a tribute or taxe, and to appoynte.
                  
                     Indictio, the ſpace of .xv. yeres.
                  
                     Indictiuus, ua, um, that whiche is declared or appoynted.
                  
                     Indictus, dicta, tum, declared or denounced ſolempnely.
                  
                     Indicta cauſa, the cauſe or matter not knowen, declared or defended.
                  
                     Indidem, from thens, forthwith, the ſame.
                  
                     Ti. Liuius
                     Indies, dayly, from daye to daye. Creſcente indies multitudine, The multitude or noumbre dayly increaſynge.
                  
                     Indigena, of the ſame countreye or towne borne and bredde.
                  
                     Indigeo, gui, gere, to lacke.
                  
                     Indigentia, nede or neceſſitie.
                  
                     Indigeſte, inordinately.
                  
                     Indigeſtio, yll digeſtion.
                  
                     Indigetes, goddis made of mortall menne, ſome take them for priuate goddis, pertainyng to particular places.
                  
                     Indigitamenta, bokes contaynyng the names of goddis, and the miſtycal ſygnification of them.
                  
                     Indigito, taui, tare, to name, or cal by name.
                  
                     Indignor, aris, ari, to diſdayne.
                  
                     Indignus, vnworthy, myſerable.
                  
                     Indigus, nedy, or lackynge.
                  
                     Indipiſco, ſci, ſcere, & indipiſtor, ſceris, ſci, to optayne, to vſurpe.
                  
                     Indiſcriminatim, indifferently, withoute diuerſytie.
                  
                     Indiſertus, without eloquence.
                  
                     Indiuidium, that maye not be dyuyded or ſeparate.
                  
                     Indo, indidi, indere, to ſette, or name. Alſo to prynte.
                  
                     Indocilis, a dullarde, that can not be taught.
                  
                     Indoctus, vnlerned.
                  
                     Indolentia, lacke of peyne. Indoloria, idem.
                  
                  
                     Indoles, towardenes, & diſpoſition to vertue, in chylderne, In men, token of vertue. Alſo very nobilitie, or honour, apteneſſe to good or euyll.
                  
                     Indomabilis, le, that may not be made tame.
                  
                     Indomitus, wylde, vnbroken.
                  
                     Indubitatus, ta, tum, vndoubted.
                  
                     Indutiae, truce, or peace for a certayn tyme.
                  
                     Induco, xi, cere, to induce, to bryng in, to ꝑſuade, to illure, to incline, to deceiue, to cancelle, to defete, to put on, proprely hoſen or ſhoen, to infix or ſtabliſh. Ita induxi in animū, I haue infyxed or ſtablyſhed in my mynde.
                  
                     Inductio, a fourme of argument, proceding from the particulars vnto the vniuerſalles. Alſo an argument, whyche by gettyng the aſſent in thinges not doubtfull, proueth the thynge, whiche is intended.
                  
                     Indulco, caui, care, & indulcoro, aui, are, to make ſwete.
                  
                     Indulgeo, dulſi, gére, to graunte lyghtly, to conſent to a requeſt, to pardon.Ci. Tyr. Ter. Heau. 
                     Indulge ualetudini tuae, Take hede to thy helth. Nimiū illi indulges, Thou cariſt to moche for him. Alſo it is to gyue reſpite, to be gentyll and mercyfull.
                  
                     Indulgentia, & indulgitas, gentylnes in ſufferance, alſo mercy.
                  
                     Indumentum, a garment.
                  
                     Induo, dui, ere, to put on a garment, or other lyke thynge, to tranſfourme, or tranſlate, to caſte in, to annoynte.
                  
                     Induperator, oris, an emperour.
                  
                     Indus, a great ryuer in Inde.
                  
                     Induſium, a petycote.
                  
                     Induſiarius, a maker of petycotes.
                  
                     Induſiatus, cladde in a petycote.
                  
                     Induſtria, a vertue comprehendynge bothe

ſtudy and diligence, induſtrie.
                  
                     Induſitius, he that is wytty and actyue.
                  
                     Induurae, apparayle.
                  
                     
                        Ineb
                              •
                           ior, briar
                              •
                           s, ari,
                      to make dronke, or be dronk
                        •
                     n.
                  
                     Inedia, hunger.
                  
                     Ineffigiatus, ta, tum, vnfacyoned, withoute good proporcyon.
                  
                     Ineo, iui, ire, to begyn, to go in, to deſerue, to gette, to wynne, to optayne, to treate.
                  
                     Inire foedus, to make a leage or treatie of peace.
                  
                     Inire pacem, to make peace. Inire bellum, to make warre. Inire uiam, to fynde the way. Alſo Inire, is to leape, as a horſe doth on a mare. Inire fugam, to flee, as men do in batayle, to conſyder, to vnderſtande.
                  
                     Iniror, oris, a ſ
                        •
                     alyon.
                  
                     Ineptio, iui, ire, to tryfle.
                  
                     Ineptus, ta, tum, vnapte.
                  
                     Ineptus, a tryflar, vſyng nothyng in order, 
                        〈◊〉
                      to the purpoſe.
                  
                     
                        Ine
                              ••
                           mis,
                      vnarmed, a man yolden.
                  
                     
                        Ine
                              ••••
                           erus,
                      without any ſcience or craft, an 
                        〈◊〉
                      perſone, alſo vnprofitable.
                  
                     Inertia lacke of crafte, ydelnes.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        , a vyne, wherof the wyne is ſoo good, that none euyll procedeth therof.
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              〈…〉
                           , ſcere,
                      to cramme or feede. Alſo 
                        〈…〉
                     .
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           , le,
                      that can not be eſchewed.
                  
                     
                        I
                              •••
                           cr
                              •
                           itus, ta, tum,
                      not exercyſe, vnoccupyed.
                  
                     Inexplorato, without ſerche.
                  
                     Inexputabilis, le, that may not be numbred.
                  
                     Inextucabilis, le, that can not be ſhaken of, or diſſolued.
                  
                     
                        In
                              ••
                           bre,
                      vnkūningly, vncraftily, yl fauored.
                  
                     Intarma, inſamye.
                  
                     Intamis, me, infamed. Infamis digitus, the myddel fynger.
                  
                     Intamo, aui, are, to infame, or yll report.
                  
                     Intandum, that may not be ſpoken.
                  
                     Intans, a chylde that can not yet ſpeake. it is alſo euery thyng that is very yong. Alſo it ſignifieth not eloquent, ſomtime an ideot that can not ſpeake.
                  
                     Infantia, chyldehode, alſo folyſhenes.
                  
                     Infantilis, le, pertaynynge to chyldehode.
                  
                     Infarcio, cii, & ciui, cire, to infarce or ſtuffe, or 
                        •
                     ylle.
                  
                     Infatuo, aui, are, to make foolyſhe.
                  
                     Infector, ctoris, a dyar, that dyeth clothe, wolle, or ſylke.
                  
                     Infectus, ta, tum, infected, dyed, ſtayned, poyſoned. Alſo vndoone, or not doone, not made.
                  
                     Infectus, tus, dyenge, or ſtaynynge.
                  
                     Infenſus, diſpleaſed, moued with angre or hate towarde an other. Alſo he that beareth malyce.
                  
                     Inferiae, ſacrifice done to infernall goddis.
                  
                     Infernalis, le, infernall.
                  
                     Infernus, helle.
                  
                     Infernus, na, num, lowe.
                  
                     Infernas, atis, the lowe.
                  
                     Inferné, alowe, or benethe.
                  
                     Infero, intuli, inferre, to brynge in, to throw in, to adde to, to caſt in, to conclude. Inferre arma, to make warre. Stuprū inferre, to cō
                     mytte aduoutry or fornication with a kynſwomanne.
                  
                     Inferus, ra, rum, where nothynge is lower.
                  
                     Infeſta ſigna, ſtanderdes or baners diſplayd in battayle on bothe partes.
                  
                     Infeſtiuus, ua, um, vnmete for diſporte.
                  
                     Infeſto, aui, are, to do diſpleaſure with ſondry incurſions or rodes.
                  
                     Infeſtum mare, the ſee occupied with pyrates and robbers.
                  
                     Infeſtus, a mortall ennemye.
                  
                     Infeſtus, ta, tum, that ſtandethe agaynſte a man, to the intent to indamage hym.
                  
                     Infibulo, aui, are, to claſpe to gyther.
                  
                     Inficias ire, to doubte or denye.
                  
                     Inficiator, oris, he that denyeth.
                  
                     Infici, feci, ficere, to dye clothe, to ſtayne o
                        •
                      infecte.
                  
                     Inficior, aris, ari, to denie, or diſafferme.
                  
                     Infidus, da, dum, vnfaythefulle.
                  
                     Infimates, the baſe people.
                  
                     Infimo, aui, are, to brynge lowe.
                  
                     Infimus, a, um, the loweſt or moſte baſe.
                  
                     Infirmo, aui, are, to make weake.
                  
                     
                        Infirmus, 
                              ••
                           a, um,
                      vnſtable, ſycke, feble.
                  
                     Infirmitas, tatis, vnſtablenes, weakeneſſe, ſyckenes.
                  
                     Inflammo, aui, are, to inflame or ſet on fire.
                  
                     Infligo, xi, gere, poenam aut opprobrium, to punyſhe or rebuke.
                  
                     Informo, aui, are, to ſhape or fourme, to enforme or teache good maners.
                  
                     Inforo, aui, are, to declare at the barre in a place of iugement, to pleade, alſo to perforate or make a hole.
                  
                     Infortunium, yll chaunce.
                  
                     Infra, within, bynethe: In numbre it ſignifieth laſſe or fewer.
                  
                     Infractio, ſlowthfulneſſe.
                  
                     Infractus, ta, tum, vnbroken, ſure, Infractus animi, ſtyffe of courage. ſometyme it ſignifieth diſcouraged.
                  
                     Infrendo, di, dere, to craſſhe the teethe for angre.
                  
                     Infrendes, chylderne lackynge teethe.
                  
                     Infringo, infregi, gere, to breake to pieces.
                  
                     Infrunitus, a foole, that knoweth not howe to vſe a thynge.
                  
                     
                     Infulae, be the labelles, whiche do hang on euery ſyde of a mytar. It was in the olde tyme the attyre that prieſtes dyd weare on their heedes. They were alſo tapettes of linen, wherwith temples were hanged.
                  
                     Infumibulū, the ſhank or tonel of a chimney.
                  
                     Infumo, aui, are, to drye in the ſmoke.
                  
                     Infundibulum, a tounnell, whereinto licour is poured, whan veſſels are fylled.
                  
                     Infundo, infudi, infundere, to poure in.
                  
                     Infurnibulum, a piele, wherwith breadde is put into the ouen.
                  
                     Ingemo, gemui, ere, to lament or bewayle moche.
                  
                     Ingeniculor, aris, ari, to bowe the knee, or make courteſye.
                  
                     Ingenium, the propre nature of a thynge. Alſo wytte.
                  
                     Ingenioſirs, wyttye.
                  
                     Ingens, tis, wonderfull great.
                  
                     Ingenuatus, comme of an honeſte ſtocke or kynrede.
                  
                     Ingenuus, a free man borne, or a gentylmā.
                  
                     Ingenuitas, tatis, freedome.
                  
                     Ingenuus, a, um, naturall.
                  
                     
                        Ingenu
                              •
                           ,
                      freely, frankely.
                  
                     Ingero, geſsi, gerere, to bryng in, to myxt.
                  
                     Ingitas, ratis, pouertie.
                  
                     Inglorius, tia, um, of no renome or fame.
                  
                     Ingluuies, gluttonie. Alſo the cray or gorge in byrdes.
                  
                     Ingrandeſco, ſci, ſcere, to waxe greate.
                  
                     Ingratis, agaynſt my wyll, or our wylle.
                  
                     Ingraueſco, ſci, ſcere, to ouercharge.
                  
                     Ingredior, eris, gredi, to entre.
                  
                     Ingruo, ui, ere, to inuade, to be imminēt, proprely ſpoken of battayle or tempeſt.
                  
                     Inguina, the pryuie membres of menne and womenne.
                  
                     Inguinaria, an herbe which cureth the diſeaſes in pryuie membres.
                  
                     Ingurgito, aui, are, to deuoure gluttonouſly.
                  
                     Inhaereo, to cleaue or ſtycke to.
                  
                     Inhaereſco, ſci, ſcere, to ſtycke faſte.
                  
                     Inhalo, aui, are, to prawe in brethe.
                  
                     Inhibeo, bui, bere, to forbydde.
                  
                     Inhio, aui, are, to gape. alſo to couere moch.
                  
                     Inhonor, withoute honour.
                  
                     Inhorreo, tui, rere, Inhorreſco, ſcere, to abhorre, to quake for feare.
                  
                     Inhumaruis, cruell, vncourteyſe.
                  
                     Inibi, euen there, anon, amonge them.
                  
                     Iniicia, inieci, iniicere, to caſte or throwe in, to caſt at ſome thynge, to throwe with violence, to putte on.
                  
                     Iniicere manum, to ſeaſe or take poſſeſſyon of a thynge. Manus iniectio, a ſeaſe
                        •
                      of lande.
                  
                     Inimicitia, hoſtilitie, contrarye to amytie.
                  
                     Inimico, caui, care, to make enemies.
                  
                     Inimcor, catis, cari, to practiſe hoſtilitie.
                  
                     Inimicus, an ennemye.
                  
                     Ininde, from thens.
                  
                     Iniquus, a, um, not euen or playne. Alſo not indifferent or iuſte, ſometyme great, ſtrait, or narrowe.
                  
                     Iniquitas, tatis, parcialite, cōtrary to iuſtice.
                  
                     Initio, aui, are, to inſtructe in thynges concernynge relygion. Initiatus, inſtructed or entred in rules concerning religion. alſo to begyn to do a thynge.
                  
                     Initior, aris, ari, to begynne: alſo to be weaned, as chylderne be.
                  
                     Initium, a beginnyng, a ſacrifice to Ceres.
                  
                  
                     Inito, aui, are, to walke in.
                  
                     Iniuges, catell neuer yoked or broken, whiche were ſometyme ſacrificed.
                  
                     Iniungo, xi, gere, to inioyne, to appoynt, to lay on, as a mā wil adde to a great burdein.
                  
                     Iniuria, wronge, iniurie, reproche, damage. Taken like an aduerbe, it ſignifyeth, without cauſe, without deſerte.
                  
                     Iniurioſus, a wronge doer.
                  
                     Iniurius, a, um, wrongfull, he that doth any thynge agaynſt the lawe.
                  
                     Innitor, teris, inniti, to aſſaye, to indeuour.
                  
                     Innato, aui, are, to ſwymme in a place.
                  
                     Innocuus, a, um, vnharmefull, he that doth none harme.
                  
                     Innoteſco, ſci, ſcere, to be knowen.
                  
                     Innoxius, a, um, wherin is no damage, that whiche can do none harme.
                  
                     Innumerato, in a redyneſſe.
                  
                     Innuo, nui, ere, to graunt or aſſent with noddynge of the heed.
                  
                     Ino, the name of Cadmus daughter, the wyfe of Athamas kynge of Thebans.
                  
                     Inocco, aui, are, to harowe in.
                  
                     Inoculo, aui, are, to greffe.
                  
                     Inodorus, without ſauoure.
                  
                     Inoleſco, ſci, ſcere, to waxe greate.
                  
                     Inopioſus, a, um, needye.
                  
                     Inops, pis, poore, lackynge helpe. Alſo vnburyed.
                  
                     Inora, beaſtes without mouthes.
                  
                     In poſterum, at the laſte, in concluſyon.
                  
                     Inprimis, ſpecially, principally, chiefly.
                  
                     Inquies, quietis, & inquietus, ta, tum, vnreſtefull, vnquyete.
                  
                     Inquieto, aui, are, to vnquyete or trouble.
                  
                     Inquilino, inquilinaui, quilinare, to dwell in a ſtraunge place.
                  
                     Inquilinus, he that dwelleth in a place, where neither he, nor his auncetoures were borne.
                  
                     Inquino, aui, are, to defyle or polute.
                  
                     Inquio, I ſaye.
                  
                     Inquiro, ſiui, quirere, to inquyre.
                  
                     
                     Inquiſitius, more intentifely, more inwardly
                  
                     Inſanio, iui, ire, to be madde or peuyſſhe, to dote, to do vnaduiſedly.
                  
                     Inſanus, madde, peuyſhe, doting, regarding no counſell, frowarde, vntractable.
                  
                     Inſania, madnes, peuyſhenes, dotage, frowardeneſſe.
                  
                     Inſcitia, ignoraunce.
                  
                     Inſcius, a, um, ignoraunt.
                  
                     Inſcienter, ignorauntly.
                  
                     Inſcribo, ſcripſi, ſcribere, to write in or vpon, to name or intitle.
                  
                     Inſcriptus, a, um, vnwritten, written vpon, named, or intitled.
                  
                     Inſecta, be all flyes and wormes, that be diuided in their bodies, the heed and breaſte from the bealy and tayle, as bees, waſpes, emotes, or piſmeres, and ſuche lyke.
                  
                     Inſequor, eris, ſequi, to folowe or purſue.
                  
                     Inſero, ſerui, rere, inſertum, to ſet in, to ioyn. whan it hath inſeui, inſitū, it ſygnyfyeth to greffe.
                  
                     Inſerto, aui, are, to ſette to.
                  
                     Inſertorium, the bond or thonge, wherwith a tergat or buckeler is hanged on a mans arme.
                  
                     Inſeruio, uiui, ire, to ſerue.
                  
                     Inſideo, es, ſedi, ſidere, to ſytte on, to ſytte in, or be in, to beſiege, to abyde in a place.
                  
                     Inſidiae, wiles to intrap a mā, er he be ware.
                  
                     Inſidior, aris, ari, to practyſe wyles, to intrappe or betray a man.
                  
                     Inſidioſus, a, um, full of wyles.
                  
                     Inſidioſe, wylyly, craftily.
                  
                     
                        Inſido, is, ſidi, 
                              •
                           e,
                      to entre to thintēt to abide.
                  
                     Inſignia, ſignes or tokens of honour, wherby euery aſtate or great auctoritie is knowen, as robes, maces, ſwordes borne vpright, cappes of mayntenaunce, and other lyke thynges. Alſo ſomtyme tokens of doctrine and vertue: as ſtaues typped with ſyluer, which bedels bere before doctors, hodes furred, crownes of laurell. &c.
                  
                     Inſignio, iui, ire, to note with ſomme ſygne. Alſo to doubbe knyghtes.
                  
                     Inſignis, ne, notable, excellent, marked with ſome ſpeciall token to be knowen.
                  
                     Inſigne, a notable ſigne or token.
                  
                     Inſignite, & inſigniter, notably.
                  
                     Inſilio, liui, ire, to leape in or vp.
                  
                     Inſimul, togyther.
                  
                     Inſimulo, aui, are, to accuſe or appeale, alſo to fayne or diſſemble.
                  
                     Inſimulatio, an accuſation or appeale.
                  
                     Inſinuatus, a, um, wounde togither.
                  
                     Inſinuo, aui, are, to bringe into, to conioyne, to put in a mans mynd couertly & craftily.
                  
                     Inſinuatio, a colourable & crafty beginning of an oration, diſſembling ſom thing. where the matter may not be fauorably herde.
                  
                     Inſipidus, a, um, vnſauerye.
                  
                     Inſipiens, entis, without diſcretion.
                  
                     Inſiſto, inſtiti, inſiſtere, to ſet faſt and fyrmely, to indeuour, to prouoke or ſolicite. ſomtime to aſſyſt.
                  
                     Inſitio, onis, greffyng.
                  
                     Inſititium, the ſtocke.
                  
                     Inſitium, the greffe. Alſo a iegot or other lyke meate ſtuffed with fleſſhe and egges chopped or mynced.
                  
                     Inſitiuus, ua, uum, infarcyd or ſtuffed.
                  
                     Inſolens, not wont or accuſtomed, haut, arrogant, preſumptuous.
                  
                     Inſolentia, ſeldomnes of vſe in any thynge. vnhauntynge of a place. Alſo preſumption wanton pride.
                  
                     Inſolitus, not wont.
                  
                     Inſolo, aui, are, to drie in the ſonne, to blech.
                  
                     Inſolatus, a, um, ſunned. Inſolatio, a ſonnyng.
                  
                     Inſomnia, ae, lacke of powar to ſlepe.
                  
                     Inſomnium, a vayne dreame.
                  
                     Inſomnes noctes, nyghtes without ſlepe.
                  
                     Inſomnioſus, ſlepy, or he that ſlepith moch.
                  
                     Inſons, inſontis, innocent, or not gyltie.
                  
                     Inſonus, a, um, without noyſe.
                  
                     Inſpectius, more aduyſedly.
                  
                     Inſpecto, taui, tare, to beholde attentiuely▪ to wayte on.
                  
                     Inſpicio, ſpexi, cere, to beholde, to ouerſee, to controll, to conſyder a thing throughly.
                  
                     Inſpectio, a beholdynge, an ouerſyghte,Cicero. Ti. Liuiꝰ a controllemente.
                  
                     Inſpector, an ouerſeer, a controller.
                  
                     Inſpico, aui, are, to make a thyng ſmalle, like to a wheate reede.
                  
                     Inſpiro, aui, are, to inſpire, to blowe in.
                  
                     Inſtans, tis, an inſtant, the leaſt part of time.
                  
                     Inſtantia, thinges that be preſent.
                  
                     Inſtanter, inſtantly. Inſtantia, diligence.
                  
                     Inſtar, as it were or lyke.
                  
                     Inſtatio, the inſtant tyme.
                  
                     Inſtauro, aui, are, to new make, or begin any thīg. ſomtime to renue or reform, to reedify
                  
                     Inſtat, it is nigh, it is com, it is at hand. Caeſar ubi ſe diutius duci intellexit, et diē inſtare, qua die frumentum militibus metiri oportebat, whā 
                     Ceſar ꝑceiued that he was delayed, & the day. was nigh come, whan he muſte nedes delyuer corne to his men of warre.
                  
                     Inſterno, ſtraui, ſternere, to couer, to ſprede.
                  
                     Inſtrata, trappers of horſes.
                  
                     Inſtratū, a coūterpoynt. alſo it ſignifieth all tapiſry, which ſerueth to couer any thing.
                  
                     Inſtigo, inxi, gere, to meue inwardely.
                  
                     Inſtinctus, inwardly meued.
                  
                     Inſtigo, aui, are, to ſtere or pricke forwarde.
                  
                     Inſtita, a purfyll.
                  
                     Inſtito, aui, are, to repugne, or withſtande.
                  
                     Inſtitor, oris, a chapman, a mercer, alſo he that ſelleth apparayle and fyne ſtuffe, goinge about therwith.
                  
                     Inſtitorius, ia, ium, pertaynyng to chapman.
                  
                     
                     Inſtituo, tui, tuere, to inſtitute, to begynne, to inſtructe or teache, to ordayne.
                  
                     Inſtitutiones, inſtructions in doctrine.
                  
                     Inſtitura, ancient maners & cuſtoms, alſo ordināces. Pro meo inſtituto, for my purpoſe.
                  
                     Inſto, as, inſtiri, inſtare, to require inſtantely, to ſolicite, to ſtycke to, to reſiſte, to perſiſt, to preaſe on, to come on, or immediatly folowe. Inſtat, it is nowe.
                  
                     Inſtratum, the trappier or apparayle of an horſe, a horſeclothe.
                  
                     Inſtrumentum, an inſtrument or toole. Alſo ordinance of warre, veſſell and all neceſſaries of houſehold and huſbandry. ſometyme it ſignifieth a dede or charter, cōcernyng lande dettes or couenantes.
                  
                     Inſtruo, xi, ſtruere, to ſette in order or aray, to inſtructe, to fournyſhe, to prepare.
                  
                     Inſubres, lumbardes, proprely menne of the duchy of Melayne.
                  
                     Inſucco, aui, are, to ſoke in lycour.
                  
                     Inſueſco, ſueui, ſcere, to be wonte.
                  
                     Inſuetus, ta, tum, not vſed.
                  
                     Inſula, an ile inuirōned with water. It is alſo a hous in a town, hauīg none other hous ioyned to it, but ſtretes on euery ſyde of it.
                  
                     Inſularis, re, belongyng to an yle.
                  
                     Inſularius, a, um, mooſte vyle, proprely men banyſhed into Iles to dygge mettall.
                  
                     Inſulatus, ta, tum, made an yle.
                  
                     Inſulto, taui, tare, to leape vppe, to ſcorne or ſpeake in the reproche of a man.
                  
                     Inſultura, a leapynge vp or into a thyng.
                  
                     Inſum, ineſſe, to be in ſome thynge.
                  
                     In ſumma, vniuerſally, alway, fynally.
                  
                     Auguſtinꝰ
                     Inſummo, are, to fynyſhe.
                  
                     Inſumo, pſi, ere, to ſpende or lay out money.
                  
                     Inſuper, furthermore, moreouer.
                  
                     Inſuſurro, aui, are, to whiſper in ones care.
                  
                     Integer, gra, grum, yf it be ſpoken of age, it ſignifieth yong & luſty: if it be ſpokē of a mā it ſignifieth honeſt in al poyntes & qualites, in a thynge it ſygnyfyeth entier or hoole.
                  
                     Integer aeui, luſtye of age.
                  
                     Integraſco, ſci, ſcere, to be renewed.
                  
                     Integro, aui, are, to begyn agayn, to renewe.
                  
                     Integrum mihi eſt. It is in my power, or at my pleaſure, at myne arbiterment.
                  
                     Intellectus, vnderſtandynge.
                  
                     Intellectualis, of vnderſtandynge.
                  
                     Intelligibile, that maye be vnderſtande.
                  
                     Intelligo, lexi, ligere, to vnderſtande.
                  
                     Intelligentia, the perceyuyng of the minde.
                  
                     Intemerara, perfecte ſacryfyces, all thynges obſerued.
                  
                     Intemperiae, goddeſſes, hauynge power to doo harme.
                  
                     Intemperies, & intēperātia, vntemperatnes.
                  
                     Intempeſta nox, mydnyght, whan all thing is in ſylence.
                  
                     Intempeſtas, taris, the caulme of the water,Saluſtiꝰ in Iugurth. whan there is no tempeſte.
                  
                     Intempeſtiuus, ua, um, thinge out of tyme or ſeaſon. Intempeſtiue, vntymely.
                  
                     Intendo, di, dere, to bende or ſtretche. Alſo to loke diligently on a thynge, to knytte or tie, to inforce with myght.
                  
                     Intendere animū, to ſet or fixe the mynde.
                  
                     In tenebris ſaltare, ſignifieth to do a thynge vnaduiſedly, and without any iugement.
                  
                     Intentatus, not aſſayed.
                  
                     Intentio, ſignifyeth not intente or purpoſe, but for the act that is apointed or executid.
                  
                     Intento, aui, are, to menace.
                  
                     Intentus, ta, tum, ſette or fyxed.
                  
                     Inter, betwene, amonge.
                  
                     Inter ſacrum et ſaxum, in the poynte to peryſhe and be vtterly loſte.
                  
                     Interamna, a citie in Italye.
                  
                     Interaneus, a, um, that whiche is within.
                  
                     Interanea, the inwardes of man or beaſt.
                  
                     Interareſco, ſci, ſcere, to be dried vp.
                  
                     Interbibo, bi, bere, to drynke all out.
                  
                     Intercalaris, re, & inter calarius, a, um, put or ſet betwene. Intercalaris dies, the daye of the leape yere.
                  
                     Intercalo, aui, are, to ſet or put betwene.
                  
                     Intercalaris menſis, the moneth, in the whiche certayne dayes were ſette, that lacked to make the yere complete, whych moneth is Februarye.
                  
                     Intercalaris uerſus, a ſyngular verſe, often repeted amonge other verſes. Some doo call it, in englyſhe balades and ſonges, the foote or refrette of a ditie.
                  
                     Intercapedo, dinis, a ſpace or pawſe.
                  
                     Intercedo, ceſsi, cedere, to make interceſſiō. alſo to go betwene, or be betwene.
                  
                     Intercedit mihi tecum amicitia, There is amite betwene the and me. Tribuni interceſſerunt, The tribunes dyd let or prohibite.
                  
                     Interceſsio Tribunorum, a let or prohibition of the Tribunes agaynſt the auctoritie of other offycers.
                  
                     Intercido, cidi, re, to cut aſōder in ye middis.Vide Cale pinum.
                  
                  
                     Interciſa & porrecta, cut of & made longer.
                  
                     Intercido, cidi, ere, to decaye or periſſhe betwene this and that.
                  
                     Intercino, nere, to ſynge betwene or in the myddell of a thynge.
                  
                     Intercipio, caepi, ere, to preuent or apprehēd one vnware, to take in the middes, or in the meane while, ſometyme to take all.
                  
                     Interciſi dies, were dayes diuided, part holy day, parte warkedaye.
                  
                     Intercludo, ſi, ere, to ſhut in, to ſtoppe, to let.
                  
                     Intercolumnium, the ſpace betwene pilars.
                  
                     Intercus, cutis, a diſeaſe betwene the ſkinne

and the fleſhe: whan it is an adiectiue it ſignifieth inwarde. Intercutibus uitiis madentes, ouerwette with inwarde vices.
                  
                     Intercutaneus, ea, eū, that is within the ſkin.
                  
                     Interdico, xi, cere, to prohibite greuouſely: alſo to reſyſte or lette.
                  
                     Interdictum, a prohibition.
                  
                     Interdiu, in the day tyme.
                  
                     Interdum, ſometyme.
                  
                     Interea, in the meane while, alſo neuer the leſſe. Interea loci, in the meane ſpace.
                  
                     Intereo, ru, ire, to dye vtterly.
                  
                     Interitus, deathe.
                  
                     Interequito, aui, are, to ryde betwene.
                  
                     Intereſt mea, tua, ſua, noſtra, ueſtra, it behoueth me, the, him, vs, you, or it ꝑtaineth to me, the, hym, &c. alſo it maketh matter, or is a diuerſitie. Nihil intereſt tui, It is no matter to the. Si nihil intereſt regis, peto ut dum dico, uinculis liberer, If it be noo matter to the kyng. I pray you, whiles I do ſpeake, lette me be without gyues. Sometime it ſignifieth to be in the myddes.
                  
                     
                        Inter
                              •
                           oemineū,
                      a womans priuy tokē, wherby ſhe is knowen from a man.
                  
                     Interfici, feci, to ſlee.
                  
                     Interfluo, xi, ere, to flowe betwene.
                  
                     Intertundo, fudi, fundere, to poure betwene.
                  
                     Intergerimus, a wall added to an olde foundation or walle, to ſuſtayne it.
                  
                     
                        Interthae
                              •
                           ,
                      in this meane tyme.
                  
                     Interi, they that be within.
                  
                     Interiaceo, cui, cere, to put betwene, to caſt betwene.
                  
                     Interibi, in the myddell of that place.
                  
                     Interſectum tempus, the meane tyme.
                  
                     Interiicio, ieci, ticere, to laye or put betwene.
                  
                     Interi, in the mean ſpace or time, in the mean reaſon alſo ſometime, ſodainly, otherwhile.
                  
                     Interimo, emi, imere, to kylle.
                  
                     Interior, & interius, the inner.
                  
                     Interiungo, ere, to tarie.
                  
                     Interlino, inere, to enterline.
                  
                     Interloquor, eris, qui, to ſpeke in a mās tale.
                  
                     Interluceo, lucere, to ſhyne betwene, or in the myddes.
                  
                     Interluco, care, to make a glade in the myddell of a wodde.
                  
                     Interluniū, the ſpace of tyme, in the whiche neither the old mone doth appere, nor the newe moone is ſeene.
                  
                     Interluo, ere, to flowe betwene, to waſſhe betwene meales, or other actes.
                  
                     Ci. de ora.
                     Intermedius, a, um, in the myddell.
                  
                     Intermeſtris luna, the newe mone at the very chaunge.
                  
                     Intermeſtrum, the tyme whan the moone is at the poynt to chaunge.
                  
                     Intermico, to ſhyne in the myddes.
                  
                     Interminor, aris, ari, to threten ſore.
                  
                     Intermitto, tere, to leaue or put of for a time.
                  
                     Intermorior, to dye vtterly.
                  
                     Intermortuus, a, um, deed for a ſeaſon.
                  
                     Interneco, are, to ſlee all at ones.
                  
                     Internectiuum bellū, warre to vtter diſtruction or dethe.
                  
                     Internecio, a vniuerſall ſlaughter.
                  
                     Internicinū bellum, warre to the vtterance.
                  
                     Internodium, a ioynt in a mans fynger. alſo a ioynt in a ſtrawe or rede.
                  
                     Internoſco, noſcere, to knowe a thynge amonge other thynges.
                  
                     Internuncius, a meſſager, or meane betwene two perſons being at variance.
                  
                     Internus, a, nū, that whiche is within, or inward.
                  
                     Inter opus, euen in the doinge.
                  
                     Interordiniū, a ſpace betwene that which is in order. Interordo, dinis, idem.
                  
                  
                     Interpello, are, to interrupt or lette one that ſpeaketh or dothe any thynge, alſo to require, to aſke or demaunde.
                  
                     Interpenſiua, certayne pieces of tymber, whiche are ſette frome the corners of the walle, to the endes of the rafters, to conuaye rayne water into the ſpoutes.
                  
                     Interpenſiui parietes, walles, which riſe vppon an other walle, and haue no fundacion in the grounde.
                  
                     Interpola, newe inuentions, or deuyſes,
                  
                     Interpolo, are, to putte or ſette betwene, to renewe or refreſhe any thynge.
                  
                     Interpolator, oris, & interpolatrix, tricis, he or ſhe that refreſheth olde thynges, and do make them ſeme newe.
                  
                     Interpolis, le, interpolus, la, um, renewed, refreſhed.
                  
                     Interpono, ſui, nere, to put betwene.
                  
                     Interponere fidem publicā,
                     Saluſt
                           •
                        
                        ▪ in Iugurth. to promiſe vpon the credence & conſent of all the people.
                  
                     Interpremo, to ſtoppe or cloſe in.
                  
                     Interpres, pretis, an interpretour or tranſlatour. Alſo a ſtyckler betwene two, whiche are at varyaunce.
                  
                     Interpretamentum, & interpretatio, an interpretation or tranſlation.
                  
                     Interpretor, aris, ari, to interprete, expoune, or tranſlate.
                  
                     Interputo, are, to cutte betwene.
                  
                     Interraſile, that whiche is playne betwyxte two partes grauen or imboſed.
                  
                     Interrex, regis, He that ruleth in the meane tyme, betwene the ceſſynge of the auctoritie of one principall gouernour, by deth or otherwiſe, vntylle an other be elected into the ſame offyce.
                  
                     Interregnum, the ſaide meane tyme of gouernaunce or rule.
                  
                     Interrogo, are, to demaunde a queſtion.
                  
                     
                     Saluſtiꝰ 
                           〈◊〉
                         Catalinar. Cic. in Prae. 
                           〈◊〉
                         urb
                           •
                        .
                     Interrogati legibus, to be tried by examinatiō, that they had offēded againſt the lawis.
                  
                     Interrūpo, rupi, pere, to breke in the middes.
                  
                     Interſcalmia, the ſpaces betwene the oores in a bore or galey.
                  
                     Interſcapilium, the ſpace betwene the ſhulders vnder the necke.
                  
                     Interſcindo, di, ſcindere, to cut in the middis.
                  
                     Interſepio, ſepſi, pire, to diuide in the middel with ſome incloſure.
                  
                     Interſepta, the griſtell, which maketh particion betwene the noſethrilles.
                  
                     Interſero, ſeui, ſerere, to ſowe or ſet betwene or in the myddes.
                  
                     Interſono, are, to make noyſe in the middes or betwene.
                  
                     Interſpiro, are, to ſpring vp in the middes.
                  
                     Interſterno, to ſtrawe betwene, or throwe thynges betwene.
                  
                     Interſtitium, a diſtance or ſpace betwene.
                  
                     Interſum, intereſſe, to be preſent. alſo to differ, to be diuers. Stulto intelligēs quid intereſt? What diuerſitie is there betwene a fole and a wiſe man?
                  
                     Intertextus, a, ū, wouē or wrought betwene. or 
                        •
                     inſelde, as cloth of tinſyl, or bawdekyn.
                  
                     Intertrigo, ginis, gallynge, whiche hapneth by the occaſion of ſweate betwene the legges, the toes, or fyngers.
                  
                     Intertrimentum, & intertritura, the loſſe of bothe partes, or on bothe ſydes.
                  
                     Interturbo, are, to trouble excedyngly.
                  
                     Interuaco, are, to be vacant or void betwene
                  
                     Interuallum, a ſpace betwene.
                  
                     Interuello, ere, to plucke vp here & there.
                  
                     Interuenio, ire, to come in the meane while, to be preſent amonge other.
                  
                     Interuenium, the ſpace betwene the vaines.
                  
                     Interuerro, re, to take away craftily or falſly.
                  
                     Interuiſo, ere, to viſite among, or now & thā.
                  
                     Interula, a ſhyrte or ſmocke.
                  
                     Inteſtabilis, he whiche by the law can make no teſtamēt. ſomtime it ſignifieth deteſtable.
                  
                     Inteſtatus, he that dyeth without makynge any teſtament, inteſtate. Alſo he that dieth makyng none heyre by teſtament. alſo a mā out of credence, whome no manne wylle take for a wytneſſe.
                  
                     Inteſtina, the bowelles, or inwarde parte of man, or other thynge lyuynge.
                  
                     Inteſtinum bellum, where people do warre within their owne realme.
                  
                     Inteſtinum odium, hate with hart & mynde, mortall hatrede.
                  
                     Inteſtinum opus, the inwarde buyldynge of tymber and pargette.
                  
                     Intingo, xi, gere, to depe, as one dothe his fynger into lycour.
                  
                     Intorqueo, ſi, quere, to thruſt in by throwing of a darte, or other lyke thynge. Alſo to tourne or wynde in.
                  
                     Intra, within. Intra modum, leſſe thanne a meane, ſhorte of a meane.
                  
                     Intra famā, les thā the opiniō that mē haue.
                  
                     Interius, more inwarde.
                  
                     Intimus, moſte inwarde, moſte ſecrete.
                  
                     Intrarius, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Internus, na, num, whiche is within.
                  
                     Intrico, are, to wrappe.
                  
                     Intrimentum, damage eyther to the gyuer, or to the receyuour.
                  
                     Intrinſecus, within.
                  
                     Intritus, brayed in a morter.
                  
                     Intrò, into a place.
                  
                     Intro, are, to entre or goo in.
                  
                     Introcludo, ſi, dere, to ſhutte in.
                  
                     Introduco, xi, cere, to brynge or leade in.
                  
                     Introeo, iui, ire, to goo in.
                  
                     Introgredior, eris, gredi, to comme in.
                  
                     Intromitto, miſi, mittere, to lette in.
                  
                     Introrſus, into, within.
                  
                     Introrumpo, rupi, rumpere, to breake in.
                  
                     Introſpicio, ſpexi, ſpicere, to loke in.
                  
                     Introuoco, are, to calle in.
                  
                     Intueor, eris, eri, to beholde in.
                  
                     Intus, in a place.
                  
                     Intuſium, a ſhyrte or ſmocke.
                  
                     Intutus, ta, tum, vnſure.
                  
                     Intybum erraticum, cicorie or white endiue.Galenus. Plinius. Columel.
                  
                  
                     Inuado, ſi, re, to inuade, to entre, to app̄hēd.
                  
                     Inualeſco, lui, ſcere, to waxe ſtronge, to be confyrmed or ſtablyſhed.
                  
                     Inualidus, da, dum, feeble, weake.
                  
                     Inualetudo, dinis, febleneſſe.
                  
                     Inuectiue orationes, orations made ageynſt one in reprouyng his maners and lyuynge.
                  
                     Inueho, uexi, uehere, to carye in a thinge, to carye a thynge into a place.
                  
                     Inuehor, eris, uehi, to rebuke one vehemently, and with violent and ſoore wordes.
                  
                     Inuenio, ire, to fynde a thing, whiche a man ſeeketh for.
                  
                     In uerba iurare, to be ſworne as princis coū
                     ſaylours and ſeruantes be ſworne vnto thē. Alſo to do feaultie.
                  
                     In uerſum, in numbre and order.
                  
                     Inuerto, tere, to tourne in, to tourne vppe ſo downe, to turne in and out after the vulgar ſpeche, proprely to turne euery thyng contrary to the ryght fourme or facion.
                  
                     Inueſtes, yonge children without heare on their bodies.
                  
                     Inueſtigo, are, to ſeke out, to finde in ſeking.
                  
                     Inueſtigabilis, le, that maye not be founde with ſekynge.
                  
                     Inueſtio, iui, ire, to adorn or garniſhe a thing.
                  
                     Inueterati, olde ſhrewes or vnthriftes, me
                        •
                      in lyuynge vnthriftily waxed olde.
                  
                     
                     Inuetereſco, raui, ſcere, to were out for age, to be oute of vſe, to be aged or olde. Alſo worne out, almoſte conſumed.
                  
                     Inuicem, togither, one the other. Inuicem d
                           ••
                        gunt, they do loue one an other. alſo it ſignifieth for thy parte. Habes res urbanas, inuicem ruſticas ſcribe, Nowe thou knoweſt the affaires of the citie, for thy parte write what is done in the countrey.
                  
                     Inuidentia, enuy, griefe to beholde or here that an other man proſpereth.
                  
                     Inuideo, uidi, dere, to haue enuy at an others proſperitie. Inuideo tibi doctrinam, I haue enuy at thy lernynge. Alſo to ſee inwardly or through a thynge.
                  
                     Inuiſus, uiſa, uiſum, hated.
                  
                     Inuidia, enuy, hatred, yll wyll.
                  
                     Saluſtiꝰ in Iugarth.
                     Inuidia facti ſui, the diſpleaſure of his acte, or attemptate, or the dede wherfore he was enuied and hated.
                  
                     Inuidioſa res, a thynge, whiche bredeth enuye or hatred.
                  
                     Inuidioſe, enuyouſely.
                  
                     Inuidioſus, an enuyous perſone. ſometyme he, whiche is enuied.
                  
                     Inuidus, he that hath enuye.
                  
                     Inuigilo, are, to haue watche of a thynge, or to lay watche, to care.
                  
                     Inuinius, he that neuer drynketh wyne.
                  
                     Inuiſus, a, ū, neuer ſene. alſo hatid or odious.
                  
                     Inuitatus, boden, as to a feaſte or bankette.
                  
                     Inuito, are, to bydde. alſo to delyte, to fylle the bealy.
                  
                     Inuitus, ta, tum, vnwyllynge, or agaynſte a mannes wylle.
                  
                     
                        In
                              ••••
                           uerſam,
                      vnyuerſally.
                  
                     Inuius, a, um, lackynge a way, or where nothynge can paſſe.
                  
                     Inumbro, are, to make ſhadowe: ſomtyme it ſignifieth to defende.
                  
                     Inunco, uncare, to catche, as it were with an hooke.
                  
                     Inundo, to ouerflowe, or ſurrounde.
                  
                     Inundario, a floudde.
                  
                     In unguem, to the poynte, perfectly.
                  
                     Inuoco, care, to calle in, to call for helpe, alſo not to calle.
                  
                     Inuolo, are, to ſteale, to lay violent handes on one, to flee out.
                  
                     Inuolucris, a byrde not redy to flee.
                  
                     Inuolucrum, that whiche is wrapped.
                  
                     Inuolucre, as a thinge whiche is wrappped togither.
                  
                     Inuoluo, uere, to wrappe.
                  
                     Inuolutus, ta, tum, wrapped.
                  
                     Inuoluolus, & inuoluola, a worme lyke a canker. whyche is on vynes, and whan he is taken of, he wrappeth hym ſelfe rounde togither.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶I Ante O.
                  
                     IO, an interiection, ſignifieng ſometyme grefe, as in Tibullo. Vrorio, O I burne. Sometyme exceſſiue gladneſſe. as in Ouidio. Dicite io paean.
                  
                  
                     Iochabella, the name of Moyſes mother.Ioſeph
                           ••
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Iocus, plurali ioca, a mery worde, diſporte.
                  
                     Iocor, aris, ari, to ſpeke merily, or in diſport.
                  
                     Iocoſus, a, um, & iocularis, lare, mery, ſportfull, prouokynge myrthe.
                  
                     Ioculus, a lyttell ſport or myrthe.
                  
                     Iolaus, the ſonne of Iphiclus, of whom the people of Sardinia, were named Iolenſes.
                  
                     Iole, the daughter of Euritus, kynge of Aetolia, whom Herculus loued.
                  
                     Ionia, a region of the laſſe Aſia, wherein were the citie of Epheſus, Milerum, & Clazomenae.
                  
                  
                     Ion, a ſtone of a vyolet colour.
                  
                     Ionia, a citie of the Athenienſes.
                  
                     Ionicus, ca, cum, & Ionius, a, um, of Ionia.
                  
                     Ioppe, a citie of the countrey of Paleſtina, not farre from Ieruſalem, ſtandyng by the ſee, whiche ſome men do ſuppoſe to be the hauyn, callyd Port Iaffe.
                  
                     Iordanis, a ryuer of Iudea, commonly callyd flume Iordane.
                  
                     Ios, an yle where Homerus was buried.
                  
                     Iotapata, a citie in Syria.
                  
                     
                        Iouin
                              •
                           ani,
                      were men of armes, ſo called of Maximian the emperoure, whiche dydde valyantly in the countrey of Illiria.
                  
                     Iouis, the genitiue caſe of Iupiter.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶I Ante P.
                  
                     IPhianaſſa, the wyfe of Melāpos, whom for her beautie Iuno tourned into furye or madneſſe.
                  
                     Iphigenia, the daughter of kyng Agamemnon, with whom he dydde ſacrifice going to Troye.
                  
                     Ips, ipos, a lyttell worme, bredynge in hornes and vynes.
                  
                     Ipſe, ipſa, ipſum, he, ſhe, that ſame, by demonſtratynge or ſhewynge the perſone or thynge ſpoken of.
                  
                     Ipſemet, he hym ſelfe.
                  
                     Ipſippe, to hym and none other.
                  
                     Ipſulces, plates emboſed like to fygures or images of men or women.
                  
                     Iphitus, the ſonne of Praxonidis, whiche fyrſte ordayned the ſolempne playes callyd Olympiada.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  ¶I Ante R.
                  
                     IR, the holowneſſe of the hande. ſommetyme it ſygnifieth the hole hande.
                  
                     Ira, wrathe, an appetite to punyſhe him,

of whom we be offended.
                  
                     Iracundia, angre, diſpleaſure agaynſt one, a deſyre to be reuenged.
                  
                     Iracundus, ſhortly or ſoone angrie, haſtie.
                  
                     Iraſcor, etis, iraſci, to be angrye.
                  
                     Irate, angrely.
                  
                     Iratus, angrye.
                  
                     Irceus, a kynde of pud dynges.
                  
                     Ircipes, an harowe.
                  
                     Ire inficias, to denye.
                  
                     Ire pedibus in ſententiam, to conſente to the ſentence or raiſon of an other, which hath ſpoken, or to be of the ſame opinyon.
                  
                     Irenarches, & irenarcha, he whiche is in auctoritie to ſee peace kepte in a countreye or citie, which amonge vs may be callyd a Iuſtice of the peace.
                  
                     Iris, iris, uel iridis, the rayne bowe. it is alſo a floure deluce, the roote wherof is verye ſoote, and is commonly called Yreos.
                  
                  
                     Irnium, oyle of Ireos.
                  
                     Ironia, is a fygure in ſpeakynge, whanne a man diſſemblyth in ſpeche that whyche he thynketh not: as in ſcoffyng or bourdyng, callynge that fayre, whyche is fowle in dede, that good, whiche is yl, that eloquēt, which is barbarous. Semblably reaſoning contrary to that I thinke, to the intente to mocke hym, with whome I doo dyſpute or reaſon.
                  
                     Ironice, mockyſhly, ſcoffyngly.
                  
                     Ironicus, he that vſethe that faſſhyon in ſpeakynge.
                  
                     Irraſus, vnſhauen.
                  
                     Irraucio, raucui, cere, to be hoorſe.
                  
                     Irrenumerabile, that may not be rewarded or recompenſed.
                  
                     Irreparabile, that maye not be repaired or reſtored to the fyrſte aſtate.
                  
                     Irrepo, pſi, pere, to crepe in.
                  
                     Irreprehenſus, a, ū, that can not be reprouid.
                  
                     Irretio, iui, ire, to be taken or holden in, as it were in a nette.
                  
                     Irretitus, taken, lapt in with crafte, or faire promyſes.
                  
                     Irrigo, to water grounde, to brynge water into the fieldes out of a ryuer.
                  
                     Irriguus, gua, guum, the grounde or fielde that may be eaſyly watered. ſometyme the water, whyche may be eaſyly diryuied into the fieldes.
                  
                     Irripio, pere, to plucke in.
                  
                     Irrito, are, to make voyde & of none effecte.
                  
                     Irritus, ta, tum, voide, of none effect or force.
                  
                     Irrito, hauynge the laſte ſyllable ſauynge one, longe, to prouoke, to kendyl wrathe, to ſtyrre vppe.
                  
                     Irrogare mulctam, to ſette a payne.
                  
                     Irructo, are, to blowe in by belkynge.
                  
                     Irrugio, gere, to braye oute.
                  
                     Irrumo, are, to ſucke in.
                  
                     Irrumpo, rupi, irrumpere, to breake in, or enter with force. ſomtyme to breake aſonder.
                  
                     Irruo, to rounne haſtilye or furiouſely into battayle, or vppon any thynge. ſometyme to falle in, or caſt in.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶I Ante S.
                  
                     IS, a pronowne, whiche ſignifieth he.
                  
                     Iſaeus, a famouſe rhetorician, whiche inuētid to make euery matter cōpendious.
                  
                     Iſagoge, an introduction.
                  
                     Iſagogicon, a waye to introduce, or begyn to teache.
                  
                     Iſapis, a ryuer nygh to Caecenna.
                  
                  
                     Iſara, a ryuer commynge oute of the Rone, where the hylle callyd Cemenus is ioyned to the Rone: and ſo runneth by Druentia into the goulfe of Venyſe.
                  
                     Iſacia, an yle ageynſte Velia, callydde alſo Oenotris.
                  
                  
                     Iſauria, a region of the laſſe Aſia.
                  
                  
                     Iſaurum, a cite in the countrey of Pāphilia.
                  
                     Iſchia, the houckle bone. it is ſomtyme taken for the ache in the ſayde bone, whiche vulgare phiſicions do call Sciatica.
                  
                     Iſchiadicus, uel Iſchiacus, he that hathe the ache in the hyppe, cōmonly callid Sciatica.
                  
                  
                     Iſiaci, the prieſtes of the goddeſſe Iſis.
                  
                     Iſis, called alſo Io, one of the harlottes of Iupiter, whom he tourned into a cowe for feare of Iuno his wyfe.
                  
                     Iſitium, a certeyne puddynge. ſome calle it an Iſynge.
                  
                     Iſmarus, a mountayne in Thracia.
                  
                     Iſmenias, the name of an excellent minſtrel, whiche played on the ſhalmes.
                  
                     Iſmenus, a ryuer in the cuntrey of Boeotia.
                  
                  
                     Iſocolon, where two ſentences are in lyke lengthe.
                  
                     Iſocrates, the name of a famous oratoure, of wonderfulle eloquence, oute of whoſe ſchole proceded the moſte excellente oratours of Grece.
                  
                     Iſodomon, a fourme of buyldynge, where euery thynge is equally ſtrayght.
                  
                     Iſonomia, equalite of lawes, as where they be indifferent & like to al maner of perſons.
                  
                     Iſopleurus, thre edged.
                  
                     Iſrael, ſygnifieth a man ſeinge god.
                  
                     Iſſa, an yle in the Venician ſee ioynynge to Slauonie.
                  
                     Iſſus, a citie in Sicile, and a ryuer of Siria.
                  
                     Iſter, iſtri, the great ryuer callyd Danubius, in 
                        •
                     uche Danowe.
                  
                     Iſter, the greatteſt ryuer of Europa, called alſo Danubius, Danowe.
                  
                     Iſtic, there, where thou arte.
                  
                     
                     Iſthmus, a narowe parte of the countreye, where two ſees are but a ſmall diſtaunce aſonder. There be dyuers ſuche places in Grecia, and of them were certayn playes called Iſthmia.
                  
                     Iſtria, a parte of Italye, marchynge on Illiria, callyd nowe Slauonye.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶I ANTE T.
                  
                     ITA, ſo, ſo moche, therfore.
                  
                     Ita ſané, ye truely.
                  
                     Italia, Italye.
                  
                     Italus, an Italyan.
                  
                     Italica, a citie in Italia, whiche by an nother name is called Confiniū, There is an other in Spayn, where Silius Italicus was borne.
                  
                     Italicus, ca, cum, of Italye.
                  
                     Italicenſis, a citeſen of Italica.
                  
                  
                     Item, in lyke wyſe.
                  
                     
                        Ite
                              •
                           , eris, itiner, itineris,
                      a iourneye. alſo a way. Iter habeo ad Caeſarem, I take my iorney to the emperour.
                  
                     Itero, are, to do a thynge efteſoones, to goo backe agayne.
                  
                     Iterum, efteſoones, or agayne.
                  
                     Ithaca, the countrey of Vlyſſes.
                  
                     Ithome, a towne in Peloponeſo, an nother in Theſſaly.
                  
                     Ithonia, a countrey in Grece.
                  
                     Ithyra, a towne on the mountain of Taurꝰ.
                  
                     Ithyphallus, the name of Priapus the moſt diſhoneſt and abhominable ydoll. Alſo the ſecrete membre being in proſperite.
                  
                     Itidem, ſemblably, alſo.
                  
                     Itinerarium, a commentarye or boke of remembraunce, contaynynge thynges commytted in iourneyes. Alſo it is a kalender of myles in the diſtance of places, with the tyme of abode in euerye place, lyke to ieſtes of princis.
                  
                     Iteneror, aris, ari, to goo in iourneye.
                  
                     Ito, taui, tare, to go moche.
                  
                     Cicero.
                     Ituria, a region in Arabia, or Siria, of whiche the people are callyd Ituraei.
                  
                  
                     Itus, & itio, a goinge. Quid noſter itus & reditus, what our goinge and commyng.
                  
                     Itys, the ſonne of Tereus and Prognes, who, as poetes doo fayne, was tourned into a feſaunt.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶I, Ante V.
                  
                     IVBA, the mane of a beaſte. Alſo the name of a kynge of Barbarye.
                  
                     Iubar, a ſterre, whiche is alſo callid Lucyfer and Heſperus. it is ſometyme taken for bryghteneſſe.
                  
                     Iubeo, iuſsi, iubere, to commande, to deſire, to wyſhe, to exhorte, to decree.
                  
                     Iubilo, are, to declare in the voyce, the ioye and gladneſſe of the harte, whiche maye not be expreſſed with wordes.
                  
                     Iubilum, ioye and gladnes in voyce, not expreſſed in wordes.
                  
                     Iucundor, aris, ari, to be ioyous and mery.
                  
                     Iucundus, a, um, he or that, whiche is the cauſe that an nother reioyſeth, dylectable, pleaſaunt to ſee or here.
                  
                     Iudaea, Iewry, or the countrey of Iewes.
                  
                     Iudaeus, a Iewe.
                  
                     Iudex, iudicis, a iudge.
                  
                     Iudex ordinarius, he that hath auctoritie of his propre iuryſdiction, to ſytte in iugemēt without commiſſion. As the chiefe Iuſtice of Englande, the Mayre of a cytie incorporate, and a Coroner.
                  
                     Iudex delegatus, he that ſytteth by cōmiſſion, as all other iudges and iuſtices.
                  
                     Iudicialis, le, of a Iudge.
                  
                     Iudiciarius, a, um, pertaynynge to a iuge, or that whiche is to be iuged.
                  
                     Iuditium, iudgement.
                  
                     Iuditium habere, to gyue iugement.
                  
                     Iudico, are, to iudge or deeme, to ſuppoſe,Lau. Vall
                           •
                         in Barpt, i
                           •
                         ciū. lib. 
                           •
                        . to gyue ſentence, to condemne.
                  
                     Iugale uinculum, the bonde of matrimonye.
                  
                     Iugalis, he that is yoked.
                  
                     Iugantinus deus, was amonge paynyms the god, whom they ſuppoſed to haue auctoritie ouer the rydges of hylles.
                  
                     Iugarius, a ſtreete in Rome, where was an aultar of Iuno, whyche men ſuppoſed dyd ioyne matrimonie ſurely.
                  
                     Iugeratim, by ſondry furlonges.
                  
                     Iugere, to crye lyke a kyte.
                  
                     Iugerum, & iugus, geris, as moche grounde as one yoke of oxen wyll eare in a day. ſom ſuppoſe it to contayne in length 240. feete, in bredth halfe ſo moche. ſome ſaye, that it is more. Leonardus Portius ſaythe, by the auctoritie of Columella, that Iugerum containeth .xxviii. thouſand & .viii. hūdred fete.
                  
                     Iuges, oxen lyke in greatnes, callid yokes, or payres.
                  
                     Iugis, contynuynge in one thynge.
                  
                     Iugiter, contynually.
                  
                     Iuglans, andis, a wall nutte.
                  
                     Iugo, are, to yoke or couple togither.
                  
                     Iugoſus, rydged.
                  
                     Iugula, a celeſtyalle Sygne, contaynynge thre ſterres.
                  
                     Iugulo, are, to ſlee, not onely with weapon, but alſo with ſyckenes. Quartana neminem ingulat, The feuer quartayn ſleeth no mā.
                  
                     Iugulus, the foreparte of the necke, whyche is dyuided in two great ſynewes.Celſ. Iſ. 4. 
                     Dexter, & ſiniſter.
                  
                  
                     Iugulum ferire, to ſlee proprely in the neck.
                  
                     Iugulum petere, whan an oratour or man of lawe, toucheth vehemently the poynte of

the matter, and with manyfeſt and ſore argumentes and reaſons, ſeemeth to aſſaulte and oppreſſe the contrarie parte, as it were with ſharpe weapons.
                  
                     Iugum, a yoke. alſo the rydge of an hyll or banke, alſo the beame, wheron weauers do tourne their webbe. Alſo a thynge lyke to a galowes, vnder the whiche in ſygne of reproche, they whiche were vanquiſſhed, were conſtrayned to creepe, whiche was made with two ſpeares ſtandynge, and one ſpeare ouerthwarte. Alſo a frame, wheron vynes are ioyned. Alſo a beame, whereon balāces do hange. Alſo the ſyde beames in a ſhyppe, in the whyche the traunſomes are faſtened.
                  
                     Iulis, a citie in the yle of Caea, the countrey of Simonides the poete.
                  
                     Iulia, a kynred, whiche proceded from Aſcanius, ſonne of Aeneas, callyd Iulus. alſo a towne in Cales, in the coūtrey of Spain.
                  
                     Iulius, the moneth of Iuly, which toke his name of Iulius Ceſar.
                  
                     Iulus, otherwiſe namid Aſcanius, the ſonne of Aeneas. Iulus, is alſo a litle worme with many fete, bredynge in vynes & okes, whiche is alſo callyd Conuoluolus, Inuoluolus, & Voluola. It is alſo the moſyneſſe of the outwarde parte of fruites. Alſo the yonge fruite immediately after that the flowres be fallen.
                  
                     Iuli, be alſo the moſyneſſe or ſofte heares, whiche do growe on the beardes & viſages of yong men, before that they be ſhauē: and ſomtyme it ſignifieth the ſame yonge men.
                  
                     Iulus, is alſo a fyſhe, whiche is guyde vnto whales: whiche alſo is called Hegeter. it is moreouer a ſonge dedicate to Diana.
                  
                     Iumentum, euerye beaſte that drawethe or beareth burdeyns. alſo a lyttel carre.
                  
                     Iunctim, ioyntely.
                  
                     Iunculi, meate callid iunkettes: alſo a freſhe cheſe made on ruſhes, callid a iackeman.
                  
                     Iuncus, a bulle ruſhe.
                  
                     Iuncus odoratus, a ſpyce that is medicinable, ſpecially to make the brethe ſwete.
                  
                     Iungami, people in the coūtrey of Liguria.
                  
                     Iungo, xi, gere, to ioyne.
                  
                     Iunix, icis, a yonge cowe or hefar.
                  
                     Iuniculi, ſmall vynes ioyned togyther.
                  
                     Iuniperus, a ſwete buſhe, called Ieoneper.
                  
                     
                        Iunis, n
                              •
                           ,
                      yonge, whereof commeth Iunior, yonger.
                  
                     Iunius, the monethe callyd Iune. alſo a mannes name.
                  
                     Iuno, the wyfe of Iupyter, it is ſometyme taken for the ayre.
                  
                     Iunonia maior, & minor, be two of the fortunate Iles.
                  
                     Iupiter, iouis, the name of a greate prynce, whiche for his wyſedom and prowes was honoured of the gentyles for chiefe of all goddes, It is alſo the name of a planette, whiche is alwaye beneuolent in his influence and courſe.
                  
                     Iuramentum, an othe.
                  
                     Iuratus, ſworne.
                  
                     Iurgioſus, a, um, braulyng, full of contētion.
                  
                     Iurgium, a braulynge, or a ſmall contention.
                  
                     Iurgo, are, to braule or chyde.
                  
                     Iuridicus, ca, cum, accordynge to the lawe, or belongynge to the lawe.
                  
                     Iuriſdictio, iurisdiction, power, or auctoritie to miniſtre and execute lawes.
                  
                     Iuro, iutare, to ſweare.
                  
                     Iurulentus, ta, tum, full of iuice, or lycoure.
                  
                     Ius, iuris, lawe, auctoritie, lybertie, power, ryght. ſomtyme the place, where the lawe is miniſtred. Alſo lycour or iuyce. De iure meo, tuo, ſuo decedere, to omytte ſome part of the rygour or extremitie of the lawe. Pro ſuo iure agere, & ſummo: iure agere, to take the extremite of the lawe. Summū ius, the rygour of the lawe.
                  
                     Iuſcum, & iuſculum, brothe, wherein meate hath den ſodden.
                  
                     Iusiurandum, a ſolempne othe or promyſe made to GOD.
                  
                  
                     Iuſſa, commaundementes.
                  
                     Iuſſus, a, um, commaunded.
                  
                     Iuſta, ſacrifices done for deed men: now it may be vſed for funerall exequies.
                  
                     Iuſta ſoluere,
                     Cicer pro Roſcio. is proprely in funeralle obſequies, to do and performe al thinges thervnto neceſſarie.
                  
                     Iuſtitia, iuſtice, rygtuouſneſſe.
                  
                     Iuſtitium, a ceſſynge for a tyme from minyſtration of lawes in places iudiciall.
                  
                     Iuſtus, a iuſte or rightuous man, an vpright and true meanynge manne. It is taken ofte tymes in holy ſcripture for a vertuouſe mā or good man.
                  
                     Iuſtus, ta, tum, equall. meane betwene twoo extremities. Iuſta magnitudo, neither more nor leſſe, the iuſte quantitie. ſomtyme it ſygnifyeth greatneſſe. Iuſta pars, the greatte parte. Iuſto labore, with great labour. Iuſtas inimicitias, great hoſtilitie. ſometyme it ſignifieth amonge lawyers, true or very. Iuſtus filius, his very ſonne.
                  
                     Iuturna, the ſyſter of Turnus.
                  
                     Iuuamen, iuuatio, & iuuamentum, helpe.
                  
                     Iuuenalia, playes vowed for the helthe of yonge menne.
                  
                     Iuuenalis, le, pertaynyng to youthe.
                  
                     Iuuenalis dies, a day celebrate to youth.
                  
                     Iuuenalis, is alſo the name of a poete, whiche wrate Satyres.
                  
                     
                     Iuuencus, & iuuenca, yonge, not onely men but alſo beaſtes. Iuuenculus, idem.
                  
                  
                     Iuueneſco, ſcere, to waxe, or be yonge.
                  
                     Iuuenilis, le, yonge.
                  
                     Iuueniliter, yongely.
                  
                     Iuuenis, a yonge man.
                  
                     Iunior, oris, yonger.
                  
                     Iuuentus, tutis, youthe. ſometyme a multitude of yonge men.
                  
                     Iuuo, uas, iuui, are, to helpe, to delyte.
                  
                     Iuxta, nighe, ioyntly or togither, euen like, accordynge.Saluſtiꝰ in Catalinar. 
                     Nunc uero quo in loco res noſtrae ſint, iuxta mecum oēs intelligitis, Nowe howe the matter ſtandeth, ye all knowe as well as I: or els, in what caſe our buſynes is, ye vnderſtande all as moche as I do.
                  
                     Iuxtim, nygh to.
                  
                     Ixon, a greate whyte byrde, of the kynde of Rauens.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶L ANTE A.
                  
                     
                        LABASCO, labaſcere, & labaſcor, ſceris, to fayle or decaye.
                  
                     Labefacio, labefacere, to breake or deſtroye.
                  
                     Labefacto, ctare, to make feble, to appaire.
                  
                     Labellum, a lyppe.
                  
                     Labeo, onis, a manne or womanne hauynge greatte lyppes.
                  
                     Labes, a ſpotte, whiche ſodeynely hapneth to thynges that are ſmothe, a blemyſhe.
                  
                     Labecula, a lyttell ſpotte.
                  
                     Labia, & labra, lyppes. Alſo Labrum is the brymme or brynke of a ryuer or fountayne. Alſo a fatte or lyke veſſell neceſſarie to be bayned in. ſomtyme a fatte for wyne after that it is preſſed. It may be vſed for a keele vate, wherinto ale or beere is putte.
                  
                     Labicanum, a towne in Italy.
                  
                     Labici, the inhabitantes of that towne.
                  
                     Labicus, was the name of the ſonne of Minos, who was named alſo Glaucus.
                  
                     Labilis, bile, vnſtable, whyche wylle ſoone falle, ſlypper.
                  
                     Labina, ſlypperneſſe.
                  
                     Labo, are, to falle downe ſodaynly.
                  
                     Labor, eris, lapſus ſum, labi, to ſlyde, to dye, to fayle, to fall downe by lyttell and lyttell.
                  
                     Labor, labour, trauayle.
                  
                     Laboriae the name of a countrey in Italye, vulgarly called Terra laboris, the lande of laboure.
                  
                     Laborinus, a felde in Campania, where the ſtubbyll of corne is ſo great, that the people do burne it in ſtede of wodde.
                  
                     Laborioſus homo, a paynefull man.
                  
                     Laboro, rare, to laboure, to be in heuyneſſe or griefe.
                  
                     Labruſca, wylde vyne.
                  
                     Labyrinthus, a maaſe, or any buildyng made like a maaſe, out of the which it were hard to gette forthe.
                  
                     Lac, lactis, mylke.
                  
                     Lacaena, a kynde of apparayle. alſo a woman of Lacedemonia.
                  
                     Lacedaemon, uel Lacedaemonia, a citie in the parte of Grece, which is nowe called Moraea, wherof Menelaus was kynge.
                  
                     Lacer, & lacerus, a, um, torne or rent.
                  
                     Lacerna, a ſhorte cloke, whiche menne of warre be wont to weare.
                  
                     Lacernatus, cloked, or cladde in a cloke.
                  
                     Lacero, are, to teare in pieces, or to gyue many woundes.
                  
                     Lacertus, & lacerta, a Lyzerde, an Euet: alſo the parte of a mannes arme, from the elbowe to the wreſte of the hande, proprely the brawne and ſynewes of the arme.
                  
                     Lacertoſus, hauynge greatte brawnes and ſynewes.
                  
                     Laceſſo, ſiui, & ceſsi, ſſere, to rent, or goo aboute to rent the good renoume of a man. Alſo to prouoke a man to wrathe or diſpleſure, with wordes, writynge, or acte: to rayle on a man, to prycke a man with ſome yll language or acte.
                  
                     Lachana, all kynde of herbes.
                  
                     Lachanopoles, a ſyller of herbes.
                  
                     Lachanopolium, the herbe markette.
                  
                     Lacheſis, one of the thre ladies called Parcae, whiche poetes dyd fayne, to haue the rule and contynuance of mans lyfe.
                  
                     Lachrima, a teare in weepynge.
                  
                     Lachrimo, are, to weepe.
                  
                     Laciniae, gardinges of a garment, proprely where the ſkirtes be cutte in ſondry facion. In lacinias, in peces. Lacinia, is alſo a redde muſheron, whiche ſpringeth at the rote of a cheſten tree.
                  
                     Lacinioſus, a, um, cutte in ſondrye facions, wyndyng and tournynge dyuers wayes.
                  
                     Lacinium, an elbowe of lande, lyenge betwene the ſee, called Hadriaticum, and the ſee callyd Ionium.
                  
                  
                     Lacon, onis, a man of Lacedemonia.
                  
                     Laconia, the countreye, where Lacedemonia ſtandeth.
                  
                     Laconicus, nica, nicum, of the countraye of Laconia.
                  
                     Laconicum, a hotehowſe or drie bayne.
                  
                     Laconiſmus, a ſhorte fourme of ſpeakinge.
                  
                     Lactarius, ia, um, meate made of mylke, all herbes, whiche haue iuyce lyke mylke.
                  
                     Lactarius, rij, he that maketh ſondry meates of mylke.
                  
                     
                     Lacteo, ere, to ſucke mylke.
                  
                     Lactes, places within the rybbes of a man, benethe the nauyll, ſoo tender, that it maye not ſuffre any wounde or ſtroke, as Probus ſayth. Some ſay that they be caules, wherin the ſmall bowelles do lye.
                  
                     Lacteſco, ſcere, to be tourned into mylke, or to be fylled with mylke.
                  
                     Lacteus, a, um, of mylke or lyke milke, alſo that whiche is nouriſhed with mylke.
                  
                     Lacticinia, white meates made of mylke.
                  
                     Lactidiaci, ſtryken aboute the nauyll.
                  
                     Lacto, are, to fede with milk, alſo to deceiue with faire wordes.
                  
                     Lactuca, an herbe callyd letuſe.
                  
                     Lacuna, a dyche, wherin water ſtandeth. alſo a trenche, wherby fieldes are drayned, Some englyſhe it, a ſynke.
                  
                     Lacunar, a beame of tymber. Alſo ſuche a thynge as doth yet hange in marchauntes houſes, ouerthwart their halles, whereon be ſet a great numbre of candelles.
                  
                     Lacus, cus, a depe place alway full of water whiche is deriuied into brokes and riuers, alſo the veſſelle, whyche receyueth wyne, whanne the grapes are preſſed. Alſo the pryncipalle beame that gothe ouerthwarte the howſe.
                  
                     Lacuturres, greatte cabages.
                  
                     Ladanum, a ſwete gumme, whiche goth into the makynge of pommanders.
                  
                     Ladon, a ryuer in Arcadia.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶L ANTE AE.
                  
                     LAedere maieſtatem, to derogate anye thynge of the kynges auctorytie or prerogatiue.
                  
                     Laedo, laeſi, dere, to hurte or do diſpleaſure.
                  
                     Ci. in Ver.
                     Laeſae religionis culpa, hereſye, or lollardy, contempt of religion or ceremonies.
                  
                     Laemargia, gluttonye.
                  
                     Laemargus, a glutton.
                  
                     Laemuſchaton, the rewarde gyuen to hym that vanquyſhed at playenge or fyghtynge with weapons.
                  
                     Laena, a garment lyned, whiche the dyuynours callyd augures, dyd weare.
                  
                     Laerte, a citie in Cilicia.
                  
                     Laertes, the father of Vlyſſes.
                  
                     Laertius, the name of one, which wrate the lyues of Phyloſophers.
                  
                     Laetabilis, gladde, or reioycefull.
                  
                     Laetamen, compaſſe or mucke layde in the fieldes, to make corne and graſſe to growe plentuouſely.
                  
                     Laetifico, are, to make gladde.
                  
                     Laetiſco, ſcere, to be gladde.
                  
                     Laetitia, gladneſſe, reioycynge of the mind, whiche doth alſo appere outwardly.
                  
                     Laetitudo, inis, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Laeto, are, to make gladde.
                  
                     Laetor, aris, ari, to be gladde, or to reioyce with outwarde ſygnes.
                  
                     Laetus homo, a gladde man.
                  
                     Laeta ouis, a good ſhepe. Laeta ſeges, & letū legumen, plentyfull corne and grayne. All other thynges, not hauynge lyfe, beinge called Laeta, do ſygnifye dilectable to beholde, or that do pleaſe the eye of the beholder.
                  
                     Laeuigo, are, to plane, or make playne, or to polyſhe.
                  
                     Laeuis, laeue, ſmothe or playne.
                  
                     Laeuitas, tatis, playnneſſe or ſmotheneſſe.
                  
                     Laeuo, are, to make ſmothe.
                  
                     Laeuor, oris, ſmotheneſſe.
                  
                     Lagari uerſus, verſes, whiche do halt in the myddes of the foote.
                  
                     Lageos, a kynde of grapes.
                  
                     Lagana, be thynne cakes made with floure and water, wherto was putte fatte brothe, pepper, ſaffron, and cynnamom.
                  
                     Lagonon, the frettynge of the guttes.
                  
                     Lagoena, a pytchar potte.
                  
                     Lagia, one of the names of the ile of Delos.
                  
                     Lagois, a kynde of fyſhe, whiche maye be called the hare fyſhe.
                  
                     Lagoplithalmos, he that hathe eien lyke a hare, or in whom the ouerlyds of the eien do not meue downewarde.
                  
                     Lagotrophia, a warren or parke of hares.
                  
                     Laguncula, a lyttell pytchar.
                  
                     Lagygies, people in Sarmacia.
                  
                     Laicus, a lay man.
                  
                     Lais, the name of a famouſe harlotte, vnto whom for her beautie repaired the richeſt men of Grece.
                  
                     Laletania, a countrey in Spayne.
                  
                     Laliſiones, coltes of wylde aſſes.
                  
                     Lallare, to ſpeake lyke a baby: in the whiche worde the greke doth approche nerer to the engliſhe than to the latine, as babazin, whiche made a latine worde,
                        
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        
                      is babare, it maye be tranſferred to the mother or norice, that babeleth with hir childe whan ſhe giueth to it the dugge.
                  
                     Lamae, the raggydneſſe of rockes.
                  
                     Lambo, bere, to lycke with the tounge. alſo to touche, to flowe, or runne ſoftly.
                  
                     Lambrus, a ryuer in Italy, whiche meteth with the ryuer of Po, called Padus.
                  
                     Lambrani, people dwellyng about the ſayd ryuer of Lambrus.
                  
                     Lamentabilis, le, lamentable.
                  
                     Lamentarius, a, um, that cauſeth lamētation.
                  
                     Lamentor, aris, ari, to lament or bewayle.
                  
                     Lamentatio, onis, lamenting or wailyng.
                  
                     
                     Lamiae, be women, whyche beholdynge, chyldren, or gyuyng to theym gyftes, doo alter the fourme of them, whiche children be afterwarde called elfes, or taken with the fayrye. And ſome ſuche women wylle ſucke the bloudde from chyldern. They be alſo thoſe, whyche be called ladyes of the fayry, whiche do allure yong men to company carnally with them, & after that they be conſumed in the acte of lecherye, they coueyte to deuoure them.
                  
                     Lamia, is alſo a beaſte, whiche hath a womans face, and the fete of a horſe. It was alſo the ſurname of a noble Romayne, and alſo of a famous harlot.
                  
                     Lamina, a plate of mettall.
                  
                     Lamirus, one of the ſonnes of Hercules.
                  
                     Lampas, a leame of fyre, or brightenes of the ſonne, moſte vſed for a lampe.
                  
                     Lampetra, a fyſhe called a lamprey.
                  
                     Lampſacus, a citie on the border of Aſia, vpon the ryuer called Helleſpontus.
                  
                  
                     Lampſacenus, a, um, of that citie.
                  
                     Lampytis, a gloo worme, or a worme callid a globerde.
                  
                     Lana, woulle.
                  
                     Lanaris, re, that beareth or hath wolle.
                  
                     Laneus, a, um, woullen.
                  
                     Laneus, a fyſhe.
                  
                     Lanitium, the occupienge of woll.
                  
                     Lanitius, a, um, wollen or of wolle.
                  
                     Lanate paecus, beaſtes hauyng woll.
                  
                     Lanarius, a wulle man, or he that occupieth or ſelleth wolle.
                  
                     Lanatus, a, um, cladde or wrapped in wolle.
                  
                     Lanatus lupꝰ, a fiſhe ſo called for his whitenes and ſoftenes.
                  
                     Lancia, a ſpaniſh iauelin with a brode heed.
                  
                     Lancearius, he that beareth a Iauelyn.
                  
                     Lanceatus, armed with a iauelyn. alſo woū
                     ded with a iauelyn.
                  
                     Lanx, cis, a dyſhe, whiche of ſome is callid a potenger. alſo a balance.
                  
                     Lancino, are, to ſtrike, to rent with the teth.
                  
                     Lanerum, a garment made of vndied woll.
                  
                     Langa, a beaſt, whiche is found aboute the ryuer of Po.
                  
                     Langueo, & langueſco, ere, to languyſhe, to be ſycke, to be faynt, to be aferd, to be idell.
                  
                     Languidus, da, dum, faynt, ſick, aferde, idell.
                  
                     Langurium, langettes of aumbre, lyke to longe beadeſtones.
                  
                     Languor, oris, languour, faylyng of ſtrēgth and naturall all moyſture.
                  
                     Laniena, the fleſh ſhambles, or ſhop where fleſhe is ſolde. Sommetyme it ſygnyfyethe diſmembrynge.
                  
                     Lanificium, cardinge and ſpinning of woll.
                  
                     Lanificus, he that dothe worke woulle, to make it mete for the clothyar. It maye be called alſo a woll wynder.
                  
                     Lanio, are, to cutte lyke a boucher.
                  
                     Lanifex, ficis, idem qui lanificus.
                  
                  
                     Lanionius, a, ū, ꝑtaynyng to bouchers craft.
                  
                     Laniſta, he that had the reule ouer ſworde players, and cauſed them to be taught, and after ſolde them. Alſo that ordayned byrdes to fyghte.
                  
                     Lanium carnarium, a ſlaughter houſe.
                  
                     Lanius, & lanio, onis, a boucher.
                  
                     Lano, are, to put in woll, or to dreſſe wt woll.
                  
                     Lanugo, the ſoft heares or moſynes in the vyſages of chylderne and women. Alſo on fruites called peaches, and ſome herbes as longe wort, clary, and ſuche other.
                  
                     Laodicea, a citie in Aſia.
                  
                     Laodomia, the wyfe of Protheſildus.
                  
                     Laomedon, ontis, the father of Priamus.
                  
                     Lapa, & lapathes, an herbe called Clote
                     ▪ whiche beareth bourres, that cleauen to clothes and cattell.
                  
                     Lapathos, ſeu lapathiū, an herbe called ſorel.
                  
                     Lapicida, a maſon.
                  
                     Lapidarius, a, um, pertainyng to ſtones.
                  
                     Lapideſco, ere, to be made or tourned into a ſtoone.
                  
                     Lapidicina, a quarre of ſtones.
                  
                     Lapido, are, to ſtrike with ſtoones. alſo to ſtrike ſomtyme without ſtones.
                  
                     Lapillus, a lytle ſtone, alſo a precious ſtone.
                  
                     Lapio, iui, ire, to make harde as a ſtone.
                  
                     
                        Lapis, pi
                              ••
                           s,
                      a ſtone but laſſe than that, whiche is called Saxum.
                  
                  
                     Lapis, is ſommetyme taken for a myle. Ad tertium aut quartum lapidem, at the thirde or the fourthe myle. De lapide empti, were ſlaues or bondmen ſolde.
                  
                     Lapithe, people of Theſſalie, of whom Perithous was kynge.
                  
                     Lapſana, wylde colewortes.
                  
                     Lapſio, a falle.
                  
                     Lapſo, are, to falle often.
                  
                     Lapſus, us, a falle. Alſo a ſmall offence done by neglygence, an ouerſight.
                  
                     Lapythos, a citie in the yle of Cypres.
                  
                     Laqueare, laquear, & laquearium, the roufe of a chaumber, which is imbowed or fretted. alſo a playne beame in a rouffe.
                  
                     Laqueatus, a, um, haltered, ſnarled, tyed or bounde faſte. ſommetyme it ſygnyfieth holowe or bowynge.
                  
                     Laqueus, an halter.
                  
                     Lares, goddes, whiche the paynyms didde ſuppoſe euery perſon had belongyng vnto hym▪ which were alſo called Penates, both the whiche wordes be alſo taken for pryuate dwellynges or houſes. Mei lares, mei penares, my houſe or dwellynge place.
                  
                     
                     Laranda, a cytie of Lycaonia.
                  
                     Lararium, a priuate chappell or cloſette in a mannes houſe.
                  
                     Lardum, larde, or the fat of an hogge. ſometyme ſwynes fleſſhe ſalted.
                  
                     Larentia, a famous harlotte, which bycauſe ſhe made the people of Rome her heyre, they named her a goddeſſe, and callydde hyr Flora.
                  
                  
                     Largior, iris, iri, to gyue lyberally.
                  
                     Largitas, tatis, largenes, or lyberalitie.
                  
                     Largitio, lyberalle expenſes, to wynne a mannes pourpoſe.
                  
                     Largus, a, um, large, or free of expenſes.
                  
                     Large, abundauntly.
                  
                     Larine, a fountayne in Attica.
                  
                     Lariſſa, the name of one citie in Theſſalia, an other in Aſia, the thyrde in Italy.
                  
                     Larius, a brooke by the citie of Comum.
                  
                     Larix, icis, a tree of the kynde of firre, out of the whiche iſſueth a ſoote gumme.
                  
                     Larodij, people in Scithia.
                  
                     Larua, a ſpyrite, whiche apperethe in the nyght time. Some do call it a hegge, ſome a goblyn. Alſo a maſker, or he that weareth a viſour. it is ſometyme taken for the ſame viſour.
                  
                     Laruatus, he that is feared with a ſpirite, & is becomme madde. It ſommetime ſignyfieth a maſker.
                  
                     Laruale, an ymage defourmed, pale, leane, and horrible to beholde.
                  
                     Larum, a lyttell blacke waterfowle.
                  
                     Laſanum, a chaumber potte, or vrynall.
                  
                     Laſciuio, ire, to be wanton.
                  
                     Laſciuus, a, um, wanton.
                  
                     Laſciuia, wantonneſſe.
                  
                     Laſer, the iuyce of an herbe called Laſerpitium, commendable in ſondry medicines.
                  
                     Laſibus, olde writers vſed for Laribus.
                  
                  
                     Laſſeo, & laſſeſco, laſſus ſum, ſere, to be wery.
                  
                     Laſcea, an yle in the ſee called Egeū. It was alſo called Andros.
                  
                     Laſſo, are, to be weery.
                  
                     Laſſus, a, um, weery.
                  
                     Laſsitudo, weryneſſe.
                  
                     Laſtaurus, a greatte lechour.
                  
                     Latebra, & latebrae, brarum, a priuye place, where men do hyde them. Sommetyme it ſygnifieth an excuſe.
                  
                     Latebro, are, to hyde.
                  
                     Latebroſus locus, where as be many priuye places.
                  
                     Lateo, tui, tere, to be hydde.
                  
                     Later, a tyle.
                  
                     Laterani, yeman of the garde.
                  
                     Lateranus, the name of a cōſul of Rome, of whoſe hous was made a church of ſainte Iohn̄, whiche is nowe callid Lateranenſis.
                  
                  
                     Laterculus, a lyttell tyle.
                  
                     Laterem lauas, thou loſeſt thy labour.
                  
                     Lateritius, a, um, made of tyles.
                  
                     Laterna, a lanterne.
                  
                     Lato, lateſcere, to be brode.
                  
                     Latex, ticis, all maner of lycour: but it is moſte commonly taken for water.
                  
                     Latomia, a dungeon in the priſon at Rome.
                  
                     Latomus, a maſon.
                  
                     Latialis, le, & latiaris, re, of latin, of that part of Italy, whiche was called Latium.
                  
                  
                     Latibulo, are, to be hydde.
                  
                     Latibulum, a denne or bury, where beaſtis do hyde them. ſomtime it is vſed for a ſecrete place or caue, wherin men be hidde.
                  
                     Laticlauius, a Senatour.
                  
                     Latifolium, that whiche hath brode leaues.
                  
                     Latifundium, a greatte or large felde, great and large poſſeſſions.
                  
                     Latinae, narum, ſacrifyces to Iupiter named of the latins, who fyrſt dyd ordayne them.
                  
                     Latinè, in the fourme of latyne.
                  
                     Latinitas, tatis, latyne ſpeche.
                  
                     Latinus, na, um, latin, or of the people callyd latines.
                  
                     Latinus, the propre name of Aeneas father in lawe.
                  
                     Latico, are, to lurke.
                  
                     Latium, a parte of Italy.
                  
                     Latius, a, um, of that countrey.
                  
                     Latinius, a mountayne in Ionia, where poetes ſay the mone kyſſed Endymion.
                  
                     Latomiae, was a ſtrayte priſon in the citie of Syracuſis in Sicilia, an other in Spartha. It is alſo a quarry, out of the whiche ſtones are dygged.
                  
                     Latona, was mother of Apollo and Diana.
                  
                     Latonia, called alſo Diana, and is alſo taken for the moone.
                  
                     Latria, the honour and ſeruyce, wherewith god onely is worſhypped.
                  
                     Latres, a ſeruaunt.
                  
                     Latrina, a ſyege or iakes.
                  
                     Latro, are, to barke as a dogge dothe.
                  
                     Latrocinium, thefre, robberie.
                  
                     Latrocinor, trocinari, to robe, alſo to ſerue in warres.
                  
                     Latrones, robbers by the high waye. Alſo ſouldyours retayned. Amonge the Romaynes it were thoſe, whyche were alwaye aboute the kynges or Emperoures perſone, as the garde is aboute the king. Alſo Latrones, ſeu Latrunculi, be cheſſemenne, with whiche menne doo playe at the cheſſe.
                  
                     Latrunculator, a iuſtyce of gayle delyuery, or any Iuſtyce, whyche dothe gyue ſentence on theues.
                  
                     Latus, lata, latum, brode.
                  
                     
                     Late, abrode, in many places.
                  
                     Latitudo, dinis, bredthe.
                  
                     Latuniae, quarres where ſtones are digged.
                  
                     Latus, lateris, a ſyde.
                  
                     Latus clauus, a ſenatours robe or garment. it is put ſomtyme for the dignitie of a Senatour. ſemblably Laticlauium.
                  
                  
                     Lauacrum, a bathe or bayne.
                  
                     Lauatrina, a ſynke, wherinto fowle water is caſte or ſwepte, wherby pauementes are made cleane.
                  
                     Lauce, an yle in the ſee called Pontus.
                  
                     Laudabilis, le, laudable, commendable.
                  
                     Laudatio, a praiſe or commendation.
                  
                     Laudo, are, to prayſe. Laudo teſtem, I take to wytneſſe.
                  
                     Lauerna, a goddeſſe, vnder whoſe protection theues were in Rome.
                  
                     Lauinium, a citie in Italye, called alſo Lautentum.
                  
                  
                     Lauo, uaui, are, & lauo, ui, ere, to waſhe.
                  
                     Lautus, & lotus, ta, tum, waſhed.
                  
                     Laurea, a leafe of a laurell or bay tree, ſometyme a garlande made of Laurell.
                  
                     Lamens, tis, a manne of the towne callyd Laurentum.
                  
                     Lamentū, a citie in Italy callid alſo Lauiniū.
                  
                  
                     Lameo, are, to put on a garlande of laurell.
                  
                     Lameola, a crowne or garlande that vyctours ware in theyr triumphe.
                  
                     Lameus, a, um, of laurell.
                  
                     Lametum, a place, wherin doo growe laurelles or baye trees.
                  
                     Lautiſer, & lauriger, is, he that wearethe a garlande of laurell.
                  
                     Laurinum, oyle of laurell or bayes.
                  
                     Laurion, a place in Attica, where ſyluer was dygged.
                  
                     Lautus, a laurelle or baye tree.
                  
                     Laus, laudis, prayſe.
                  
                     Lautia, were preſentes, which the Romās did ſend to ambaſſadors of other realmes.
                  
                     Lautitia, magnifycence and neteneſſe in dyners and bankettes.
                  
                     Lautrices, the wyfes of two bretherne.
                  
                     Lautulae, weate baynes.
                  
                     Lautus, ta, tum, waſhed. alſo nete or cleane, or elegant, ryche.
                  
                     Laxitas, tatis, & laxamentum, releaſe, pardon, lowſenes, lybertie.
                  
                     Laxo, are, to lowſe or ſette at lybertie, to releaſe.
                  
                     Laxus, a, um, lowſe, large, wide, ſoft, weke.
                  
                     Laxum, an aduerbe, ſignifieth wyde.
                  
                     Caeſar.
                     Laxare manipulos, was in batayle, whan the ſondry bendes or companyes of fote men were ſet in a ray, one man a cōuenient diſtance from an nother, that they mought fyght the more at their lybertie.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     LEae, an Ilande by Cyrenaica, a regyon of Affrike.
                  
                     Leiena, a lyoneſſe.
                  
                     Leander, the name of a man.
                  
                     Lebes, lebetis, a caudron to boyle in.
                  
                     Lebadia, a cytie in Boeotia.
                  
                  
                     Lectica, a thynge lyke to bed, wherin riche men, and noble men were borne by ſix ſeruantes. It may be taken for a lyghter.
                  
                     Lecanomantia, a diuination or prophecy by the noyſe of baſons.
                  
                     Lecticarij, they whiche bare Lecticam.
                  
                  
                     Lectio, onis, reedynge.
                  
                     Lectipes, an herbe.
                  
                     Lectiſterniator, oris, a chaumberlayne, or he that maketh the beddes.
                  
                     Lectiſternium, a ſolemnitie among the paynims whan in the honour of their goddis Iupiter, Iuno, and Minerua, beddes were ſpradde in the temples, in the which fyrſt the idolles were layde, in the reſydue as many as mought lye and eate.
                  
                     Lectito, are, to rede often.
                  
                     Lectrum, a part of Aſia, lyenge into the ſee.
                  
                     Lecturio, ire, to deſyre to rede.
                  
                     Lectus, a bedde. Lectulus, a lyttell bedde.
                  
                     Lecythus, a potte of erthe, whiche ſerued onely for oyle.
                  
                     Legatarius, ia, to whome any thynge is bequethed.
                  
                     Legacitius, pertaynynge to legacies.
                  
                     Legator, oris, he that bequetheth any thing, the teſtatour.
                  
                     Legatum, a legacye or bequeſte.
                  
                     Legatus, an ambaſſadour, that hathe commiſſyon to treate of matriers. He that is ſente oonely to ſalute or congratulate, is callyd Orator.
                  
                  
                     Legerda, a citie in greate Armeny.
                  
                     Legirupio, onis, a breaker of lawes.
                  
                     Legio, onis, a company of men of warre, cō
                     taynyng cōmonly, ſyxe thouſand fote mē, ſeuen hundred thyrty and two horſemen.
                  
                     Legionarius, a, um, pertaynyng to a legion.
                  
                     Legirupa, a breaker of lawes.
                  
                     Legislator, a maker or gyuer of lawes.
                  
                     Legifer, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Legittimus, a, um, accordynge to the lawe.
                  
                     Legittimi dies, dayes in banke, whanne the partie ſhulde appere or pleade.
                  
                     Legittima iuditia, iugementes confirmed by lawes written, or auncient cuſtome.
                  
                     Legiuncula, a ſmall legion.
                  
                     Lego, are, to ſende as an ambaſſadour, or as a legate, or deputie, to commytte, or appoynte, to bequeathe.
                  
                     Lego, gi, gere, to gather, to rede, to paſſe by to ſtryke.
                  
                     Legula, a fyllet.
                  
                     Leguleius, a lawyer.
                  
                     
                     Legulus, a gatherer of ſmall thynges.
                  
                     Legumen, minis, all maner of pulſe, as beanes, peaſon, vetches, tares. &c.
                  
                     Legumentum, & legarium, the ſame.
                  
                     Leleges, ſeu lelegae, people, whiche were alway wandrynge, and dwelled ſommetyme in Theſſalia.
                  
                     Lema, a teare.
                  
                     Lemanus, a ryuer whiche runneth into the ryuer of Rone.
                  
                     Lembus, a ſwyfte lyttelle ſhyppe, whyche may be callyd a barke.
                  
                     Lemniſci, labelles hangynge downe frome garlandes.
                  
                     Lemnos, an yle in the ſee called Aegeum.
                  
                  
                     Lemnia terra, that whyche is nowe callyd Terra ſigillata.
                  
                  
                     Lemoſi, they that weepe lyghtly.
                  
                     Lemonici, a people in Guyan, Lemonoiſe.
                  
                     Lemures, ſpyrites, whyche doo walke by nyght with horrible fygures.
                  
                     Lenaeus, one of the names of Bacchus.
                  
                     Lenas, a bawde.
                  
                     Lendiginoſus, a, um, full of nyttes.
                  
                     Lenio, iui, ire, to pacifie, to appeaſe, to treate gentilly, to make plain, or ſmoth, to cōforte.
                  
                     Lenis, lene, that whiche hath no roughnes, meke, tractable, ſofte of condicions.
                  
                     Lenitas, & lenitudo, mekeneſſe, gentilneſſe, eaſyneſſe to pleaſe, ſoftenes, ſmothenes.
                  
                     Leniter, ſoftely, ſwetely, moderately.
                  
                     Leno, a baude, a marchant of hoores.
                  
                     Lenobates, a treader of grapes.
                  
                     Lenocinium, the practyſe of bawdry. ſometyme immoderate and exquiſyte clenlynes or elegancye, to ſtyrre a manne to vyce.
                  
                     Lenocinor, ari, to practiſe baudrye. Alſo to ſpeake fayre, or allure oone with wordes, and other pleaſaunt thynges.
                  
                     Lenonius, a, um, pertaynyng to bawdes.
                  
                     Lens, lendis, a nytte.
                  
                     Lens, tis, a kynde of poulſe called fatches.
                  
                     Lenteſco, ſcere, to be ſmothe, or tender.
                  
                     Lenticula, a poulſe called chittes.
                  
                     Lenticula, a maner of veſſel, out of the whiche kynges and princes were annoynted, a Chriſmatorie.
                  
                     Lenticularis, re, lyke a chytte or fatche.
                  
                     Lentigo, ginis, a thynge lyke a lyttell warte in the face redde or blacke.
                  
                     Lentiſcus, a lyttell tree, out of the whyche cometh Maſtix, a ſwete gumme.
                  
                     Lente, eaſily, ſoftely.
                  
                     Lento, lentare, to doo a thynge ſoftely or eaſyly, ſlowely.
                  
                     Lentus, ta, tum, ſofte, gentylle, eaſye, ſlowe, remyſſe, ydell, cleauynge, or clammy.
                  
                     Lenulus, a lyttell or yonge bawde.
                  
                     Lenunculus, 
                     idem. Alſo a lytel fiſhers bote.
                  
                     Leo, onis, a Lyon.
                  
                     Leo riſit, a prouerbe touching thē, which be ſowre of countenance, fierce, & vncurteyſe.
                  
                     Lonem radere, ſpoken where one attēpteth a thynge dangerous, and almoſt impoſſible.
                  
                     Leocrates, the name of an excellent grauer.
                  
                     Leodamas, the ꝓpre name of a philoſopher.
                  
                     Leon, a philoſopher.
                  
                     Leonides, was kynge of the Lacedemonians, whiche dyd feates of warre agaynſte Xerxes kynge of Perſia incredible, and finally was ſlayne in defendyng Grece, with foure thouſande and eight hundrid grekes onely, againſt .xvii. hundred thouſande of the hooſte of Xerxes. There was alſo an other Leonides, which was tutour to king Alexander, whan he was a chylde.
                  
                     Leonina, an herbe, whiche groweth on hilles, whoſe floures are like to a lions mouth whan he gapeth.
                  
                     Leontopetalon, an herbe, hauynge leaues lyke to colewortes, the ſtalke halfe a foote high, the ſede in huſkes as great as ſmalle peaſon, the rote lyke a rape rote, great and blacke, whiche helpeth ageynſte the ſtyngyng and bytynge of all maner of ſerpētis.
                  
                     Leontophon, a lyttell worme, whiche if the lyon do byte, he dyeth incontinent.
                  
                     Leontophona, a lyttell beaſte, whoſe heed is tourned into aſſhes, wherwith men doo myxte fleſhe, and caſt it in the ways, wherby lyons do paſſe, wherof if they doo eate, they dye incontinent.
                  
                     Leontopodion, an herbe callid Pee de lyon whiche hath floures lyke roſes vnſpradde.
                  
                     Leopardus, a Lybarde.
                  
                     Lepaduſa, the yle of Sicile.
                  
                     Lepidiū, an herbe lyke to a wyld parſnippe.
                  
                     Lepidus, a, um, nete, polyte, and pleaſaunte, as well in ſpeeche, as in geſture.
                  
                     Lepor, oris, & lepos, òris, pureneſſe or neteneſſe in ſpeeche. Alſo the good grace and dilectableneſſe in ſpeche and geſture.
                  
                     Leporarium, an incloſure,Varro .3. de re ruſt. or place incloſed, wherin are kepte any beaſtes for pleaſure or huntynge.
                  
                     Leporinus, rina, rinum, of an haare.
                  
                     Lepra, leprye.
                  
                     Leprium, a cytie in Achaia.
                  
                     Lepus, poris, an hare.
                  
                     Laeptoludiae, blacke fygges.
                  
                     Lepuſculus, a l
                        •
                     uret or yonge hare.
                  
                     Lerna, a place, wherein the citie of Argon layde all their ordure and fylthe.
                  
                     Lernaeus, a, um, of Lerna. Lerna malorum. the dunge heape of miſchiefes.
                  
                     Leros, an Ilande in the ſee Icarie.
                  
                     Leſbos, an ile in the ſee called Agaeum.
                  
                  
                     Leſbius, a, um, of, the yle of Leſbos.
                  
                     
                     Leſſus, us, a lamentable voyce, vſed in the burieng of men, us we do ſaye, Alas.
                  
                     Leſtorum, a region of Indie.
                  
                     Leſtry gones, a people in the extreme parte of Italye, whiche dyd eate the companyons of Vlyſſes, roſtynge them on broches.
                  
                     Letalis, le, mortalle.
                  
                     Letania, uel litania, a ſupplycation or commune prayer.
                  
                     Lethargus, a ſyckenes, whiche cauſeth one to ſlepe continually, and to forget al thing.
                  
                     Lethargicus, he that hath the ſlepynge or forgettynge ſyckeneſſe.
                  
                     Lethe, a ryuer of hel, the water wherof as ſoone as it is drunke, cauſeth a man to forgette all thynge that is paſſed.
                  
                     Letiſicus, ca, cum, cauſynge deathe.
                  
                     Leto, tare, to ſlee. Letatus, ſlayne.
                  
                     Letum, deathe.
                  
                     Leua manus, the lefte hande.
                  
                     Leuca, a promontorie or elbowe of lande, nygh to Corinthus.
                  
                     Leucantha, white bryer.
                  
                     Leucanthemis, an herbe, which phiſytions of late dayes calle Camomylle.
                  
                     Leucates, a mountaine in Epiro. alſo an yle.
                  
                     Leuce, a littell towne not far from Smirna.
                  
                     Leucola, an yle by Cypers.
                  
                     Leuconium, whyte cotton.
                  
                     Leucophaeus, a browne or a ruſſette coloure.
                  
                     Leucophaeatus, he that dothe weare a ruſſet garment.
                  
                     Leucopum, & leucopus, white of naturalle coloure.
                  
                     Leucophlegmantia, a white dropſye.
                  
                     Leucoſyria, a countrey, whiche is now called Cappadocia.
                  
                  
                     Leucoſia, an yle agaynſte Peſtanum, in the the ſee Thyrrhenum.
                  
                     Leucothaea, the goddeſſe, whiche was called Matuta, & Aurora.
                  
                  
                     Leuctrum & leuctra, a towne in Boeotia.
                  
                     Leuis, leue, lyght. Leuitas, tatis, lyghtnes.
                  
                     Leui, one of the ſonnes of Iacob, the patriarch.
                  
                     Leuiathan, a dragon of the ſee: it is taken in holy ſcripture for the dyuell.
                  
                     Leuiculus, a, um, ſomwhat light. alſo wāton.
                  
                     Leuidenſis, ſe, thynne wrought, and of ſmall ſubſtance.
                  
                     Leuifidus, da, um, of light credence or truſt.
                  
                     Leuir, ri, the huſbandes brother.
                  
                     Leuo, are, to lyfte vp. ſomtime to take away, to abate.
                  
                     Leuus, a, um, lyght. Alſo whan it is ſpoken of worldly thynges, it ſygnifieth lefte, vnhappy, contrary: whan it is referred to celeſtiall thynges, it betokeneth ryghte, fortunate, proſperous. For that whiche to vs is the lefte hande, to them, whiche are aboue vs, and do looke towarde vs, is the ryghte hande.
                  
                     Lex, legis, lawe.
                  
                     Lex municipalis, the peculyar lawe, whyche euery citie hath.
                  
                     Lex orchia, a lawe, whyche aſſigned howe many perſones ſhulde be boden to ſouper, and that men ſhulde ſoupe at their doores, to the intent that it moughte appere, howe the lawe was obeyed.
                  
                     Lex plagiaria, wherby men were whipped.
                  
                     Lexipyreti, medycines, whyche doo heale menne of feuers.
                  
                     Lexouii, people in hyghe Fraunce aboute Burbon.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶L ANTE I.
                  
                     LIae, be holes in the toppe of a maſte, whiche doo receyue the cabulles, or roopes.
                  
                     Liba, an yle in the Indian ſee.
                  
                     Libamen, minis, libamētum, & libatio, a taſte or ſay taken, proprely in ſacrifice.
                  
                     Libanius, the name of a great Rhetorician.
                  
                     Libanotis, tidis, an herbe callyd Roſemary.
                  
                  
                     Libanotus, a wynde, whyche dothe blowe out of the northweſte.
                  
                     Libanus, a mountayne betwene Araby and Phenicia. It is alſo a tree, whyche bryngeth forthe incenſe.
                  
                     Libellio, a writer of bokes.
                  
                     Libellorum praefecti, mayſters of the requeſtes, whiche do receyue billes of ſupplication, being put in, to the kyng or prince.Hieron.
                  
                  
                     Libellulus, a very lyttell boke.
                  
                     Libellus, a lyttell boke: alſo ſometyme an epiſtell, a ſupplication, a lybell or declaration in the lawe, of dette, treſpaſſe, couenant, and other lyke.
                  
                     Libens, wyllynge.
                  
                     Libentiae, dylectations, pleaſures.
                  
                     Libenter, wyllyngely, gladly.
                  
                     Libentina, one of the names of Venus.
                  
                     Liber, beri, the fynder of wyne, called alſo Bacchus & Dionyſius.
                  
                     Liber, ra, rum, free, at lybertie, not bounden, large, or greatte.
                  
                     Liber, libri, a boke or warke writen, the inner rynde of a tree.
                  
                     Liberalis, le, lyberall. Liberales artes, the lyberall ſciences, or ſciences belongynge to a free manne.
                  
                     Liberale iuditium, & liberalis cauſa, where a man contendeth for his lybertie.
                  
                     Liberalia, orum, the feſtiual days of Bacchꝰ.
                  
                     Liberaliter, lyberallye.
                  
                     
                     Liberalitas, tatis, lyberalytie.
                  
                     Liberi, chyldren, as well women as men.
                  
                     Liberides, comes.
                  
                     P
                           ••
                        o
                           •
                        ua,
                     Libero, are, to delyuer, to ſette at lybertie.
                  
                     Liberare creditorem, to content, or ſatisfie hym, of whom money is borowed.
                  
                     Libertas, tatis, lybertie taken alwaye in the good parte.
                  
                     Libertinus, & libertus, he that of a bondeman is manumiſed or infranchiſed.
                  
                     Libet, it lyketh or contenteth.
                  
                     Libethra, a caue, wherin was a well, callyd
                  
                     Libethros, where the Muſes beinge conuerſant, were therfore called Libethrides.
                  
                  
                     Libethrides, the Muſes, or ladies of ſciēces.
                  
                     Libethras, a moūtain in Macedonia, where the Muſes dyd dwelle.
                  
                     Libidinarius, a haunter of lecherie.
                  
                     Libidinoſus, lecherous, wylfull.
                  
                     Libido, dinis, ſenſualitie, vnlefull appetite or luſte. Sometyme it ſygnifieth onely appetite or wylle.
                  
                     Libitina, a goddeſſe, in whoſe temple were ſolde all thynges pertaynyng to ſepulture or funeralles. ſometyme for burienge. Alſo for dethe, or the beere, wheron deade bodyes are caryed.
                  
                     Libitinarius, he that hath the ſuruayeng and charge aboute burienges.
                  
                     Libo, are, to taſt any thing: ſomtime to touche, ſomtyme to ſacrifice, ſomtyme to take.
                  
                     Libra, a pound weight: ſomtyme a payre of balaunces. it is alſo one of the .xii. ſygnes.
                  
                     
                        Libra A
                              •
                           tica,
                      conteined a hūdred dragmas, and was called Mna, or Mina.
                  
                  
                     Libra Romana, contayned .xii. ounces, that is to ſay foure ſcore & ſyxtene dragmas,
                  
                     Libralis, le, a pounde wright.
                  
                     Libramentum, poyſe or weyght.
                  
                     Libraria, a lybrary.
                  
                     Librarius, a, um, pertaynynge to bokes, or of a pounde weyght.
                  
                     Librarius, a ſcriuener, a boke bynder.
                  
                     Librile, the hanging equally of the balance.
                  
                     Librilla, a cogell or ſtone, to throwe at one.
                  
                     Libripens, dis, a weyer. It was alſo amonge the Romaynes he, whiche bought a bondman or ſlaue, takynge a pounde weighte of braſſe in his hande, and ſayeng: This man, whiche with this money and braſon pound is boughte to my vſe, by the lawes of the Romayns. I ſay, is myn owne.
                  
                     Libro, are, to way, to poyſe, to make weightye, to houer.
                  
                     Libs, a wynde, the whiche bloweth out of the ſouthe.
                  
                     Libum, a chiefe caake.
                  
                     Liburni, people of the countrey called Liburnia, alſo commune meſſangers.
                  
                     Liburnia, a part of Galmatia, or Slauony.
                  
                     Liburnum, liburna, liburnas, & liburnica, a lyght ſhyppe, as a barke or galias.
                  
                     Libya, & libye, a royalme in Affrike.
                  
                     Libycis, cidis, a citie in Iudea, on the eaſte parte of the ryuer of Iordane.
                  
                     Libycontes, ſtones, which ar not very clere,
                  
                     Libycus, ca, cum, of Libra.
                  
                     Libya, & Libyſſa, a man & woman of Libya.
                  
                     Libyophoenices, people in Affrica.
                  
                     Liceo, cere, to cheapen.
                  
                     Liceor, ceris, ceri, to ſette the price.
                  
                     Licenter, raſhely.
                  
                     Licentia, licence, vnlefull libertie.
                  
                     Licentioſus, raſhe, vſynge vnlefull libertie.
                  
                     Licet, it is lefull. ſommetyme it is vſed for maye. Mihi licet, I maye. Tibi licet, thou mayſte. ſometyme be it ſo, admytte it.
                  
                     Lichas, a meaſure, whiche excedethe not foure fyngers.
                  
                     Lichenes, ryngewormes or tetters.
                  
                     Lichenis, a foule breakyng out, whyche begynneth aboute the chynne. Some do take it for the frenche pockes.
                  
                     Licia, be thredes, whiche ſylke women do weaue in lyncelles or ſtooles.
                  
                     Liciatoriū, a weauers ſhyttel, or a ſylke womans tauell, wheron ſylke or threde beinge wounden, is ſhot through the web or lome.
                  
                     Licinia, a kynde of olyue trees.
                  
                     Licitator, toris, a chepener, a chapman, ſometyme it ſignifieth a broker.
                  
                     Licitè, lefully.
                  
                     Licitor, aris, ari, to bye and ſelle for gaynes, or to bargayn by exchaunge or cheuiſance, to fyght, to deceyue a manne by a craftye bargayne.
                  
                     Lictor, a ſergeant, or other lyke miniſter to execute corporall punyſhement. A Conſul of Rome had .xii. other heed officers: ſyx which bare euery one in their handis, roddes and axes bounden togither, to do with them execution, as they were cōmaunded.
                  
                     Lictorius, a, um, pertaynyng to ſergeantes and other lyke officers.
                  
                     Lictus, ta, tum, lycked.
                  
                     Lidoron, a tyle in lengthe one foote and an halfe, in bredth one foote.
                  
                     Lien, nis, the ſplene.
                  
                     Ligamen, minis, ligamentum, a bonde.
                  
                     Ligellum, a cotage.
                  
                     Liger, eris, a ryuer in France called Loire.
                  
                     Lignor, aris, ari, to go to carie wodde.
                  
                     Lignarius faber, a carpentar.
                  
                     Lignator, a carier of wodde.
                  
                     Lignile, fuell, or a wodde ſtacke.
                  
                     Lignoſus, a, um, as harde as wodde.
                  
                     Lignum, wodde.
                  
                     Ligo, are, to bynde.
                  
                     
                     Ligo, onis, a ſpade.
                  
                     Ligula, a lyttell tongue.
                  
                     Liguria, the countrey in Italye, where the citie of Geane is ſette.
                  
                     Ligurio, ire, to eate lycorouſely, or to deuoure ſweete or dayntye meates. Alſo to eate daintily or curiouſely.
                  
                     Liguritor, toris, a daintie feder, an eater of delicate meates.
                  
                     Ligus, guris, of the countrey of Liguria, a Ianuens of Ianeway.
                  
                     Liguſticum mare, the ſee that is by Ieane.
                  
                     Liguſticus, ca, cum, of Liguria.
                  
                     Liguſtrum, a tree, which dothe beare white floures, and ſoote: wherof is made an oyle called oleum cyprinum: and this tree doth growe in watrye places, as wyllowes and ſalowes do. It is alſo an herbe, which ſome men do cal Maior, and groweth by hedges.
                  
                     Ligyes, are people of Aſye, whyche with Xerxes warred agaynſte the Grekes.
                  
                     Lilibaeum, an hyll in Sicile on the ſee banke. Alſo a towne.
                  
                     Lilietū, a place where do grow many lilyes.
                  
                     Lilinum, oyle of lylyes.
                  
                     Lilium, a lylye.
                  
                     Lima, a fyle.
                  
                     Limatulus, a lyttell fyled.
                  
                     Limatura, pouder, whiche cometh of filing.
                  
                     Limax, cis, a ſnayle. Alſo a man, which prieth or ſeketh for ſome thynge to conſume.
                  
                     Limboratius, a maker of gardes or purfils.
                  
                     Limbus, a purfyll of a womans garment, or a garde of a mans garment.
                  
                     Limen, minis, ſignifyeth not only the thraſſholde of a doore, but alſo the haunſe, ſomtyme it ſignifieth the entre of the dore. ſomtyme frendeſhyppe, after the expolytion of Seruius.
                  
                     Limenarcha, the wardeyn of the portes.
                  
                     Limes, mitis, ſygnifieth a bounde or butting in fieldes.
                  
                     Limetanei agri, feldes lyeng in the extreme marches of a countrey.
                  
                     Limetanei milites, ſouldiours appoynted to kepe the borders of a countrey.
                  
                     Limito, are, to bounde or lymitte how ferre a thynge doethe extende.
                  
                     Limitatus, ta, tum, bounded, lymytted.
                  
                     Limo, are, to fyle, to polyſhe.
                  
                     Limus, a veſture from the bely downward. Alſo mudde or ſlime, which is in the water.
                  
                     Limus, a, um, croked, a wrie, a ſkewe.
                  
                     Limis oculis ſpectare, to looke wantonly on the one ſyde, to caſte a wanton eie, to loke a ſkewe.
                  
                     Linamentum, lynnen.
                  
                     Linarius, a warker of lynnen.
                  
                     Linea, a carpenters lyne or corde. it ſygnifieth alſo euery line generally, either made or ymagined to be.
                  
                     Lineamentum, the facyon of a body.
                  
                     Linearis, are, pertaynynge to a lyne.
                  
                     Lingo, xi, gere, to lycke with the tunge. alſo to ſucke downe by lyttell and lyttell.
                  
                     Linctus, tus, lyckynge or ſuckynge downe.
                  
                     Lingones, people in France, called Lāgres.
                  
                     Lingua, a tongue. alſo a language. Alſo an inſtrument, wherwith men do take medycines or ſalues out of a boxe.
                  
                     Lingula, a lyttell tunge. Alſo a lachet or lingell. Alſo Lingua & lingula, do ſommetyme ſignifie a ſpoone.
                  
                     Lingua bula, an herbe called Langdebefe.
                  
                     Linguax, acis, a great ſpeker, ful of wordes.
                  
                     Lingulaca, a woman full of wordes. Alſo a fyſhe called a ſoole.
                  
                     Linio, iui, ire, to annoynte.
                  
                     Lino, ni, ere, to annoynte or laye on ſomme thynge, that is thycke. alſo to lyne.
                  
                     Linoſtrophron, an herbe, whyche is alſo callyd Marubium.
                  
                  
                     Linozoſtis, an herbe callyd Mercurie.
                  
                     Linquo, liqui, linquere, to leaue.
                  
                     Lintearius, a mercer of lynnen.
                  
                     Linteolum, a piece of lynnen clothe.
                  
                     Linteo, onis, a lynnen weauer.
                  
                     Linternus, a ryuer and towne in Campania.
                  
                     Linteum, a ſhete. It is taken for all lynnen clothes. ſometyme for ſayles.
                  
                     Lintres, lytell botes made of holowe trees.
                  
                     Linum, lynnen.
                  
                     Linus, he that brought fyrſt letters out of Phenicia into Grece, and was mayſter to Hercules.
                  
                     Lynx, a beaſte, whiche hathe the face of a lyon, the body ſpotted lyke a panther, and is of the greatneſſe of a doo, whoſe vryne is ſodaynly tourned into a precyous ſtone.
                  
                     Lipara, an yle by Greece. It is alſo a ſofte playſter.
                  
                     Liparis, a ryuer in Cilicia.
                  
                     Lipopſichia, a ſoundyng, where one ſemeth to be deade.
                  
                     Lipopthymia, a traunſe.
                  
                     Lippio, iui, ire, to be porreblynde, or ſande blynde, or dymme of ſyght.
                  
                     Lippus, bleare eyed.
                  
                     Lippitudo, the bleareneſſe of eyen.
                  
                     Lipſana, ſcrappes, or leauynges of vitayle, or other thynges.
                  
                     Liquamen & liquatū, greace, or talow molten, ſewet.
                  
                     Liquefacio, cere, to melte.
                  
                     Liquentia, a ryuer in Lombardy.
                  
                     Liqueo, iui, ire, to be liquide or ſoft, as oyle.
                  
                     Liqueſco, ſcere, to relente.
                  
                     Liquer, it appereth, it is ſure.
                  
                     
                     Liquido, are, to diſcouer, or make to appere.
                  
                     Liquidus, da, um, lyquide runnynge & ſofte. ſometyme pure, alſo proſperous.
                  
                     Liquidò, playnely, apparantly, purely.
                  
                     Liquo, are, to melte.
                  
                     Liquo, ere, to runne out, as lycour dothe.
                  
                     Lira, a rydge of lande, whiche is ouer the ſurrowe. ſometyme it ſygnifyeth an harpe.
                  
                     Lirae be trifles or iapes.
                  
                     Liratim, in ridges.
                  
                     Liris, a ryuer in Campania.
                  
                     Liro, are, to make rydges.
                  
                     Litem aeſtimare, to aſſeſſe damages and coſtes for the playntyfe in an action.
                  
                     Lis, litis, debate, variance, controuerſie.
                  
                     Litem ſuam facere, where oae medleth in an other mans matter, as it were his owne.
                  
                     Litera, a letter. Literae, a letter or letters that be ſent. ſometyme it ſignifieth ſciences.
                  
                     Litera ſalutaris, was in the olde tyme, A, as betokenynge abſoluynge, Litera triſtis, B, as ſygnifyenge condemnynge.
                  
                     Literae fugientes, blynde letters, whyche eyther in defaulte of the ynke, or of the parchemente, or for auncientie, maye not be radde.
                  
                     Literarius, a, um, pertaynynge to letters or ſciences.
                  
                     Litterator, oris, a grammarian, or a mayſter of grammer.
                  
                     Litteratura, grammer.
                  
                     Literoſus, lettred. Litteratus, idem.
                  
                  
                     Liticen, a blower of a ſmalle trumpette.
                  
                     Lythargyrium, lytarge, or white leed.
                  
                     Lithargyrus, a ſtone of ſyluer.
                  
                     Lithiaſis, the griefe of the ſtone.
                  
                     Lithocolla, a cement, wherwith ſtones are ioyned togyther.
                  
                     Lithoglyphus, a granour in ſtones.
                  
                     Lithologema, a heape of ſtones.
                  
                     Theophraſtus.
                     Lithoſpermon, an herbe, which hath ſedes lyke ſtoones, and groweth amonge corne: whyche herbe curethe the ſtoone of the bladder.
                  
                     Lithoſtratus, a place paued with ſquare ſtoones.
                  
                     Lithotomia, a maſons warkhouſe, or quarre
                  
                     Litigator, oris, a ſtryuer.
                  
                     Litigioſus, a, um, full of ſtryfe.
                  
                     Litigium, a debate, or variance.
                  
                     Litigo, are, to varie, to ſtryue, to ſewe one an nother.
                  
                     Lito, tare, to pleaſe god with ſacrifyce, and to optayne my deſyre.
                  
                     Littus, toris, the bankes, as well of the ſee, as of a great ryuer. ſomtyme lande butting on the ſee callyd the ſee ſyde.
                  
                     Littoreus, rea, um, & littoralis, littorale, of the ſee ſyde.
                  
                     Litura, a blottynge or ſtryke through that, whiche is writen, cancellynge.
                  
                     Lituro, are, to blotte or ſtryke throughe, or cancelle.
                  
                     Litus, ta, tum, enoynted.
                  
                     Lituus, a croked ſtaffe, which the diuinours called Augures, helde in their handes, whā they appoynted places in their diuination. Alſo a ſcepter, and a trumpette.
                  
                     Liueo, ere, to be blacke, to enuye.
                  
                     Liueſco, ſcere, to enuy.
                  
                     Liuidus, a, um, he that hath his ſkyn blacke with beatynge, alſo enuious.
                  
                     Liuius, the prince of latyn hiſtoriens.
                  
                     Liuor, the coloure, whiche is lefte on the ſkynne, after beatynge or whippynge.Lucanus. ſomtyme it is taken for enuye. Liuor edax tibi cuncta negat, The gnawyng enuie denayeth the all thynges.Claudius lib. 3. 
                     Rabiem liuoris acerbi Nulla poteſt placare quies, No quiete canne content the ragynge of bytter enuy.
                  
                     Lix, aſſhes.
                  
                     Lixa, a ſkullyon, whiche carieth wodde or water in an hoſte, or to the kychen.
                  
                     Lixabundus, he that for a ſmalle rewarde dothe moſte vyle ſeruyce.
                  
                     Lixinium, lye made of aſhes to waſſhe clothes cleane.
                  
                     Lixo, are, to whette.
                  
                     Lixos, a towne in Affrica.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶L ANTE O.
                  
                     LObus, the lappe of the eare.
                  
                     Loba, a braunche of the grayn callyd Millium.
                  
                  
                     Locarium, the hyre of a houſe or lodgyng.
                  
                     Locatarius, he that letteth houſe or lande, a leſſour.
                  
                     Locellus, a lyttell place.
                  
                     Locito, are, to lette.
                  
                     Loco, care, to ſet or lay, as a howſe is ſet in a place, a foundation is layde. Alſo to laye vp, as a thing is to be kepte. Sometyme to gyue in mariage. Alſo to lette a thynge to hyretor to rent, to make a leaſe.
                  
                     Locator, toris, the leſſour.
                  
                     Locrus, a citie in the vttermoſte parte of Italy, whiche was named Magna graecia.
                  
                  
                     Locrenſes & locri, people of Locrus. there were alſo people ſo named in Grece.
                  
                     Loculamenta, places made with bourdes, wherin tame culuers, and other byrdes or conyes are kepte to brede.
                  
                     Loculatus, ta, latum, dyuyded into ſondrye places.
                  
                     Loculus, a lyttell place. Alſo a purſe, an almorie, a lyttell coffer, a biere, wheron deed bodies are borne to be buried.
                  
                     Locuples, pletis, ryche, abundāt, ſufficient.
                  
                     
                     Locuples fideiuſſor, a ſufficient ſuretie.
                  
                     Locupleto, tare, to make ryche of yerelye reuenewes.
                  
                     Locus, a place. ſomtime a family or kinred. alſo ſlede, as Loco patris te habeo, I take the in ſtede of my father.
                  
                     Loci, plurali numer. the ſecrete partes of a womanne.
                  
                     Locuſta, a flye with longe hynder legges, whiche bourneth corne with touchynge of it, and deuoureth the reſydue. In India be of them thre foote in lengthe, whiche the people of that countrey do eate. It is alſo a ſee fiſhe, like to a creuys, called a lopſter.
                  
                  
                     Locutor, cutoris, & loculeius, a prater or a iangler.
                  
                     Lodex, uel lodix, icis, a ſheete.
                  
                     Loedoria, a taunt or reproche in ſcoffyng.
                  
                     Arifto. Metheor
                           ••
                        .
                     Loelaps, a blaſte of wynde tourned frome the erthe vpwarde.
                  
                     Logica, logike, one of the lyberal ſciences, the c
                        •
                     a
                        •
                     t
                        •
                      of reaſonyng or arguinge.
                  
                     Logion, a place where iuges gyue ſentēce: alſo a gathering of rent, or other reuenues
                  
                     Logodaedalus, he that ſpeaketh craftily to deceiue: or in eloquente wordes induceth ſentences vayne, or of lyttell purpoſe.
                  
                     Logomachia, a contencion with wordes, or an vnd
                        ••
                     rete altercation.
                  
                     Logos, vſed for a latyn worde, is taken for triflynge wordes, or vayne language.
                  
                     Loligo, ginis, a fyſhe, which hath his heed betwene his fete and his bealy: and hathe alſo two bones, one lyke a knyfe, the other lyke a penne.
                  
                     Lolium, a wiede growynge in corne, callyd Cockyll.
                  
                     Longobardia, a regyon of Italye, callyd Lumbardye.
                  
                     Lombricus, a lampraye.
                  
                     Lomentum, beane meale.
                  
                     Longa Alba, a citie in Italye.
                  
                     Longaeuus, longe lyued.
                  
                     Longanimis, he that ſuffreth longe.
                  
                     Longanon, a gutte, out of the whyche ordure iſſueth.
                  
                     Longe, an aduerbe, ſignifieth longe, farre, excedynge.
                  
                     Longinquus, a, um, far of, farre, ſtraunge.
                  
                     Longiſco, ſcere, to be longe.
                  
                     Longitudo, dinis, lengthe.
                  
                     Longobardi, Lumbardes.
                  
                     Longurius, a longe pole.
                  
                     Longus, a, um, longe.
                  
                     Longum, a longe tyme.
                  
                     Lopades, a ſhelle fyſhe.
                  
                     Loquacitas, tatis, babblynge.
                  
                     Loquacito, are, to babble or ſpeake moche.
                  
                     Loquax, cis, a babler or greatte ſpeaker.
                  
                     Loquela, ſpeeche.
                  
                     Loquor, eris, qui, to ſpeake.
                  
                     Loquitor, tari, to ſpeake moche.
                  
                     Lora, ſiue lorea, a drynke made of grapes, after that they be preſſed, callyd Seconde.
                  
                     Loram, ſeruantes whiche ſerued to bynde men, or to beate them, whan they were by their maiſters commaunded.
                  
                     Lorica, an haberion, a place made vppon walles lyke an open galery, with grates of tymber or hurdels, to kepe men frome fallyng. It is alſo the walle plate, before that morter is layde on it.
                  
                     Loricatus, armed with an haberion.
                  
                     Loricatio, wallynge with morter.
                  
                     Lorico, care, to put on an haberion.
                  
                     Loricion, a mantell.
                  
                     Loricula, in warfare is a munymēt or fortification, that the beſigers of cites do make.
                  
                     Loripes, edis, whoſe fete ar, as if they were bounden or gyrte.
                  
                     Lorum, a thonge of lether, or a colar, or other lyke thynge, wherewith beaſtes are bounden or tyed. ſometyme a whip, wherwith a man or beaſte is whypped.
                  
                     Lotaringia, a countrey betwene Pycardye and Normandy.
                  
                     Lotophagi, people in Affrike, whyche doo lyue by eating only of a frute, callid Lotos.
                  
                     Lorium, vryne or pyſſe.
                  
                     Lotos, & lotis, lotidis, is a notable tree in Affrike, or herbe, of whoſe fruite if a ſtranger do eate, he dothe incontinently forget his owne countrey.
                  
                     Loxias, one of the names of Apollo.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  ¶L ANTE V.
                  
                     LVbentia, & libentia, myrthe, pleaſantnes, moſte proprely in wordes.
                  
                     Lubido pro libido, ſenſuall appetite.
                  
                     Lubrico, care, to make ſlypper.
                  
                     Lubricus, ca, cum, ſlypper, waueryng. ſometyme redy to ſlyppe or ſlyde.
                  
                     Luca, a citie in Italye, of whiche the inhabytantes are called Lucenſes.
                  
                  
                     Lucae boues, were taken of the olde latines for Elephantes.
                  
                     Lucania, a countray belongyng to the royalme of Naples.
                  
                     Lucani, people of the countrey of Lucania.
                  
                  
                     Lucanica, a pouddynge made of porke, 
                        •
                      ſawſage.
                  
                     Lucanus, a famous poete, which wrate the battayle betwene Ceſar and Pompeye.
                  
                     Lucar, money beſtowid in woddes, dedicat
                        •
                      to goddis, called Luci.
                  
                  
                     Lucaria feſta, feaſtes, whiche the Romains made in holy woddes.
                  
                     Lucellum, a lyttell gayne, a ſmall markette.
                  
                     
                     Lux, lucis, light, ſometyme it ſignifieth day.
                  
                     Luci, by daye.
                  
                     Lucens, that whiche hath his lyghte of an nother thynge.
                  
                     Luceo, luxi, lucere, to ſhyne.
                  
                     Luceres, the thirde parte of the people of Rome, diſtributed by Catius & Romulus.
                  
                     Luceria, a citie of Apulia.
                  
                     Lucerius, a kynge of Ardea, whiche holpe Romulus agaynſt Tatius.
                  
                     Lucerna, a lanterne.
                  
                     Lucernarius, the lanterne bearer.
                  
                     Lucernula, a ſconſe.
                  
                     Luceſco, ſcere, to be bryght or clere, as day.
                  
                     Lucetius, a name of Iupiter.
                  
                     Lucetia, one of the names of Iuno.
                  
                     Lucibile, that whiche is light of it ſelfe.
                  
                     Lucido, are, to make clere, or to gyue lyght.
                  
                     Lucifico, care, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Lucidus, da, dum, cleere.
                  
                     Lucifer, the daye ſterre.
                  
                     Lucifigus, ga, whyche fleeth frome lyghte, and delyteth in darkeneſſe.
                  
                     Lucilius, the name of an olde poete.
                  
                     Lucina, one of the names of the mone, called alſo the goddeſſe of byrthe.
                  
                     Lucini, they whiche haue lyttell eyen, and ſmalle ſyghte.
                  
                     Lucius, a mans name.
                  
                     Lucretilis, an hylle in the countreye of the Sabynes.
                  
                     Lucrifuga, he that fleeth frō lucre or gaines
                  
                     Lucrinus, a mere or great water in Cāpania.
                  
                     Lucrio, onis, a couetous manne, an inordynate gayner.
                  
                     Lucror, aris, ari, to gayne, or to wynne.
                  
                     Lucrum, lucre or gayne.
                  
                     Lucta, wraſtelynge.
                  
                     Luctatius Catulus, a cyteſyn of Rome.
                  
                     Luctiferum, cauſe of waylynge.
                  
                     Luctificus, ca, cum, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Luctitor, tari, to wraſtell ofte.
                  
                     Luctor, aris, ari, & lucto, are, to wraſtle.
                  
                     Luctuoſus, a, um, lamentable.
                  
                     Luctus, tus, weepynge and waylynge, the habyte of mournynge,
                  
                     Lucubro, are, to make any thynge by candelle lyghte.
                  
                     Luculentus, ta, tum, full of lyght, cleere.
                  
                     Lucullus, the name of a noble Romayne.
                  
                     Lucus, a hygh and thycke wodde, ſomtime it ſignifieth lyght, whan it is of the fourth declination. It is alſo a citie in Spayne by Compoſtella, which is now called Lucenſis.
                  
                  
                     Ludia, a daunſynge wenche.
                  
                     Ludibruini, a mocke, or any thynge that is mocked.
                  
                     Ludibundus, a, um, playing, or full of playe.
                  
                     Ludicrū, any play or paſtime, or an enterlude
                  
                     Ludicrus, cra, crum, pertaynynge to playe or myrthe.
                  
                     Ludifico, are, to mocke.
                  
                     Ludii, & ludiones, players in enterludes or ſtage playes.
                  
                     Ludius, & ludio, onis, a player.
                  
                     Ludo, ſi, dere, to playe, to mocke or deceiue in game. Opera luditur, The warke or labour is loſte.
                  
                     Ludus, play in actes, myrth in wordes: alſo a ſchoole or place of exercyſe.
                  
                     Luſus, us, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Lues, peſtilence in men, murrayn in beaſtis.
                  
                     Lugdunum, a citie in Fraunce, callid Lions.
                  
                     Lugeo, luxi, lugere, to mourne, to lamente.
                  
                     Lugubris, bre, pertaynynge to mournynge. Veſtis lugubris, a mournynge garment.
                  
                     Luma, a brembyll.
                  
                     Lumbago, ginis, feblenes of the loynes.
                  
                     Lumbare, breeches of hoſen.
                  
                     Lumbrici, wormes callyd eaſts.
                  
                     Lumbi, the loynes.
                  
                     Lumen, luminis, lyghte.
                  
                     Luminare, that whiche gyueth lyght.
                  
                     Luna, the Moone.
                  
                     Lunaris, re, pertaynynge to the moone.
                  
                     Lunaticus, he that is madde or ſycke at a certayne tyme of the moone.
                  
                     Lunatus, ta, tum, lyke the moone.
                  
                     Luo, ere, to ſuffre punyſhement or dethe.
                  
                     Luere capite, to haue the heed ſtryken of.
                  
                     Lupa, a female wolfe. alſo an harlotte.
                  
                     Lupanar, a brothell howſe.
                  
                     Lupanaris, re, pertaining to a brothel hous.
                  
                     Lupanarium, a brothell howſe.
                  
                     Lupari, to meddell with cōmon harlottes.
                  
                     Luparius, a hunter of wolfes.
                  
                     Lupatum, a harde bytte.
                  
                     Lupercal, a place dedicate to Pan, the god of ſhepeherdes.
                  
                     Lupercalia, ſacrifices & plays made to Pan.
                  
                     Luperci, minyſters of that ſolemnitie.
                  
                     Lupinus, na, num, of a wolfe.
                  
                     Lupinus, a kynde of poulſe.
                  
                     Lupus, a wolfe. Alſo a bytte for a hors. alſo a hoke to drawe vp thinges our of a pyt. Alſo a kynde of ſpyders.
                  
                     Lupus eſt in fabula, a prouerbe, whan he cometh, whiche is ſpoken of.
                  
                     Lupum auribus tenere, a prouerbe in thynges that be daungerous, eyther to retaine, or to lette goo.
                  
                     Lura, the mouthe of a bottelle.
                  
                     Luridus, da, dum, pale of colour.
                  
                     Lurco, are, to eate rauenouſly.
                  
                     Lurco, onis, a deuourer of his own ſubſtāce
                  
                     Luſcinia, a nyghtyngale.
                  
                     Luſcioſus, poreblynd. Luſcio is the diſeaſe.
                  
                     Luſcitus, he that ſeeth playnely by nyghte.
                  
                     
                     Luſcus, porblynde. ſommetyme a man hauynge but one eye.
                  
                     Luſitania, the realme called Portugall.
                  
                     Luſito, tare, to playe often.
                  
                     Luſorius, a, um, pertaynynge to playe.
                  
                     Luſtralis, le, pertayning to riot and lechery. ſometyme a thynge done euery fyfte yere.
                  
                     Luſtrici dies, the day whan a chylde is fyrſt named, whiche in men chylderne was the nynth day, in womenne childern it was the viii. day. It may nowe be vſed for the daye of chriſtenynge of chylderne.
                  
                     Luſtro, are, to go aboute in circute, to make ſatisfaction by ſacrifice, to conſyder in the mynde, to ſhadowe, to beholde aboute.
                  
                     Luſtror, aris, ari, to ſerche out.
                  
                     Luſtrum, a denne or caue of wylde beaſtes in woddes, an hidde place and vyle, a hous where gluttonye and lecherie is haunted, alſo the hauntynge of the ſame vices: ſometyme it ſygnifyeth the ſpace of fiue yeres. Alſo the generall purgation of the citie by ſacrifice euery fyfte yere.
                  
                     Luter, eris, a cuppe, wherin wine is delayde with water
                  
                     Luteſco, ſcere, to be claye.
                  
                     Luteus color, the colour of yelowe, approchinge towarde redde, of the colour of the yolke of an egge, or of waxe newe made.
                  
                     Luteola, a lytell floure of the colour of yelowe, in greatnes and ſauour, not moch vnlyke a vyolette.
                  
                     Luteum oui, the yolke of an egge.
                  
                     Luto, are, to claye.
                  
                     Lutia, ſiue lytra, a beuar, or a beaſt moche lyke to it, whiche gnaweth trees aſonder. and dothe haunte greatte waters, and lyueth lyke an Ottar.
                  
                     Lutum, claye.
                  
                     Lux, lucis, lyght.
                  
                     Luxo, are, to lowſe or make looſe.
                  
                     Luxatus, whoſe bones are out of ioynte.
                  
                     Luxurio, ire, to excede, to abunde more than is neceſſarie in the body or perſonage.
                  
                     Luxurior, aris, ari, to abounde exceſſiuely in thynges concernynge the mynde or goodes: Alſo to be wanton with to moch welth or proſperitie.
                  
                     Luxurioſus, to proſperouſe, or lyuynge in to moche pleaſure.
                  
                     Luxurioſus, a, um, excedynge in abundance.
                  
                     Luxus, luxuria, & luxuries, all ſuperfluitie or exceſſe, as well in carnalle pleaſure, as in ſumptuous fare, apparayle, or buyldyng.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶L ANTE Y.
                  
                     LYaeus, one of the names of Bacchus, called god of wynes.
                  
                     Lyceum, was the ſchole of Ariſtotell in Athenes.
                  
                     Lycaeus, a mountayne in the countreye of Archadia.
                  
                     Lycaon, the kyng of Archadia, whom Iupiter tourned into a wolfe.
                  
                     Lycaonia, a countrey in Aſia: after ſomme writers, it is a parte of Archadia.
                  
                     Lycaones, people in Aſia the leſſe,Ptho. li. 3. nere to Lycia, as writeth Ptolome.
                  
                     Lycaſtus, a citie of Candy.
                  
                     Lychnis, an herbe whoſe floure ſhyneth by nyght, and fyrſte ſpringeth, and longeſt dureth: whiche in drynke helpeth them that are ſtongen with the Scorpion.
                  
                     Lychnites, whyte marbyll.
                  
                     Lychnobij, they whiche do tourne the daye into nyght, and the nyght into daye.
                  
                     Lychnus, a matche of a candelle, ſometyme the ſelfe candell.
                  
                     Lycia, a countrey in the laſſe Aſia.
                  
                     Lycidas, the name of a Centaure, and of a ſhepeherde in Vergile.
                  
                     Lycion, a thyng made with the iuyce of an herbe, wherwith ſoore eis be cured.
                  
                     Lyciſca, a dogge commen of a wolfe and a dogge.
                  
                     Lycius, one of the names of Apollo.
                  
                     Lycurgus, a kynge of the Lacedemoniens, whiche gaue to them their fyrſte lawes.
                  
                     Lycus, a ryuer in the countreye of Caeſaria.
                  
                  
                     Lydia, a royalme in Aſia the more.
                  
                     Lydus, a, um, of the countrey of Lydia.
                  
                     Lyenteria, the flyxe or continuall lowſenes of the bealye.
                  
                     Lympha, water.
                  
                     Lymphaticus, a madde man, which lyke to a wodde dogge, runneth hither and thither.
                  
                     Lympidus, a, um, cleere, ſmothe.
                  
                     Lynceus, was a manne, who (as Varro writeth) coulde ſee ſhyppes on the ſee .Cxxx. myles from hym, & dyd nombre them. And ſome wrate, that he coulde ſee throughe a walle. And therfore they, whiche haue very ſharpe ſyghtes, be ſayde to haue
                  
                     Lynceos oculos, the eien of Lynceus.
                  
                     Lyndus, a citie atte the Rodes, where they dyd ſacrifice to Hercules with reproches and curſes.
                  
                     Lynter, eris, a cockebote.
                  
                     Lynx, cis, a beaſte lyke to a wolfe, hauynge many ſpottes, whoſe ſyght dothe perce all thynges. It is alſo a byrde, whyche hath a tongue lyke a ſerpente.
                  
                     Lyra, an harpe.
                  
                     Lyricen, cinis, an harper.
                  
                     Lyſander, a Capitayne of the Lacedemonyans, a man contentious, whiche dydde ſette all Grece in the Lacedemonians top, and was ſlayne of the Thebans.
                  
                     
                     Lyſanias, an oratour of Grece.
                  
                     Lyſias, an oratour moſte pleaſant, of whom Quint. ſpeaketh.
                  
                     Lyſimachus, a noble man of Macedony, the ſcholar of Calliſthenes.
                  
                     Lyſippus, an excellent caruer.
                  
                     Lyſius, a ryuer of Archadie.
                  
                     Lytta, a worme in a dogges tongue.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶M ANTE A.
                  
                     
                        MACARIVS, the name of a manne. In latyn it ſygnifieth bleſſed.
                  
                     Maccabaeus, the name of certayne noble menne, whiche were capitains of the Iewes.
                  
                     Macaedonia, a realme ioinyng to Grece, whereof the great Alexander was kynge.
                  
                     Macedo, onis, a man or womā of Macedony.
                  
                     Macedonicus, ca, cum, of Macedonie.
                  
                     Macellarius, a vittayllour or ſeller of all maner of vittayle.
                  
                     Macellum, a place where all maner of vytayle is ſolde. Macellus is ſomtyme taken for a leane man.
                  
                     Maceo, & maceſco, ſcere, to be leane.
                  
                     Macer, cra, crum, leane.
                  
                     Macereſco, ſcere, to make ſofte with lyeng longe in lycour.
                  
                     Maceries, & maceria, a wall of ſtone without morter, made in the ſtede of an hedge. alſo leanneſſe.
                  
                     Macero, are, ſpoken of the body, ſignifieth to make leane, or thynne, or ſofte by ſteapynge in lycour: referred to the mynde, it ſygnifieth to vexe or inquiete.
                  
                     Machaera, a ſworde.
                  
                     Machaerophorus, a ſworde bearer.
                  
                     Machaeropios, a Cutlar, or a bladeſmyth̄e.
                  
                     Machaon, the ſonne of Aeſculapius, an excellent ſurgeon.
                  
                     Machina, a thynge craftilye inuented, or a crafty inuention, an engyne.
                  
                     Machinor, aris, ari, to inuent craftily, to deuyſe, to ymagine.
                  
                     Macies, & macritudo, leanneſſe.
                  
                     Apulcius.
                     Macidatus, ta, tum, wette.
                  
                     Macilentus, leane.
                  
                     Macio, aui, are, to make leane.
                  
                     Macra, a ryuer, whiche rounneth betwene the mountaynes of Liguria.
                  
                     Macreſco, ſcere, to waxe leane.
                  
                     Macreo, ere, to be leane.
                  
                     Macrobij, people of Aethiopia, whiche do lyue very longe.
                  
                     Macrobius, the name of a great lerned mā.
                  
                     Macrochie, he that hath longe handes.
                  
                     Macrochera, a garmente with longe ſleues.
                  
                     Macteae, precious meates.
                  
                     Macticus, he, whiche hath greatte chekes, and a gapynge mouth.
                  
                     Macto, are, to ſlee or kylle: alſo to beate, ſometyme to honour.
                  
                     Mactra, an hutche, wherin breade is putte: ſome doo calle it a brake, wherwith dowe is wroughte.
                  
                     Macte uirtutis & uirtute, procede in vertue.
                  
                     Macte animi, be of good courage.
                  
                     Macti ingenio, men of excellent wyttes.
                  
                     Macula, a ſpotte, a blemyſhe: Alſo infamye or reproche. Sometyme the maſſhe of a nette or hole betwene the thredes: alſo a nette, images wrought in marble.Varro.
                  
                  
                     Maculo, are, to ſpotte or make fowle.
                  
                     Maculoſus, ſpotty, vncleane, or foule.
                  
                     Madaura, a citie ſet in the boundes of Getulia and Numidia.
                  
                     Madefacio, cere, to weate, to waſhe, to bain.
                  
                     Madefio, fieri, to be waſhed.
                  
                     Madeo, dere, to be wette or waſhed.
                  
                     Madeſco, ſcere, to ſweat, or be through wet.
                  
                     Madian, a citie beyond Arabia on the ſouth part in the deſert of the Saraſyns, ageinſt the caſte parte of the redde ſee.
                  
                     Madido, dare, to make wette.
                  
                     Madidus, dida, didum, wete or waſhed with lycoure.
                  
                     Madifico, facere, to make weate.
                  
                     Mador, oris, moyſture, ſometyme ſweate.
                  
                     Mados, a certayne kynde of white vynes.
                  
                     Madulſa, dronken.
                  
                     Maeander, a ryuer of the countray of Phrigia, whiche hathe many tournynges and wyndynges: and of that all crooked and ſubtyll tournynge wayes, meanes, and deuyſes, be called Meandri. There is alſo of that name a mountayne in India.
                  
                     Maedia, a citie in the realme of Thracia.
                  
                     Maee, a kynde of great crabbes of the ſee.
                  
                     Maemacrerion, the moneth of Septembre.
                  
                     Maenala, uel Maenalus, a hygh mountayne in Archadia.
                  
                     Maenas, adis, a fyſhe, whiche I ſuppoſe we do calle a Menowe.
                  
                     Maenades, women, whiche dyd alwaye folowe Bacchus, with their heare ſcatterid like mad women, running hither & thither.
                  
                     Maenoles, one of the names of Bacchus.
                  
                     Maeonia, is a countrey in Aſia the laſſe, callyd alſo Lidia.
                  
                     Maeonius, a, um, of Maeonia. Homere the excellent poete was named Maeonius, eyther bicauſe that he was borne in that coūtrey, or els that his fathers name was Maeon.
                  
                  
                     
                     Maeotis, a greatte mere in the countrey of Scithia, whiche is alway froſen.
                  
                     Maereo, es, loke after in Maereo et Mereor.
                  
                  
                     Maero, are, to make heuy.
                  
                     Maeror, heuineſſe with wepynge.
                  
                     
                        Maeſtit
                              •
                           a, et maeſtitudo,
                      heuyneſſe.
                  
                     
                        Maeſto, et Maeſt
                              •
                           ſico, care,
                      to make heuy.
                  
                     Magalia, villagis.
                  
                     Magia, Magike, whiche is in two ſortes, one is the ſecrete knowlege of the naturall qualyties and hydde operations and cauſes of thynges, and that is called Magia naturalis, naturall magike: A nother is ſuperſtionie & deuilliſhe, called witche crafte, ſorcery, or other lyke deteſtable names, whiche is vnlefull by the lawes of god and man.
                  
                     Magicus, ca, cum, perteynyng to magike.
                  
                     Magidae, kychen bourdes, or inſtrumentes perteynynge to the kechyn.
                  
                     Magida, a kynde of breade.
                  
                     Maginor, aris, ari, to trifle.
                  
                     Magis, more.
                  
                     Magitteriū, the dignite or office of a maſter.
                  
                     Magiſtrauis, tus, a great offycer, a man hauynge autoritie in gouernance of people. all be it that ſome haue more authoritie by the lawes, and ſome haue leſſe.
                  
                     Magiſter populi, the chefe ruler of the people, by the whiche name the Dictatour amonge the Romaynes was called.
                  
                     Magiſter, tri, a maſter or teacher of ſciēces.
                  
                     Magiſtro, are, to rule.
                  
                     Magiſter ſcriniorum, an offycer lyke to the mayſter of the rolls.
                  
                     Magmata, confections made of dyuerſe ſweete ſpices in paſte only for the ſauour, as pomaundres and waſhing balles. ſomtyme it is taken for the dreggis of ſweete oyles.
                  
                     Magna Graetia, that parte of Italy from Larentum to Cumas.
                  
                  
                     Magnalia, gret thinges to be wondered at.
                  
                     Magnarius, a greate marchaunt.
                  
                     Magnanimitas, tatis, valiantneſſe of courage or harte, magnanimity.
                  
                     Magnas, atis, et Magnatus, a noble man, a mā of great eſtimation.
                  
                     Magnes, etis, an Adamant ſtone.
                  
                     Magneſia, a parte of Macedonia.
                  
                     Magnifico, are, to extoll.
                  
                     Magnificus, he that doth great thynges.
                  
                     Magna, at a great price.
                  
                     Magnificentia, a diſpoſition and adminiſtration in doinge or makynge of great thynges and ſumptuous.
                  
                     Magnus, a, um, great.
                  
                     Magog, the ſonne of Iapheth.
                  
                     Maguderis, a kynde of Caules called alſo Laſerpitium.
                  
                  
                     Magus, ſignifieth in the Perſiane tongue a wyſe man, expert alſo in the miſteries of theyr ceremonyes, ſometyme it ſignifieth a witche.
                  
                     Maia, the mother of Mercurius.
                  
                     Maieſtatem conſtituere, to confirme the aſtate of princes dignitie.
                  
                     Maiales, barowe hogges.
                  
                     Maieſtatem ſoluere, to leſe the preeminence of princes dignitie.
                  
                     Maieſtas, tatis, maieſtie.
                  
                     Maieſtatis crimen, myſpriſion.
                  
                     Maiores, auncetours, progenitours.
                  
                     Maior, oris, greatter.
                  
                     Maius, the monthe of Maye.
                  
                     Malae, the chekes.
                  
                     Malaca, a citie in Spayne.
                  
                     Malatia, calme of the See, alſo the griefe of the ſtomacke not ſuſteynyng meate, abhorrynge all thinges, as a womanne with chylde, ſome do cal it the abhomination of the ſtomake.
                  
                     Malachites, a ſtone of a dark grene colour.
                  
                     Malaciſſo, are, to knede or make ſofte.
                  
                     Malaces, ces, a kynde of malowes.Plaut. i
                           •
                         Epi.
                  
                  
                     Malacoſtracha, ſoft as fiſhe without ſhelles.
                  
                     Malacus, ca, cum, ſofte.
                  
                     Malagma, tis, a mollifienge playſter, wherby hard impoſtumes be made ſoft or ripe.
                  
                     Malaſſo, are, to make ſofte or rype. Alſo to exercyſe.
                  
                     Male, ylle, vnhappily, vncommodyouſely, myſcheuouſely
                  
                     Malea, a promontorie or hylle lienge into the ſee by Laconia, which is daungerous for ſhyppes to paſſe by.
                  
                     Male audire, to be yll reported of, to haue an yll name.
                  
                     Male cogitare de aliquo, to haue yll opynion of one.
                  
                     Male accepti, yll handled, yll intreated.Ci. in Ver. Brutus i
                           •
                         Cice.
                  
                  
                     Maledicentia, yll reporte.
                  
                     Maledico, xi, cere, to curſe.
                  
                     Maledicus, yll tonged.
                  
                     Malefica, a wytche, whiche with ſorcerye dothe hurte to her neyghbours.
                  
                     Maleficus, a harme doer.
                  
                     Maleficium, & maleficentia, damage, wrong diſpleaſure, hurt, a myſcheuous dede.
                  
                     Malefice, myſcheuouſely, harmefully.
                  
                     Male meritus eſt de me, He hathe ylle intreated me.
                  
                     Male optare, to curſe.
                  
                     Male accipere, to intreate one ylle.
                  
                     Male accipere uerbis, to gyue ylle language to one.
                  
                     Male acceptus, yll intreated, yll handelyd, ſhrewdely welcome.
                  
                     
                     Male cadere, to chaunce ylle.
                  
                     Male conciliatus, coſte loſt, he on whome a man hath loſt al that he hath beſtowid. Fugitiue prodi, male conciliare, Come forthe mycher, on whome I haue loſte all that thou coſteſt me.
                  
                     Plautus in Amph. Plautus in Aſinar.
                     Male formido, I am yll or ſoore aferde.
                  
                     Male me habet haec res, I am ſorie or yll apayde for that mattier: or that mattier greueth me ſoore.
                  
                     Maleloqui, & maledicere, to curſe.
                  
                     Plaut. in Caſtel.
                     Male maceror, I am yl vexed, I am il at eſe.
                  
                     Male mereri, to doo diſpleaſure.
                  
                     Male metuo, I am yll aferde.
                  
                     Male moratus, yll manerde.
                  
                     Male morigerus, diſobedient, or frowarde.
                  
                     Terent. in Adelph.
                     Male odi, I hate deedly.
                  
                     Male precari, to aſke a vengeaunce.
                  
                     
                        Male ue
                              •
                           tat illi,
                      God ſende hym yuell lucke therof, yll maye he brooke it.
                  
                     Male ſuada, ſhe that giueth ſhrewed coūcel.
                  
                     Malenolentia, malyce, yll wylle.
                  
                     Maleuolus, malyciouſe.
                  
                     Malicorium, the rynde of a pome granade.
                  
                     Maligné, enuiouſly, diſdainfully, maliciouſly
                  
                     Malignor, & maligno, to beare malyce, to be hatefulle.
                  
                     Vergilſus. Plinius.
                     Malignus, a, um, wycked, cruell, enuyous, & couetous, maligna uia, an yll way.
                  
                     Malignus ager, grounde that is ylle to be broughte to tylthe.
                  
                     Maligna lux, a dymme lyghte.
                  
                     Malignitas, tatis, wickednes, malignitie, enuye, malyce, vnprofytableneſſe, the vyce contrarye to lyberalitie.
                  
                     Malitia, contrary to vertue & goodnes. ſomtyme it ſignifieth ſubtiltie with deceyte.
                  
                     Malitioſe, malyciouſely.
                  
                     Malleatus, a, um, hammered.
                  
                     Malleo, are, to warke with an hammer.
                  
                     Malleolus, a lyttelle hammer. It is alſo a ſmalle boughe or twygge of a vyne. Alſo Malleoli be ſommetyme taken generallye for ſmalle ſtickes.
                  
                     Malleus, an hammer.
                  
                     Malluuium, & malluuiae, arum, a baſyn, wher in menne do waſhe their handes.
                  
                     Malobathrum, a ſwete oyntment, wherwith men were wont to waſhe their heare.
                  
                     Malo, I had leauer, or rather: mauis, mauul.
                  
                  
                     Malobathron, whiche in latyn is callyd foliū, is a ſwete herbe growing in India, vpon waters without any roote.
                  
                     Malta, a clay, whyche touchynge anye other mattier or ſubſtaunce, ſettethe it on fyre.
                  
                     Malua, an herbe callyd Mallowes.
                  
                     Malus, an appull tree of the femynyne gender.
                  
                     Malus aſsyria, nel medica, an orenge tree.
                  
                     Malus, in the maſculyne gender, a maſte of a ſhyppe.
                  
                     Malum, beinge an aduerbe,Terent. in Phor
                           •
                        . ſygnifieth with a myſchiefe, or like thyng. Quid uo
                           •
                         malum ergo me ſic ludificamini? Than wherfore with a myſchiefe do you thus mocke me. Quid tua (malum) id referi? what with a myſchiefe reckeſt thou therfore, or haſt thou therwith to do?
                  
                     Malus, a, um, yll, contrary to good: ſomtime labour, vexation, ſyckneſſe, grefe, malice.
                  
                     Mamertini, people in Campania.
                  
                     Mamilla, a lyttell dugge, or pappe.
                  
                     Mamma, a dugge or pappe.
                  
                     Mammare, to gyue the dugge or breſte to a chylde.
                  
                     Mammeata, a womanne with greatte dugges or breaſtes.
                  
                     Mammillare, a kerchefe, wherwith women do couer theyr pappes.
                  
                     Māmona, in the language of Syria, worldly ſubſtaunce, rycheſſe.
                  
                     Mammoſus, ſa, & mammeatus, ta, tum,
                     Plaut. hauynge great dugges.
                  
                     Mammothrepius, the chylde that ſoucketh longe.
                  
                     Mamphula, a certayne bread vſed in Syria, whiche ere it be throughe baken, fallyth into coles.
                  
                     Mano, are, to droppe or ſtylle out, or runne out ſoftly. alſo to deſcende, to procede.
                  
                     Mana, in the olde tyme, was taken for Bona, good.
                  
                     Manapia, an Ilande in the northe parte of Britannia.
                  
                     Manceps, cipis, he that byeth or hyreth any thynge of the people.
                  
                     Mancinati, perſones condemned.
                  
                     Manciolae, lyttell handes.
                  
                     Mancipium, that which is ſolēnely bought before wytneſſes. Alſo a mannes propre goodes or catell. ſometyme a bondeman.
                  
                     Mancupi, the ſolempne fourme or maner of byenge any thynge before wytnes, by lyuerye and ſeyſon, or poſſeſſyon takynge, with other thynges executed, requyſyte for the aſſuraunce of any bargayne & ſale.
                  
                     Mancipatio, the aſſuraunce by lyuerye and poſſeſſyon.
                  
                     Mancupes, the principall takers of lande, or other thynge, wherof groweth yerely reuenues. Alſo they, whiche doo take on them to perfourme any worke in greatte.
                  
                     Mancupio dare, to gyue or ſelle a thynge with warrantie.
                  
                     Mancupio accipere, to take a thynge with warantie of hym, the whyche gyueth or ſelleth it.
                  
                     
                     Mancipi, the intereſt or right of a thinge.
                  
                     Mancipo, are, to delyuer in bondage, to delyuer poſſeſſion, to make lyuery & ſayſon.
                  
                     Mancipij ſui eſſe, to be his owne manne, and none other mans ſubiect or ſeruant.
                  
                     Mancipio dare, to delyuer poſſeſſion, reſeruynge a rente.
                  
                     Vi
                           •
                        ruuius.
                     Mancipio accipere, to take poſſeſſion or lyuerye and ſaiſon.
                  
                     Mancus, lackynge one hand. alſo generally that, whiche lacketh any thyng neceſſary.
                  
                     Mandatarius, he to whome commaundemente is gyuen.
                  
                     Mandatum, a commyſſion. Alſo a commandement, a charge.
                  
                     Mandatus, ta, tum, giuen in charge.
                  
                     Mandibula, a 
                        •
                     awebone, wherin the teethe be ſette.
                  
                     Mando, are, to cōmitte, memoriae mandare, to remembre, to put in remembraunce, to leaue in memorie, or for a memoriall.
                  
                     Mandare aeternitati, to wryte a thing, to the 
                        •••
                     ent to be in perpetuall remembraunce.
                  
                     Mandare literis, to put in memorie.
                  
                     Mandare ſiderahcuius, to put a man in truſte with a thynge. Mandare teriae ſemina, to putte ſede into the grounde.
                  
                     Mando, di, dere, to chewe meate, or grynde it with the tethe.
                  
                     Mando, onis, a great eater, or he that is alway eatynge.
                  
                     Mandra, a cabin, a ſhepehouſe, or oxehous.
                  
                     Mandragora, an herbe callyd Mandrag, whiche beareth a lyttell apple: the iuyce whereof dronken or ſmellyd to, cauſeth a manne to ſlepe.
                  
                     Manduces, imagis caried about in pageātis with great chekes and wide mouthes.
                  
                     Manduco, are, to chewe meate.
                  
                     Manduco, conis, a gret eater.
                  
                     Manducus, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Mane, earely, alſo the mornynge.
                  
                     Maneo, manſi, manere, to abyde, to tary, to perſiſte, to happen hereafter.
                  
                     Manere promiſsis, to kepe promyſe.
                  
                     Mane dum, tarye a whyle
                  
                     Manſio, onis, a place to abide in, alſo a poſte place, for conuayinge of letters or other thynges ſpedyly.
                  
                     Manes, the good and badde aungell. Some tyme they be taken for deuylles, ſomtyme for ſpyrytes or ſowles, not pourged of ſynne, ſommetyme for the peynes, whiche ſoules do ſuffre.
                  
                     Mango, onis, was taken for a ſeller of childerne to abhominable vſes. It is alſo taken for ſuche one as polyſſheth or paynteth a thynge with a fals colour, to ſelle it the deerer.
                  
                     Mangonicus, a, ū, pertainynge to that craft.
                  
                     Mangonium, the crafte to make thynges ſaleable:
                  
                     Mangonizo, nizare, to polyſſhe, paynte, or trymme a thynge, to make it more vendible, or to be better ſolde.
                  
                     Mania, madneſſe.
                  
                     Maniacus, a madde manne.
                  
                     Maniae, arum, ymages defourmed.
                  
                     Manibus, pedibuſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , with all might & mayne.
                  
                     Manibus pedibuſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         ire in ſententiā, is where in a parlyament, greatte counſayle, or other great aſſembly, to haue the conſente of many men, the greatter parte conſentyng to one mannes opinyon or ſentence, to goo towarde hym, holdynge vp theyr handes, in token that they be therevnto agreed.
                  
                     Manicae, ſleues of a garmente. Alſo manacles to tie the hādes togither. Alſo gantlettes and ſplyntes, and myttaynes, or longe gloues.
                  
                     Manichaei, a ſecte of heritikes, ſo callyd of an Archeherytyque called Manychen.
                  
                     Manicula, a lyttell hande.
                  
                     Manifeſtarius, a, um, notoryous.
                  
                     Manifeſto, tare, to manyfeſte or make apparaunt.
                  
                     Manifeſtum, manyfeſte or clere.
                  
                     Manifeſtum habere, to knowe ſurely.
                  
                     Manifeſtus mendatij, proued a lyer.
                  
                     Manifeſto, an aduerbe, ſygnyfyeth clerelye, playnely.
                  
                     Manifeſtatius, a, um, clere, euydente, openly knowen.
                  
                     Manimoria, thynges, whiche doo abyde in remembraunce.
                  
                     Maniolae, Iles agaynſt India, beyonde the ryuer of Ganges, where as be rockes of Adamant ſtones, which do drawe to them ſhyppes that haue yron nayles.
                  
                     Manipulus, an handefull, a grype, a bende of men, proprely of tenne ſouldiours.
                  
                     Manipularis, & maniplaris, a ſtanderd bearer, or baner bearer.
                  
                     Manipulatim, by bendes.
                  
                     Manliana imperia, cruelle gouernaunce or rule, without any mercy.
                  
                     Manlius, a noble Romayne.
                  
                     Manna, a delycate meate, whiche god ſent to the Iewes beinge in the deſerte. alſo a ſweete dewe, whyche falleth in the mornynges, and lyethe on leaues congelyd lyke whyte hony, whyche phiſicions do vſe for a medycine to purge coler eaſily.
                  
                     Manna thuris, the pouder or duſte that cometh of frankincenſe.
                  
                     Mannus, an amblynge hackeney.
                  
                     Mannor, aris, ari, to ſteale.
                  
                     
                     Mannobarbulus, a balle of leade to throw. alſo the caſter therof.
                  
                     Mart. li. 12
                     Mannulus, a nagge, a lyttell hors.
                  
                     Manſiſterna, a pytcher potte.
                  
                     Mano, are, to runne oute, as lycour dothe: alſo to droppe out, to appere out, as ſweat out of the poores.
                  
                     Manſio, one dayes iourney.
                  
                     Manſtus, ſtollen.
                  
                     Manſito, tare, to abyde longe.
                  
                     Manſueſco, ſcere, to waxe tame or gentyll.
                  
                     Manſues, for manſuerus.
                  
                  
                     Manſuetudo, dinis, mekenes, gentylneſſe, a moderate temperance betwixte pride and ſymplicitie.
                  
                     Manſuetus, ta, tum, meke, gentyll, tame.
                  
                     Manſuete, mekely, gentylly.
                  
                     Manſum, meate, whiche the nourices doo chewe, and after giue it to the chyld, puttynge it into his mouthe.
                  
                     Veſtus.
                     Manſutius, a great eater: alſo ripe and apt to be eaten.
                  
                     Manſus, a, um, chewed.
                  
                     Mantaelum, & mantaelium, & mantile, a towel wherwith menne do wype their handes, whan they haue waſhed. Alſo a cloke.
                  
                     Manteum, a place where dyuels in ydolles gaue aunſweres.
                  
                     Manthicora, a beaſt which is in India, in body like to a lion, but more rough, hauynge a face like to a mā, & in his mouth .ii. rewes or ſet of teeth, the raile of a ſcorpiō, & the voyce of a ſmalle trumpette: and is of colour redde, and wyll neuer be made tame.
                  
                     Mantica, a bagge, ſometyme a cloke.
                  
                     Manticula, a purſe.
                  
                     Manticularius, a ſtealer of napry, alſo a pike pours, or cutte pourſe.
                  
                     Manticularia, towels or other lyke thyngis wherwith men do wype their handes.
                  
                     Manticulor, aris, ari, to do a thynge ſlyly, as to pike a purſe.
                  
                     Manticulatio, ſlyeneſſe, deceite.
                  
                     Mantinea, a cytie in Grece.
                  
                     Mantis, a prophete.
                  
                     Mantiſcinor, aris, ari, to ſtele or pike craftily.
                  
                     Mantiſſa, the addition in weight.
                  
                     Manto, tare, amōg the old writers to abide.
                  
                     Mantua, a noble citie in Italy, where Vergile the excellent poore was borne.
                  
                     Mantuanus, a, um, of Mantua.
                  
                     
                        Mantuari
                              ••
                            tunicae,
                      ſleuyd iackettes.
                  
                     Manuarius, a, um, manuall.
                  
                     Manubiae, the pray taken of ennemies: alſo money, for the whiche the pray was ſolde.
                  
                     Manubinarius, the partner of a proye.
                  
                     Manubrium, the hylte or handle of a weapon or inſtrument.
                  
                     Manuleatus, ta, tum, hauinge longe ſleeues.
                  
                     Manum de tabula, a prouerbe, ſygnifienge, Leaue whiles it is wel.
                  
                     Manum conſerere, to ioyne in battayle, to ioyne in iſſue, whan one ſueth a nother.
                  
                     Manum ferulae ſubducere, to lerne as ſcholers do in the ſcholes.
                  
                     Manumitto, to manumyſe or infraunchiſe a bonde man.
                  
                     Manuconſertum ex iure vocare, to chalenge right or propretie in a thynge, it maye be taken for derayning of battayle in a wryte of ryght, after the lawes of Englande.
                  
                     Manus, a hande, a grapul to faſten ſhippes togither, ſomtime it ſignifieth a multitude of men in the ayde of one, ſometyme power, ſometyme writynge, alſo the noſe or ſnoute of an olyphant.
                  
                     Manus iniectio, attachement, alſo ſaiſen or ſaiſure of a thing, wherunto we make title.
                  
                     Mapalia, cotages builded rounde like ouēs.
                  
                     Mappa, a table clothe.
                  
                     Marathon, a felde in the countrey of Athenes, and alſo a towne there.
                  
                     Marathron, et Maratrum, an herbe, whiche is called fenell or fenkill.
                  
                     Marathuſa, an yle wherin is abundaunce of fenell, and it is alſo called Clazomenia.
                  
                     Marceo, cui, cere, to corrupte, to putrifie
                  
                     Marcellus, a propre name.
                  
                     Marchia, a countrey in baſe Germany.
                  
                     Marcor, oris, corruption, or putrifaction.
                  
                     Marconianni, people in Germany, whiche are nowe ſuppoſed to be either of Boeme or of Morauia.
                  
                     Mardi, people adioyninge to Perſia.
                  
                     Mare, the Sec.
                  
                     Mare coelo miſcere, to trouble al the world.
                  
                     Marcipor, oris, the ſeruant of Marcus.
                  
                     Mareotis, oridis, a Ryuer in Egipte, alſo a parte of Libia, a parte of Epirus.
                  
                     Mariotides, grapes of that countrey.
                  
                     Margaridae, ſmalle dates, rounde and white.
                  
                     Margarita, margaritum, margarites, margaris, garidis, a perle, a Margarite: ſometime generally all preciouſe ſtones are called Margaritae.
                     Plinius.
                  
                  
                     Margaritarius, a ſeller of perles.
                  
                     Margariteferus, ra, rum, that which beareth Margarites.
                  
                     Margina, a region in Aſia.
                  
                     Margo, ginis, the brymme or edge of euery thynge, the margent.
                  
                     Margus, a riuer in Aſia.
                  
                     Maria, a propre name.
                  
                     Mariaba, the chiefe citie in Saba.
                  
                     Marinus, na, um, of the ſee.
                  
                     Mariſcae, vnſauery fygges, wylde fygges, fygges which do open, that the ſedes do appere, alſo great piles in the fundement.
                  
                     
                     Mariſcus; a bull ruſhe.
                  
                     Marita, a wedded woman, a wyfe.
                  
                     Maritigenus, a, ū, com of the kyndof Mars
                  
                     Maritimus, of the ſee ſyde, or of the ſee.
                  
                     Maritus, a wedded man, a huſbande.
                  
                     Marito, are, to wedde.
                  
                     Marius, a propre name of a man.
                  
                     Marmarica, a countrey of Affrike.
                  
                     Marmor, oris, marble ſtone.
                  
                     Marmoratus, ta, tum, wrought with marble.
                  
                     Marmoratio, buyldynge with marble.
                  
                     Marmoreus, a, um, of marble.
                  
                     Marpeſus, an hyll in the yle callyd Parus.
                  
                     Marpeſius, of the ſame hylle.
                  
                     Marplacidae, ſhyps or barges vſed in Media.
                  
                  
                     Marra, a mattocke.
                  
                     Marrubium, an herbe called horehounde.
                  
                     Marracim, people in Italye.
                  
                     Mars, martis, callyd god of battayle. ſome tyme it is taken for battayle.
                  
                     Martia, a countrey in Italye.
                  
                     Marte ſuo, of his owne propre wytte, with out any counſayle.
                  
                     Marſpiter, the father of Mars.
                  
                     
                        Marſup
                              •
                           um,
                      a powche or pourſe.
                  
                     Martiacus, ca, cum, belongynge to warres.
                  
                     Martiaca, wages gyuen to ſouldyours.
                  
                     Martialis, borne vnder the planet of Mars.
                  
                     Martius, a, um, pertaynyng to Mars.
                  
                     Martius campus, a fyelde at Rome, dedycate to Mars.
                  
                     Martius menſis, the moneth callid March.
                  
                     Martyr, in greke, a wytneſſe.
                  
                     
                        Marty
                              ••
                           um,
                      martyrdome.
                  
                     
                        Ma
                              •
                            maris,
                      a man, or mankynde.
                  
                     Maſculus, a, um, manly, great, wyſe.
                  
                     Maſculeſco, ſci, ſcere, to be manly, great, or wyſe, to be come of the male kynde.
                  
                     Maſculo, are, to make manly, or ſtronge.
                  
                     Maſdoranus, a mountayne, whiche diuydeth Parthia from Aria.
                  
                  
                     Maſſagetae, a people in Aſia, whiche rounnynge on horſebacke throughe deſertes, doo drynke their horſes bloudde myxte with mylke, they alſo doo eate theyr parentes, if they die for age: but if they be ſycke, they caſte theym to wylde beaſtes to be deuoured.
                  
                     Maſsiniſſa, kynge of Numidia, and greate frende to the Romaynes.
                  
                     Maſsica, a countrey in the ſouthe parte of Spayne.
                  
                     Maſsicus, a mountayne in Campania.
                  
                     Maſsilia, a cite in hygh France, callid Marſiles.
                  
                  
                     Maſsilienſis, ſe, of Marſiles.
                  
                     Maſsylia, cum y, a countreye in Affrike, amonge the weſterne Moores.
                  
                     Maſticeos, reuerende, honourable.
                  
                     Maſtiche, a ſoote gumme.
                  
                     Maſtigia, & maſtigeus, a knaue worthye to be beaten.Plautus 
                           〈◊〉
                         trucule
                           •
                         Plaut.
                  
                  
                     Maſtigophorus, a felow worthy to be whipped. Alſo certayne miniſters, which with whyppes remoued the people, where there was moche preaſe.
                  
                     Maſtos, a teate. alſo a ceſterne, whereinto water doth runne, and efteſones runneth out by a cocke or ſpoute.
                  
                     Maſtruca, a garment, whiche men of Sardinia vſed to weare.
                  
                     Maſtix, cis, a whyppe.
                  
                     Maſtrupari, to touche diſhoneſtly the priuy membres of a man.
                  
                     Maſarius, the name of a famous lawyer, whiche wrate on the lawes ciuyle.
                  
                     Matella, an vrinall, or other veſſell, ſeruyng to that pourpoſe.
                  
                     Matellio, onis, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Mataeotechina, the vanitie, whiche is in a ſcience or crafte.
                  
                     Mater, tris, a mother.
                  
                     Materfamilias, ae, an houswife, goodwyfe of the houſe, ſhe that hath gouernaunce of other women, be ſhe maried or vnmaried.
                  
                     Mater matrina, ſhe that is a mother, & hath mother lyuynge.
                  
                     Materia, & materies, matter, wheerof any thyng is made, be it mettal, wodde, ſtone, erthe, or any thynge elles.
                  
                     Materialis, le, that which is of ſom matter.
                  
                     Materiarius, a carpenter.
                  
                     Materior, aris, ari, to warke in tymber.
                  
                     Materis, a frenche ſpeare, or a iauelyn.
                  
                     Matertera, an aunte or mothers ſyſter.
                  
                     Mathematicus, he that is cunnynge in aulgryme, muſyke, geometry, and aſtronomy.
                  
                     Matheſis, & mathema, lernyng by a demonſtracyon.
                  
                     Matralia, the ſolemne feaſtes of Matuta, called the mother of goddes.
                  
                     Matreſco, ſcere, to be lyke a mother.
                  
                     Matricida, he that kylleth his mother.
                  
                     Matrimonium, wedlocke, matrimonie.
                  
                     Matrix, cis, the mother or matrice in a woman, in the whyche the chylde is conceiued. alſo matrix is any female kynde that concenieth and beareth. Alſo the citie in a countrey, where as is the archbiſhops ſee is callyd matrix vrbs, whiche in greke is callid Metropolis.
                  
                  
                     Matrona, a wyfe. alſo the name of a ryuer in Burbon.
                  
                     Matronalis, pertaynynge to a wyfe.
                  
                     Matruelis, the ſonne or doughter of my mothers ſyſter.
                  
                     Matta, a matte.
                  
                     Mattiacae pilae, ſope balles.
                  
                     Mattiacum, a towne in Germanye.
                  
                     
                     Plaut. in Milite.
                     Matura aetas, full or perfyte age.
                  
                     Maturate, quickely. Iube marurate illam exire huc, Byd her come for the quickely.
                  
                     Mature, tymely, nor to ſoone, nor to late.
                  
                     Matureſco, ſcere, to be rype.
                  
                     Matutitas, tatis, rypenes in all thynge, and as it were perfection.
                  
                     Maturo, are, to make rype or perfyte, to do a thynge perfectly in due tyme & meaſure: ſometyme to do a thyng ſpedily or quickly.
                  
                     Maturus, a, um, rype, perfite, ſomtime it ſignifieth aged. Maturus homo, an aged man.
                  
                     Matuta, the mornynge, or morowe.
                  
                     Matutinus, a, um, of the morowe.
                  
                     Mauors, ortis, Mars.
                  
                     Mauortius, a, um, pertayninge to Mars.
                  
                     Mauritania, Moriſke, or the countreye of Moores.
                  
                     Mauri, people called Moores.
                  
                     Mauſolus, the king of a realme callid Caria
                  
                     Mauſoleum, a ſepulchre or tombe, whiche Arthemiſia made for her huſbād Mauſolꝰ, which for the excellent warkmanſhip was accoūtid to be one of the meruailes of the worlde, & for the famouſnes therof, euery gret & notable ſepulchre is callid Mauſoleū
                     
                  
                  
                     Maxilla, the cheke bone.
                  
                     Maximus, a, ū, greateſt, or moſt in eſtimatiō.
                  
                     Maximates, the greatteſt men in auctoritie.
                  
                     Maximitas, tatis, auncient wryters vſed for greatneſſe.
                  
                     Maza, a cake made of floure and mylke.
                  
                     Mazaca, a cytie in Cappadocia vnder the hyll callid Argeus, nowe called Ceſaria.
                  
                     Mazeras, a ryuer in the mouthe of the ſee, called mare Hircanum.
                  
                  
                     Mazononiū, a platter wherin meat is caried
               
            
            
               
                  
                     ❧ M, ANTE E.
                  
                     MEapte, myne owne.
                  
                     Meatus, tus, a paſſage, a waye.
                  
                     Mecaſtor, a fourme of ſwearynge, as who ſayth, ſo Caſtor helpe me.
                  
                     Mechanicus, a craftes manne.
                  
                     Mechanica ars, a handy crafte.
                  
                     Mecoenas, aris, minion to Auguſtus the emperour, and bicauſe he was the ſupporter of great lerned men, all fauourers and ſuccourers of lerned men be ſo called.
                  
                     Meconis, a kynde of letuſe, which cauſeth a man to ſlepe.
                  
                     Mecon, in greke, is popye in englyſhe.
                  
                     Mecū, with me. Mecū facit, it maketh for my purpoſe. Mecū ſentit, he is of min opinion.
                  
                     Medea, wyfe vnto Iaſon, a witche and cruelle womanne.
                  
                     Medela, remedy by medicine.
                  
                     
                        Mederga, for erga,
                      towarde me.
                  
                     Medeor, eris, eri, to heale or cure.
                  
                     Media, a region in Aſia.
                  
                     Media vocabula, wordes whiche maye be taken in a good or ylle parte, as tempeſtas whiche ſignifieth tempeſt and tyme, facinus, a notable dede good or ylle, ualitudo, helth, or ſyckenes, and other lyke.
                  
                     Medianus, na, nū, that which is in the midle.
                  
                     Mediaſtinus, a drudge or lubber, which doth in the howſe all maner of vyle ſeruice, as ſwepe or clenſe the houſe, carie wodde to the kytchen, and other like drudgery.Budeus.
                  
                  
                     Mediaſtimus, a, um, the myddelmoſte.
                  
                     Mediaſtrinus, the ſeruant, whiche hath the rule of the hous vnder his maiſter.
                  
                     Medica, an herbe, whiche ſpecially nouryſheth horſes, and ones beinge ſowen, efteſones ſpringeth ten yeres continually, and commonly it is called Sylla.
                  
                     Medibile, in ſtate to be healed, curable.
                  
                     Medicabilis, le, curable.
                  
                     Medicamentarius, a phiſycion.
                  
                     Medicamentarius, a, um, pertaynyng to medicyne.
                  
                     Medicina, medicamen, medicamētum, a medicine. ſometyme it ſygnifieth poyſon.
                  
                     Medicinalis, le, medicynable.
                  
                     Medico, & medicor, aris, ari, to hele or cure.
                  
                     Medicus, a phiſytion.
                  
                     Medicus, ca, cum, pertaining to phiſike.
                  
                     Medimnus, a certayn meaſure of corne, cō
                     taynynge ſyxe tymes the meaſure callyd modius. Vide modium.
                  
                  
                     Mediocris, dlocre, meaſurable, in a meane, moderate.
                  
                     Mediocritas, tatis, a meane.
                  
                     Mediolanum, the chiefe citie of Lombardy, callyd Myllayne.
                  
                     Medioximus, a, um, meane, or in the middes
                  
                     Medipontus, an inſtrumente, wherwith ropes are made.
                  
                     Meditabundus, cerefull, ſtudiouſe.
                  
                     Meditariſe, to exerciſe hym ſelfe.
                  
                     Meditatè, ſtudiouſely,Plautus in 
                           •
                        tich. in Bacch, perfectelye on the fyngers endes.
                  
                     Meditatio, a thynkynge or dyuyſynge in thought. alſo an exerciſe, aſwell of minde, as of bodye.
                  
                     Meditatorius, a, um, whyche belongethe to medytation.
                  
                     Mediterraneus, in the myddel of the lande, and furtheſt from the ſee.
                  
                     Meditor, aris, ari, to thynke deepely, and in thynkynge to fynde out, to purpoſe, to lay ſnares, to ſynge or playe ſwetely.
                  
                     Meditrina, the goddeſſe of phiſyke.
                  
                     Meditrinalia, ceremonyes vſed by theym, whyche dranke muſte or newe wyne.
                  
                     Meditullium, the myddell.
                  
                     
                     Medius, a, um, the myddes equally diſtant from the extremytes. ſometyme meane.
                  
                     Medium commune, amonge all.
                  
                     Medius, a meane or mediatour betwene .ii. menne.
                  
                     Medius fidius, an othe, whiche althoughe ſomtyme it had a nother ſignification, yet may it nowe in a commune fourme of ſpekynge be vſed in this wiſe, by the faythe of my body: ſens Dius for Iupiter, and fidius for filius, be nowe out of vſe.
                  
                     Meduacus, a Ryuer aboute Venyce, called nowe Brent.
                  
                     Medulla, marowe, whiche is in bones.
                  
                     Plaut.
                     Medullo, are, to take out marowe, ſomtime to expreſſe vtterly. Narraiam rem nobis omnem, ati
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         emedulla, Tell and expreſſe vtterly to vs all the hole matter.
                  
                     Medullitus, innerly into the marowe.
                  
                     Meduſa, a lady, of whom fables do report, that her heares by Minerua were tourned in to adders, and they which behelde her were tourned into ſtones: whom Perſeus afterward ſlewe. ſhe is ſomtyme taken for one of the furtes of hell.
                  
                     Melanſilium, a certayne weapon to throwe.
                  
                     Maegabizi, prieſtes of Diana, whiche alway were gelded.
                  
                     Megaera, a furie or turmentour of hel, whiche Paynyms ſuppoſed dyd prouoke and 
                        ••
                     ere men to woodnes.
                  
                     Megaleſia, the feſtiual day, dedicate to Cybele, called the mother of goddes among Paynyms.
                  
                     Megalenſes, & megaleſia, playes to the honour of Cybele.
                  
                  
                     Megalium, a ſwete oyntement.
                  
                     
                        Megalop
                              •
                           epeia,
                      an honourable facyon in gyuynge or imployeng of great thynges, whych beſemeth a man of great courage.
                  
                     Megaloprepes, he that doth great thinges accordynge to his dignitie.
                  
                     Megara, a Cytie belongynge to Athenes. It was alſo the name of oone of Hercules wyues.
                  
                     Megaris, idis, a countrey in Achaia.
                  
                     Megiſtanes, whome we doo calle nobles or pieres of the realme.
                  
                     Meherclè, an othe ſworne by Hercules.
                  
                     Meio, iere, to pyſſe.
                  
                     Mel, mel is, hony.
                  
                     Mellene, a citie in Arcadia.
                  
                     Melampus, a mannes name.
                  
                     Melamphyllon, an herbe.
                  
                     Melancholia, melancolye.
                  
                     Melancoryphus, a byrde called a fynche.
                  
                     Melanthia, an herbe called alſo Nigella.
                  
                     Melamirus, a fyſhe hauynge a blacke taile.
                  
                     Plini.
                     Melandria, the leane partes of the fiſhe called Tunny.
                  
                     Melculum, a wanton worde ſpoken by louers vnto their paramours, my litel hony.
                  
                     Meleagrides, byrdes, whiche we doo calle hennes of Genny.
                  
                     Melegina, an yle in the Venecian ſee.
                  
                     Melenetus, a kynde of faukons very lytell of body, black and puiſſant, which haunteth mountaynes, and feedeth her byrdes alone, a merlyon as I ſuppoſe.
                  
                     Maelibeus, a ſhepardes name.
                  
                     Meliboea, a citie in Theſſaly.
                  
                     Meliceris, idis, a ſoore or ſkalle in the heed lyke a hony combe, out of the whiche cometh an humour lyke hony.
                  
                     Melicraton, wyne & hony ſodden togither.
                  
                     Melicerta, whome the gentyls dyd honour for one of the goddes of the ſee.
                  
                     Melicus, a muſycyan.
                  
                     Melilotos, an herbe called melilote.
                  
                     Melimela, ſwete appulles.
                  
                     Melina, a ſwete ſhalme.
                  
                     Melinus, na, num, whyte ruſſette, or a gynger coloure.
                  
                     Melioreſco, ſcere, to be better.
                  
                     Melipecta, meates made with honye.
                  
                     Melis, ſeu melius, a beaſte called a graye, a brocke, or a badger.
                  
                     Meliſphillon, ſmallache.
                  
                     Meliſſa, a woman, who with her ſyſter Amalthea, nouryſſhed Iupyter. It is alſo an herbe, commonly called baume.
                  
                     Melite, ſiue melita, an Ile lyeng betwene Italy and Epirus. Alſo a citie made by the Carthaginenſis.
                  
                     Melitites, a drynke made of hony and muſt, or newe wyne.
                  
                     Mellitones, places where bees be noriſhed.
                  
                     Melitaei canes, & melitenſes, were praty littel houndes, in the which ladies toke pleſure and delyte, whiche were brought out of the ſayde yle of Melite.
                  
                     Melites, a precyous ſtone of the colour of an orenge.
                  
                     Meliſſus, the name of hym, whiche dydde fyrſt ſacrifice vnto ydolles. alſo the name of an auuncient philoſopher.
                  
                     Mellium, a dogges coler.
                  
                     Mellarius, a hony man, or ſellar of hony.
                  
                     Mellarius, a, um, of honye.
                  
                     Mellatio, the tyme of driuynge of hyues, whan hony is taken out.
                  
                     Mellanū, new muſt, wherin hony is ſodden.
                  
                     Mellifico, care, to make hony.
                  
                     Mellificatio, makynge of honye.
                  
                     Mellificum, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Mellifluus, a, um, ſwete as honye.
                  
                     Melligo, ginis, a mell dewe, whiche falleth on leaues of trees, and ſomtime on corne.
                  
                     
                     Melliloquus, a ſweete ſpeaker.
                  
                     Melilla, my hony, my ſweetynge, a worde of wanton dalyers.
                  
                     Melliſones, they which doo practyſe dreſſynge of honye.
                  
                     Melliturgus, a warker or maker of hony.
                  
                     Mellitus, a, um, myxte with honye.
                  
                     Melitus, the name of hym, whiche accuſed Socrates.
                  
                     Melizonum, a confection made with honye clarifyed.
                  
                     Apitius.
                     Melleus, a, um, of hony. alſo ſwete, as Vox mellea, a ſwete voyce.
                  
                     Mellica, a kynde of poulſe, of the coloure of redde, of the fourme of Mylle.
                  
                     Melo, a ryuer callyd alſo Geon.
                  
                     Melodia, melodye.
                  
                     Melodes, he that ſyngeth cunnyngely, and ſwetely.
                  
                     Meloeſſa, an yle by Sicile, in the whyche was great plenty of ſhepe.
                  
                     Melomeli, whan apples, very rype & fayre, be conſerued in hony.
                  
                     Mellonia, uel Melona, callyd the goddeſſe of honye.
                  
                     Melos, odis, melodye, armonye.
                  
                     Melora, & melote, a ſhepes felle or ſkynne.
                  
                     Melpomene, one of the nyne Muſis.
                  
                     Membrana, parchement or velume, wherin men do write, alſo the ouermoſte ſkynne of any thynge.
                  
                     Membroſus, a, um, hauyng a great membre.
                  
                     Membraneus, a, um, the par hemente or velume.
                  
                     Membranulum, a ſmall membre.
                  
                     Membrare, to fourme membres.
                  
                     Membratim, by euery membre.
                  
                     Mēbratura, the ſetting or order of mēbres.
                  
                     Membrum, a membre.
                  
                     Memet, my ſelfe.
                  
                     Memini, I remembre.
                  
                     Memerylus, a lyttel tree lyke a citron tree.
                  
                     Mēnon, the ſonne of Thiton, whiche came to the ayde of the Troyans.
                  
                     Mēnoniae aues, byrdes, which were ſuppoſed to growe of the aſhes of Mēnon.
                  
                     Memor, oris, he that remembreth.
                  
                     Memorabilis, le, worthy remembraunce.
                  
                     Memoratus, tus, et Memoratio, a remembrynge.
                  
                     Memoria, memory, remembraunce.
                  
                     Memoriale, a thynge, whiche ſhulde be remembred.
                  
                     Memorioſus, he that hath a good memory.
                  
                     Memoriter, parfitely by hart, or with good remembraunce.
                  
                     Memoro, are, to remembre, ſomtyme to tel, or expounde, to recite or reherſe.
                  
                     Memphis, a great citie in Egipt.
                  
                     Memphiticus, of that citie.
                  
                     Memphe, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Mena, a lyttell fyſhe, blacke in ſemer, and white in wynter.
                  
                     Menechmi, the name of a comedy of Plaut.
                  
                     Menalippa, quene of Amazon, whom Hercules vaynquiſhed.
                  
                     Menapij, people of the coūtrey called Gellarlande, or Gylderlande.
                  
                     Menander, a famouſe poete, a wryter of comedies.
                  
                     Menaria, an Ile in the ſee betwene Carthage and Sicile.
                  
                     Menceps, he or ſhe, whiche is oute of her wytte.
                  
                     Menda, et Mendum, a faulte or vice in wrytynge.
                  
                     Mendarium, a lye.
                  
                     Mendaculum, a lyttell fault or lye.
                  
                     Mendax, acis, a lyar.
                  
                     Mendicabulum, beggynge.
                  
                     Mendaciloquus, a teller of lyes.
                  
                     Mendicitas, tatis, et Mēdicimoniū, beggery.
                  
                     Mendico, are, to begge.
                  
                     Mendicula, a certayne veſture.
                  
                     Mendicus, a beggar.
                  
                     Mendix, an offyce amonge the olde Italyans called Oſci.
                  
                     Meneletus, a byrde lyke to a ſmall egle.
                  
                     Memana aedificia, buyldynge outewarde in proſpectes or galeries.
                  
                     Menix, an Ile agaynſt the laſſe Affrica.
                  
                     Mens, tis, the hygheſt and chiefe parte of the mynde.
                  
                     Menſa, a table or bourd to eate on. ſomtime dyner or ſoupper.
                  
                     Menſarius, the banker or exchaungeour, of whom men do borow money vpon gayne, called exchaunge.
                  
                     Menſio, a meaſure.
                  
                     Menſis, a moneth.
                  
                     Menſtrualis, & menſtruus, a, um, pertaynyng to a monethe.
                  
                     Menſtruatus, ta, tum, that which hath floures lyke to women
                  
                     Menſtruum, a womans naturall purgation called floures.
                  
                     Menſtruus, a, um, that whiche hapneth euery moneth.
                  
                     Menſura, a meaſure.
                  
                     Menſurnus, a, um, monthly.
                  
                     Menta, et Mentula, the preuye membre of a manne.
                  
                     Mentagra, a dyſſeaſe, whiche couereth all the face with a ſkurfe.
                  
                     Mente captus, a madde manne.
                  
                     Mentha, an herbe called mynte.
                  
                     Menthaſtrum, wylde mynte.
                  
                     
                        Mentibor, for mentiar,
                      I ſhall make a lye.Plaut.
                  
                  
                     
                     Mentigo, a dyſſeaſe, whiche infectith beaſtes with ſcabbes aboute theyr mouthes and lyppes.
                  
                     Mentior, iris, iri, to lye.
                  
                     Mentoas, the famous ryuer, whiche is now called Danubius.
                  
                     Mentor, an excellent grauour of veſſel.
                  
                     Mentum, a chynne.
                  
                     Menus, a riuer in Germany.
                  
                     Meo, are, to go, to flowe.
                  
                     Sidonius.
                     Meo nomine, for my cauſe, on my behalfe.
                  
                     Mephiucus, ca, cum, ſtynkynge.
                  
                     Meatus, condutes or ways, wherby any humour floweth.
                  
                     Mephitis, a ſtenche or yl ſauour, which procedeth of corrupt water or licour, mixt with erthe.
                  
                     Meopte ingenio, by myn owne wytte.
                  
                     Meracus, ca, cum, et Merax, racis, pure without any mixture.
                  
                     Vinum meracum, wyne without any water.
                  
                     Mercalis, le, Vendible, or that, which maye be bought.
                  
                     Mercator▪ oris, euery byar, a marchaunt.
                  
                     Mercatura, the feate of marchaundyſe.
                  
                     Mercatus, tus, the act of byinge.
                  
                     Mercatus, ti, a market, or fayre.
                  
                     Mercatus, ta, tum, bought.
                  
                     Mercenarius, an hyred ſeruaunt.
                  
                     Mercenarius, a, um, that whiche maye be hyred.
                  
                     Merces, cis, marchaundiſe, ware, chaffer.
                  
                     Merces, cedis, wages, the reward of labour or ſeruice.
                  
                     Mercimonium, that whiche is tourned in byenge and ſellynge.
                  
                     Mercor, aris, ari, to bye for to ſel for gaynes. ſometymes to bie generally.
                  
                     Mercurialis, an herbe called mercury.
                  
                     Mercurius, was of the paynimes called god of Eloquence, and meſſager of Iupiter, it is the name of one of the ſeuen planettes.
                  
                     Merda, the excrement or ordure of a man or beaſte.
                  
                     Merdo, are, to expell or cure.
                  
                     Merenda, meate eaten at after noone, a collataion, a none m
                        •
                     le.
                  
                     Mereo, ere, et Mereor, eri, to take wages, to deſerue, to exerciſe a vile occupation. Mereor bene de te, I do ſomewhat for the, I d
                        •
                     ſerue to haue the my frende, or to haue thy fauour. Male mereor de te, I doo the diſpleaſure, I do yll deſerue thy fauour. Alſo Merere, to ſerue in warres. Merere ſtipendia, to take wagis as a ſouldyour, or to be a ſouldiour.
                  
                     Plautus in 
                           •
                        ilite.
                     Meretricié, hooriſhely.
                  
                     Meretricius, hooredome, or brothelry.
                  
                     Meretricium, a, ū, perteyning to brothelry.
                  
                     Meretricor, aris, ari, to lyue in brothelry, to playe the harlote.
                  
                     Meré, purely.
                  
                     Meretrix, icis, an harlot, or brothell.
                  
                     Mergae, pitcheforkes for to take vp ſheues.
                  
                     Mergites, gripes of corne.
                  
                     Mergi, vines, or other ſmall trees, whiche ar bowed and haue the toppes bowe wiſe tourned and ſet into the erthe.
                  
                     Mergo, ſi, gere, to drowne in the water.
                  
                     Mergulus, an inſtrument where the matche of a lampe is conteyned.
                  
                     Mergus, goris, a bukket to drawe vp water.
                  
                     Mergus, gi, a waterfoule called a dyue doppar, ſome do call it a foule of the ſee lyke to a gull, whiche dyueth vnder the water to take fiſhe.
                  
                     Meribibulus, he that drynketh moch wyne without water.
                  
                     Meridies, noonetyde.
                  
                     Meridianus, a, um, perteynyng to none.
                  
                     Meridio, are, et Meridior, ari, to dyne, to eate meate at noone, to ſlepe at none.
                  
                     Meridiatio, noone reſte.
                  
                     Meriſmos, a fygure called alſo dyſtributio, wherby the oration is diſtributed into ſō
                     dry ſentences.
                  
                     Meritò, worthily, with good cauſe.
                  
                     Merito, are, to be worthye, alſo to ſerue in warres.
                  
                     Meritorius, a, um, that whiche is let or ſette for aduantage.
                  
                     Meritoria taberna, a houſe wherinto a man is receyued for his money.
                  
                     Meritoria, howſes or ſhoppes let to hyre.
                  
                     Meritum, a benefite, a deſerte good or ylle.
                  
                     Meritus, ta, tum, deſerued, conuenient.
                  
                     Meritus, a mountayne in the thirde part of Europa beyonde Grece.
                  
                     Meroe, an yle on the great ryuer of Nilus in Egipte.
                  
                     Mero, was in ſcorne the name of Nero, bicauſe he was ſo great a drynker of wyne.
                  
                     Merobiba, ſhe that drynkethe wyne without water.
                  
                     Merops, a byrde which doth eate bees.
                  
                     Meroctes, a lyttell ſtone of the coloure of leekes, whiche ſweateth a lyckour lyke to mylke.
                  
                     Meropes, men of dyuers languages.
                  
                     Meropus, a moūtain in Grece by Theſſaly.
                  
                     Meros, a hylle of Inde, at the foote wherof is the citie callyd Niſa.
                  
                     Merſo, are, to drowne often.
                  
                     Merto, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Merula, a byrde.
                  
                     Merum, wyne vnlayde, without water.
                  
                     Merus, a, um, ſoole, mere, pure.
                  
                     Merx, cis, one kynd of marchandyſe.
                  
                     
                     Meſa, a ryuer whiche runneth by Braband and the lande of Luke and Gellar, called the Maſe.
                  
                     Meſapia, a countrey called alſo Apulia.
                  
                     Meſauli, entrees betwene the haule and the parlour.
                  
                     Meſia, a Countrey ioynynge to Hungrye, Myſe.
                  
                     Meſochorus, he that plaieth on a flute or other pype in the myddes of the daunſers.
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        udeus.
                     Meſonauta, a drudge in a ſhyppe, or a ſhyp page, whiche dothe all vyle ſeruice in the ſhyppe.
                  
                     Meſoleucos, a preciouſe ſtone, blacke, hauynge a whyte ſtrake in the myddes.
                  
                     Meſomelas, a whyte ſtone, hauyng a blacke lyne in the myddes.
                  
                     Meſonyxion, midnyght.
                  
                     Meſopotamia, a countreye lyinge betwene the two greatte ryuers Euphrates, and Tigris.
                  
                     Meſpilus a medlar tree.
                  
                     Meſpilum, a fruite called a medlar.
                  
                     Meſſala, a noble oratour of Rome.
                  
                     Meſſalina, wyfe to the emperour Claudius a woman of vnſaciable lechery.
                  
                     Meſſana, a citie in Sicile.
                  
                     Meſſene, a citie in Grece.
                  
                     Meſsias, Chriſte.
                  
                     Meſsis, harueſt, ſometyme it ſygnifieth the corne or the grapes newe mowen or gathered.
                  
                     Meſsio, onis, a reapynge
                  
                     Meſſor, oris, a reaper.
                  
                     Meſſorius, meſſoria, rium, perteynynge to reapynge.
                  
                     Meta, a but, or pricke to ſhote at, ſomtyme a marke or gowle in the felde, where vnto men or horſes do runne, ſomtyme a boūde in landes. Alſo a reyke of corne or heye, alſo the lower part of a myll.
                  
                     Meta lactis, a Cheſe.
                  
                     Metabaſis, a paſſage.
                  
                     Metabole, chaunge.
                  
                     Metagonium, a promontory or mountayne lyinge into the ſee, whiche diuideth Affrica fro Numidia.
                  
                     Metalepſis, a fygure, whereby a worde is put from his commune ſignification.
                  
                     Mettalli, hyred ſouldiours.
                  
                     Metallici, they which do dygge and warke mettall out of the mynes, wherin mettall is founde.
                  
                     Metallum, mettalle.
                  
                     Metamorphoſis, cos, a tranſformation or chaungynge of fygure.
                  
                     Metaphora, a tranſlation of wordes frome their propre ſygnifycation.
                  
                     Metaplaſmus, a fygure callyd tranſformation. It is a tranſlatyng of wordes being in proſe into a fourme of meter, eyther for neceſſitie, or to augmente the elegancye.
                  
                     Metapontū, a citie in the realme of Naples.
                  
                     Metempſychoſis, the tranſpoſyng of ſoules after the opinion of the Pythagoriens, out of one body into an other body.
                  
                     Metatheſis, where one letter is tranſpoſed from one place in a worde into an nother as Tymber Tymbre.
                  
                  
                     Metaurus, et metaurum, a ryuer of Vmbria, whiche runneth into Flaminia.
                  
                  
                     Metellus, the propre name of dyuers noble Romaynes.
                  
                     Meteoria, ſpeculation in high thynges.
                  
                     Meteorologus, he that is ſtudious in ſuche ſpeculation.
                  
                     Meteora, are bokes of Ariſtotle, wherin he treateth of ſterres, and ſuche other celeſtiall thynges.
                  
                     Meteoroſcopus, a beholder of high thingis
                  
                     Methodus, a compendious or redy way, or a rule certayne to lerne by any ſcience.
                  
                     Metonymia, a fygure called denomination, as Bacchus for wyne, Venus for lechery, Cupido for loue.
                  
                     Methymna, a citie in the yle of Leſboe.
                  
                     Meticuloſus, temerouſe or fearefull.
                  
                     Metior, tiris, tiri, to mete or meaſure, to giue by meaſure, to paſſe ouer.
                  
                     Meto, meſſui, metere, to reape.
                  
                     Metona, a towne in Grece called Modon.
                  
                     Metor, aris, ari, to ſette boundes, to meaſure lande, to diſpoſe.
                  
                     Metopion, oyle of almondes, alſo a tree in Affrica, whiche deſtylleth downe gumme lyke to roſyn.
                  
                     Metopoſcopus, he that conſydereth a mās face, and therby iudgeth his condycions or affectes.
                  
                     Metreta, a meaſure for lyckour, whiche is alſo called Amphora, and contayned euery way ſquare one foote.
                  
                     Metropolis, the chiefe citie.
                  
                     Metropolitanus, a man of that citie.
                  
                     Metropolites, the biſhop of the chiefe citie.
                  
                     Metrum, a verſe.
                  
                     Metuo, tui, tuere, to feare or dreade with tremblynge.
                  
                     Metus, tus, feare, drede.
                  
                     Metys, the refuſe, of waxe.
                  
                     Meu, an herbe.
                  
                     
                        Meuani
                              •
                           ,
                      a citie in the part of Italy, callyd Vmbria, wherein Propertius the poete was borne.
                  
                     Meneuia, a citie in wales called ſaint Dauid.
                  
                     Meus, a, meum, myne.
                  
                     Meum eſt, it is my duetie or my parte.
               
            
            
               
               
                  ¶M, ANTE I.
                  
                     MI, to me.
                  
                     Mica, a crumme of breade.
                  
                     Mico, care, to gliſten, or ſhyne. Diggnus qui cū in tenebris mices, is applied to one, whiche is reputed to be an honeſte man, and a truſty, whiche wyll kepe touch and deceyue no man. It may be this wiſe tranſlated, in a commune fourme of ſpeakynge, He is one, with whom thou mayſt aſſuredly bargayne. alſo to holde vp now one fynger, nowe two, as men do whanne they trete or bargain togyther by ſignes.
                  
                     Miconium, an herbe called Popy.
                  
                     Microcoſmas, a lyttell worlde.
                  
                     Micrologia, curioſitie aboute thynges of no valour.
                  
                     Micrologus, a lyttell communication.
                  
                     Micropſichia, feble courage, faynt harted.
                  
                     Micropſichi, they which haue faint hartis.
                  
                     Micturio, ire, to pyſſe.
                  
                     Mictytis, poore folkes potage.
                  
                     Mida, a worme bredynge in beanes.
                  
                     Midas, a kynge of Phrigie, who excellyd all other in rycheſſe.
                  
                     Miaeſa, a towne in Macedonia.
                  
                     
                        Mig
                              •
                           o, are,
                      to remoue frome one place, to dwell in an other.
                  
                     
                        Miles, mi
                              ••
                           tis,
                      a man of warre, a ſouldiour.
                  
                     
                        Mil
                              ••
                           pte,
                      Cato vſed for mihi ipſi.
                  
                  
                     Miletus, a citie in Grece.
                  
                     Mileſius, a, um, of that citie.
                  
                     Militatis tua, the hygh way.
                  
                     Militariter, warrely.
                  
                     Militia, warre. ſommetyme the exerciſe of warre.
                  
                     Milito, tare, to goo on warfare, or to be in warres.
                  
                     Milium, a ſmalle grayne callyd Myll.
                  
                     Mille & millia, a thouſande.
                  
                     Millepeda, a worme hauynge a great numbre of feete.
                  
                     Millearium, a myle, alſo a cawdron, alſo a pyller in Rome, wherein was grauen all the wayes of Italye.
                  
                     Milliarius, a, um, of a thouſande weight.
                  
                     Millies, a thouſande tymes.
                  
                     Millus, a maſtyues colar, made of lether with nayles.
                  
                     Milo, onis, the name of one, whiche at the game of Olimpus, with his bare hande, ſlewe a bulle, and after caried hym a furlonge, and the ſame daye eate hym euery morſel. It was alſo a noble Romayne, for whom Tullie made an oration, conteining incomparable eloquence.
                  
                     Miluina tibia, a cornette, or ſmalle ſhaulme.
                  
                     Miluus, & miluius, a kyte. There is alſo a fyſhe and a ſterre of the ſame name.
                  
                     Miluinus, na, num, of a kyte, or lyke a kyte.
                  
                     Mimallones, women dedicate to the foliſhe ceremonies of Bacchus.
                  
                     Mimas, a mountayne of Thracia.
                  
                     Mimus, a bourder or rayler, which in mockynge other men in geſture and countenaunce, dothe folowe them, faynynge to be the ſame perſones, whome they do reproue. Mimi, be verſes counterfaytynge moche wantonnes without any reuerēce, hauynge not withſtandynge ſomme wyſe ſentences myngled therwith.
                  
                     Mimicus, ca, cum, of ſuche wanton facion.
                  
                     Mimographus, a wryter of ſuche wanton matters.
                  
                     Mina, & mna, was the pounde of Athenes, which in weight cōtained .lxxv. dragmas: in money it conteined a hundred dragmas or olde poyſe grotes, wherof .viii. wente to one ounce.
                  
                     Minae, arum, thretenynges. alſo battylmentes of walles.
                  
                     Minax, acis, full of thretnynges.
                  
                     Minaciter, thretnyngly.
                  
                     Mincius, a ryuer of the Venecians.
                  
                     Minei, people in Arabia, nigh to the red ſee
                  
                     Minera, & mineralia, are of ſomme vſed for mynes, out of the which mettal is digged.
                  
                     Minerua, called goddeſſe of doctryne and wyſedom, which was alſo named Pallas.
                  
                     Minerual, & mineruale, a rewarde gyuen ſomtime by ſcholers vnto their mayſters, in meate or drynke.
                  
                     Mingo, gere, to make water, to pyſſe.
                  
                     Miniacius, a, um, redde, of ſinople colour.
                  
                     Minime, & minimum, leſte. minime gentiū, leſte in all mens opinions. ſometyme minime ſignifieth no, in no wiſe. minime doctus vnlerned. minime ſapiens, vnwyſe. minime mirum, lyttell meruayle.
                  
                     Minio, are, to dye redde.
                  
                     Miniati libri, limned bokes, hauyng letters of dyuers colours.
                  
                     Miniſter, tri, a ſeruant.
                  
                     Miniſterium, ſeruice, ſometyme generallye all warke. ſomtyme miniſteria be ſeruātis.
                  
                     Miniſtro, are, to ſerue, to gyue a thynge in doinge ſeruyce.
                  
                     Minor, aris, ari, to thrette.
                  
                     Minitor, aris, ari, to thrette ſoore.
                  
                     Minium, Synople or redde leade.
                  
                     Minius, a ryuer in Spayne.
                  
                     Minoa, the name of a citie in Sycile, of an other in the ile called Amorgos, by Sicile
                  
                     Minos, was the kynge of Crete, and gaue to theym lawes, whome paynyms for his excellente iuſtice, ſuppoſed to be chyefe Iudge of helle.
                  
                     
                     Minthos, bunge or ordure.
                  
                     Minotaurus, was a monſter kepte in Crete, halfe a man, halfe a bulle.
                  
                     Minturnae, a citie in Campania.
                  
                     Minuo, ere, to myniſhe.
                  
                     Minurizo, are, to ſynge ſmalle, or to feyne in ſyngynge.
                  
                     Minus, leſſe.
                  
                     Minutal, a meate made with chopped herbes, a iuſſell.
                  
                     Minutarius, a ſellar of tryfles or ſmalle haberdaſhe ware.
                  
                     Minutatim, pece mele, in gobettes.
                  
                     Minutim, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Minutia, the ſmalleſt thing that may be ſene.
                  
                     Minutus, a, um, miniſhed.
                  
                     Minyae, a towne in Theſſalia.
                  
                     Miniariae, mines, they be alſo vaynes of metall, out of the whiche is taken ſynope.
                  
                     Mira, wonders or meruayles.
                  
                     Mirabilis, le, meruaylous, wonderfull.
                  
                     Miraculum, a miracle, a thynge excedynge nature, or commune reaſon.
                  
                     Mirifico, care, to make wonderfull.
                  
                     Mirificus, ca, cum, wonderfully done, mervaylouſe.
                  
                     Mirmeciae, wertes in the priuie partes.
                  
                     Mirmillones, chalengers at fightynge with ſwordes.
                  
                     Miror, aris, ari, to meruayle, to like a thing.
                  
                     Mirum in modum, in a meruaylouſe facion.
                  
                     Miſanthropos, he that hateth the company of men.
                  
                     Miſcellanea, a myxture of dyuers thynges.
                  
                     Vide compo
                           •
                        .
                     Miſceo, cui, ſcere, to myxe or meddyll together, to confounde together, to trouble or to do a thynge out of order or reaſon, ſometyme it ſygnyfyeth to ſerue one with drynke.
                  
                     Miſellus, a lyttell wretche.
                  
                     Miſer, eri, a wretche, ſometyme innocent.
                  
                     Miſerabilis, le, myſerable, wretched, lamentable.
                  
                     Miſerabiliter, miſerably, lamentably.
                  
                     Miſerandus, to be pitied.
                  
                     Miſerator, he that dothe an acte of charytie on hym whom he pytieth.
                  
                     Miſericors, dis, mercifull.
                  
                     Miſeré, miſerably, pitiouſely, vnhappyly.
                  
                     Miſerè, amat, he loueth excedyngely.
                  
                     Miſerior, eris, miſereri, to haue pitie.
                  
                     Miſereſco, ſcere, to be moued with pitie.
                  
                     Miſeret me, I haue pitie.
                  
                     Miſeretur, I am moued with pitie.
                  
                     Miſeria, miſery, infelicitie.
                  
                     Miſeritudo, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Miſericordia, pitie.
                  
                     Miſericorditer, pitiefully.
                  
                     Miſeriter, miſerably.
                  
                     Miſeror, aris, ari, to haue pitie.
                  
                     Miſogynia, an hater of women.
                  
                     Miſſenus, an hyll in Campania.
                  
                     Miſsiculo, are, to ſende often.
                  
                     Miſsile, all thynge that is throwen.
                  
                     Miſsilia, thynges whiche the auncient emperours were wonte to caſte amonge the people, as breade, cakes, ſwete oyntemēt, and ſuche lyke thynges, which was done in the Theatre, in the feaſtes, called Saturnalia.
                  
                     Miſsio, a meſſage, alſo leaue to departe.
                  
                     Miſsito, tare, to ſende often.
                  
                     Miſſus, a, um, ſente.
                  
                     Miſſus, us, a courſe, whan one thynge commeth in a diſtance after a nother, a turne.
                  
                     Miſſum facere, to omit or paſſe ouer a thing, alſo to gyue leaue to departe.
                  
                     Mitellum, a lyttel miter.
                  
                     Mitis, mite, mieke, ſymple, quiete.
                  
                     Miteſco, ſcere, to waxe tame or quiet, ſomtyme to waxe rype.
                  
                     Mithra, the Perſians do call the ſonne, and alſo the chiefe prieſt of the ſonne.
                  
                     Mithrax, a ſtone of the colour of a roſe, but agaynſt the ſonne he is chaungeable.
                  
                     Mithriaca ſacra, ceremonies of the ſonne.
                  
                     Mithridates, a puiſſaunt kynge of Ponthus in Aſia.
                  
                     Mithridaticum, a medicine lyke to tryakle, called Mitridate.
                  
                     Mithylenae, arū, a citie in the ile of Leſbos.
                  
                     Mitigo, are, to mitigate, to ſwage.
                  
                     Mitifico, to pacifye or make quyete.
                  
                     Mitra, a myter. It was alſo a tyre of womennes heedes.
                  
                     Mitto, miſi, mittere, to ſende, to leaue or lay aparte, to gyue. Mirtere ſanguinem, to let bloudde. Mitteſanguis, a bloudde lettyng, or a bloudſhede.
                  
                     Mitterin, an Iyle ſyxe dayes ſaylynge oute of Englande, wherein is greatte plentie of tynne.
                  
                     Mittas frenum affectibus, Brydelle thyne affections.
                  
                     Mitte hunc ire, Lette hym goo.
                  
                     Mitte hanc noxiam, Forgyue me that faute.Cice. pro Cluencio. Aſc. Ped.
                  
                  
                     Mittere in conſilium, to lette the iuges departe to gyue ſentence, after that the oratour hath finiſhed his oration, or the lawyer his plee.
                  
                     Mixtarius, a cuppe, wherin wyne is alayde with water.
               
            
            
               
                  M, ANTE N.
                  
                     MNa, idem quod mina.
                  
                  
                     Mnemoſyne, memory.
                  
                     Mneſterae, wowars.
                  
                     Mneſtheus, the name of a Troyane.
               
            
            
               
               
                  ¶M, ANTE O.
                  
                     MOab, a citie of Araby. alſo the name of oone of the ſonnes of Loth, of whom the peple are called Moabtae.
                  
                  
                     Mobilis, le, mouable, ſone moued.
                  
                     Moderatus, ta, tum, moderate, temperate.
                  
                     Moderator, oris, a gouernoure,
                  
                     
                        Modero
                              •
                           , aris, ari, et Modero, are,
                      to gouerne, to rule, to ſette a meaſure in thynges, to moderate.
                  
                     Moderatio, moderation, temperaunce.
                  
                     Modeſtia, modeſtie, temperaunce.
                  
                     Modeſte, temperately, ſobrely, aduiſedly.
                  
                     Modetius, temperate, well aduiſed.
                  
                     Modialis, le, that which conteineth a buſhel
                  
                     
                        Modi
                              •
                           us, ca, cū,
                      which excedeth not, meaſurable, ſometyme lyttell or fewe.
                  
                     
                        Modi
                              •
                           e,
                      meanely.
                  
                     
                        Modif
                              •
                           cor, caris, cari,
                      to take the meaſure of a thynge.
                  
                     Modiolus, a buckette, where with water is drawen out of a well: or a pot faſtned to a whele, whiche bryngeth vp water, & poureth it out.
                  
                     Modiparatores, men ordeyned to ſee meaſure kepte.
                  
                     Modius, a buſhell: it was proprelye a meaſure of daye thynges, whiche conteyned .xvi. Sextarios, vide poſtea in ſextario.
                  
                  
                     Modo, newe, nowe late, ſomtyme it ſignyf
                        ••
                     th ſo that. Non reſert, modo id faciat, It maketh no mattier, ſoo that he doo it, alſo 
                        •••
                     ly.
                  
                     Modo noſtro, after our facion.
                  
                     Modulor, aris, ari, to make or doo a thynge by numbre and meaſure, alſo to ſynge.
                  
                     Modulus, et Modulamen, a ſonge, a modulation, the tyme in ſyngynge.
                  
                     Modus, maner, meaſure, furme, facion, way, quantite,Ci. ad At. Columel. ende. Etſi nihil ſcripſit, niſi de modo agri, although he wrote nothyng but of the quantitie of the felde.
                  
                     Moechor, aris, ari, to commytte auoutry.
                  
                     Plautus in Caſtel.
                     Moechus, an auoutrer, or lechour.
                  
                     Moechiſſo, are, to commytte auoutry.
                  
                     Moenia, walles of a towne or caſtell.
                  
                     Plautus in bacch.
                     Moenitus, ta, tum, walled.
                  
                     Moereo, ere, to be ſorowfull.
                  
                     Moero, are, to make one ſadde and heuy.
                  
                     Moeror, oris, ſorowe.
                  
                     Moeſtitia, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Moeſta, a prouince in Aſia nygh to Pontus.
                  
                     Moeſtiter, heuyly, ſorowfully.
                  
                     Moero, are, to make one ſorye.
                  
                     Moeſius, a, um, ſory or ſorowfull.
                  
                     Moeſio, are, Moeſtifico, care, to make ſorowfull.
                  
                     Moga, a countreye in Aſia, called nowe Ceſaria.
                  
                     Moguntia, a noble Citie in Germany, called Menſe.
                  
                     Mola, a myl, it is alſo a great pece of fleſhe without ſhape, growen in a woman, whiche cauſeth them ſomtyme to thynke, that they be with chylde, it is alſo a cake made of mele and ſalte.
                  
                     Molaris, a cheke tothe.
                  
                     Molaris, re, et Molarius, ia, um, perteyning to a myll.
                  
                     Molendinarius, ia, um, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Molarius equus, an horſe, whiche dryueth about a malte myll.
                  
                     Molendinarius, a myllar.
                  
                     Moles, a thynge that is verye greatte and weightye: ſommetyme it is taken for diffycultie.
                  
                     Moleſtia, griefe.
                  
                     Moleſta tunica, a garment which was myxt with ſome mater, whiche gathered fyre, putte on ſome perſones that ſhulde ſuffre deathe.
                  
                     Moleſtè, greuouſely.
                  
                     Moleſto, are, to greue, to offende, to do diſpleaſure to one.
                  
                     Moleſtus, a, um, that whiche greueth, offendeth, or diſcontenteth.
                  
                     Moletrina, a morter or querne, wherin any thynge maye be grounde with the hande.
                  
                     Molimen, et molimentum, that whiche we go about and endeuour vs to do.
                  
                     Molior, iris, iri, to moue, to be moued, or ſtyrted to doo a thynge. moliri claſſem, to prepare a nauy. moliri iter, to perfourme a iourneye. moliri habenas, to rule. moliri inſidias, to laye ſnares, to laye in awayte. Moliri arcem, to buylde a fortreſſe. Moliri bellum, to make warre. Moliri is ſomtime to deuyſe or inuent, alſo to go about to do a thynge, to make, to be taryed or lette.
                  
                     Moliri morā, to tary.
                  
                     Molitor, oris, a myllar.
                  
                     Molleſco, ſcere, to waxe ſofte, to be pacified from wrathe.
                  
                     Moleſtra, a ſhepes fell.
                  
                     Mollicies, et mollicia, ſoftneſſe, tendernes, delicateneſſe, womanlyneſſe.
                  
                     Mollicina, fyne clothe or ſilke.
                  
                     Molliculus, la, tender delycate,
                  
                     Mollifico, to make ſofte or tender.
                  
                     Mollio, ire, to make ſofte or tender, to pacific or appayſe, to make wanton or tēder.
                  
                     Mollis, ſofte, tender. molle ingenium, a wit whiche lyghtely taketh. mollis homo, a man effemynate, or womanly, not hardye or conſtant of wytte, inuolued an wanton pleaſures and ſenſuall appetite, ſomtyme mollis ſygnifieth rype, alſo remiſſe, ſometyme

pleaſaunt, alſo eaſy to be pleaſed.
                  
                     Molliter, gentylly with good wylle, eaſily, delycately.
                  
                     Mollitudo, inis, ſoftnes and gentylnes.
                  
                     Molluſca, a nutte with a ſofte ſhale, a fylberde.
                  
                     Molluſcum, the wenne of a tree.
                  
                     Molo, molui, lire, to grynde.
                  
                     Molochinus color, a colour like to the floures of mallowes.
                  
                     Molorthus, a plumrule, ſuche as maſons and carpenters doo occupie in ſquarynge of ſtone and tymber.
                  
                     Moloſſa gens, people in the parte of Grece called Epirus.
                  
                     Moloſſus, a maſtiue dogge. it is alſo a fote in meter.
                  
                     Molothros, a kynde of white vynes.
                  
                     Molucrum, a ſquare piece of tymber, wheron the paynyms dyd ſacrifyce. It is alſo the trendyll of a myll. Alſo the ſwellynge of a womans bealy, whiche dothe happen as well to maidens, as to wyues.
                  
                     Molybdena, an herbe called alſo Plūbago, it is alſo the oore of leade or ſyluer.
                  
                     Molybditis, the ſpume or fome of leade.
                  
                     Momentaneus, a, um, that whyche durethe but a lyttell whyles, or ſhortly altereth.
                  
                     Momentarius, a, um, that whiche is done in a lyttell ſpace.
                  
                     Momentum, the leſte parte of tyme, which can not be aſſigned, a moment.
                  
                     Momus, called the god of reprehencion.
                  
                     Momo ſatisfacere, to contente hym, whom almoſte nothynge may pleaſe.
                  
                     Momo iudice decertare, to contende afore a rigorous and extreme iudge.
                  
                     Monachus, a ſolytarie perſon, all be it that it is vſed for a monke.
                  
                     Monachris, a mountayne in Archadia.
                  
                     Monarcha, a prynce, whiche reuleth alone without piere or companyon, monarche.
                  
                     Monarchia, the rule of one monarchie.
                  
                     Monas, monadis, the numbre of one, vnitie.
                  
                     Monaſterium, a place ſolytarie.
                  
                     Monedula, a byrde callydde a Choughe or Cadeſſe.
                  
                     Moneo, monere, to warne, to putte in remembraunce.
                  
                     Monitor, toris, he that warneth a man, or putteth hym in remembraunce.
                  
                     Moneta, money, alſo the name of Iuno.
                  
                     Monetalis, le, pertaynynge to money.
                  
                     Monetarius, a maker of money, a coyner.
                  
                     Monile, a colar or bee, whiche women vſe to weare aboute their neckes, It is alſo a poytrell of a horſe.
                  
                     Monitio, warnynge.
                  
                     Monitus, tus, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Monitorius, a, um, that whiche doth warne, or exhorte.
                  
                     Monna, an Ile pertaynynge to Englande, whiche ſome do ſuppoſe to be Angle ſey, ſomme Manne, betwene Lancaſter and Irelande.
                  
                     Monobeli, they whiche haue a longe thing lyke to ſpyttes. Alſo they that be veraye hyghe in perſonnage and aboue other. Lampridius in uita Alex.
                  
                  
                     Monochordium, an Inſtrumente, hauynge manye ſtrynges of oone ſowne, ſauynge that with ſmalle pieces of cloth, the ſonnes be diſtincte, as Clauycordes be.
                  
                     Monoechus, a hauen of Liguria.
                  
                     Monoceros, otis, an Vnycorne.
                  
                     Monoculus, a man hauynge but one eye.
                  
                     Monodia, a lamentable or mournyng ſong, ſuche as is ſongen in funeralles.
                  
                     Monodos, was a manne, whyche in ſtede of teethe, hadde but oone boone, lyke as kynge Pirrhus hadde.
                  
                     Monogamus, he that neuer hadde but one wyfe.
                  
                     Monogammi, menne leane and yuelle coloured.
                  
                     Monologium, a longe tale of one mattier.
                  
                     Monomachia, a battayle, wherein oonely two menne doo fyghte.
                  
                     Monomachus, he that fyghteth alone.
                  
                     Monophagia, a meale of one onely meate or dyſhe.
                  
                     Monopodium, a table ſette on one foote or treſtylle.
                  
                     Monopolium, where one manne ingroſſeth thynges, to haue all in his owne hande, that no manne maye gayne, but he onely. It maye be alſo one countrey or market, that taketh away the gaynes from other countreyes or markettes.
                  
                     Monoptaton, a worde hauyng but one caſe.
                  
                     Monoſceli, men in India, whiche haue but one legge, ſo greate, that therwith they couer them ſelfes from the ſonne.
                  
                     Monoſtelon, where as is but one pyller.
                  
                     Monotropos, ſolitarie, of one facion alway.
                  
                     Monoxylon, a bote made in oone piece of tymber.
                  
                     Mons, tis, a mountayne or hylle.
                  
                     Mons feratus, a countrey in Italye.
                  
                     Monſtrificus, a, um, monſtruous.
                  
                     Monſtro, are, to ſhewe.
                  
                     Monſtrum, a monſter, that which excedeth or lacketh in naturall fourme or order.
                  
                     Monſtruoſus, monſtruoſa, ſtruoſum, monſtruous.
                  
                     Montanus, a, um, of a mountayne.
                  
                     Monticulus, a lyttell hylle.
                  
                     Montigena, borne on a hylle.
                  
                     
                     Montinagus, wandringe by hilles.
                  
                     Montoſus, a, um, full of hilles.
                  
                     Monumentum, a remembrance of ſome notable acte, as ſepulchres, images, pylars, grete ſtones, inſcriptions, bookes, and other lyke: whereby any thinge excellent, concernynge grete wittes, kunnynge, entrepriſe in armes, puyſſaunce, or rycheſſe is remembred.
                  
                     Monycha, chae, the name of ſaynct Auſtens mother.
                  
                     Monychus, a gyant, one of the Centaures.
                  
                     Monyma, the wyfe of kynge Mithridate, whiche after that her huſbande was vainquiſſhed, killed her ſelfe.
                  
                     Mopſopia, the contray of Athenes.
                  
                     Mopſus, the name of a Poete.
                  
                     Mora, taryenge, leyſar.
                  
                     Moralis, le, pertayninge to maners.
                  
                     Moramentum, taryenge, or abode.
                  
                     Moratus, inſtructed in good maners.
                  
                     Morbidus, a, um, ſycke or ſcabbed.
                  
                     Morbiſicus, ca, cum, that which cauſeth diſcaſe or ſickeneſſe.
                  
                     Morbus, ſickeneſſe, diſeaſe, a ſore.
                  
                     Morbus animae, a vice inueterate and harde to be cured, as ambition, auarice.
                  
                     Morbus regius, the yelow iaundyſe.
                  
                     Mordax acis, he that doeth byte, be it with the teeth, or with langage.
                  
                     Mordeo, momordi, dere, to byte, to detract, or rebuke vehemently.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈1 paragraph〉
                        
                     
                     Mordere frenum, to gnawe on the brydell, which is ſpoken where it ſignifieth one to repugne againſt ſeruitude or bondage.
                  
                     Mordicibus, with bytinges.
                  
                     Mordico, care, to hurt with bytinge.
                  
                     Mordicus, bytinge harde and faſte, as a man holdeth a thinge.
                  
                     Mordicus tenere, to holde faſt, to perſiſt obſtinately in an opinion or ſentence.
                  
                     Moribundus, dyenge.
                  
                     Moriger, geri, obedient.
                  
                     Morigeror, aris, ari, to obaye, to do as a man bedeth, to conforme one mannes maners to anothers.
                  
                     Morini, people in fraunce, dwellynge about Turwan.
                  
                     Morio, onis, a foole.
                  
                     Morior, iris, & eri, moriri, & mori, to dye.
                  
                     Morologus, he that ſpeketh treatably, ſomtyme wordes treatably ſpoken: ſometyme it ſignifieth him, that ſpeketh foolyſhely.
                  
                     Moror, aris, ari, to tary or abyde, to let, or cauſe to tary.
                  
                     Moros, a foole.
                  
                     Moroſus, waywarde, dyuerſe in condicions, whome no man can pleaſe, more curiouſe than nedeth.
                  
                     Morotis, & Moroſis, a madneſſe or freneſy, where a man loſeth his memory.
                  
                     Mors, tis, deth.
                  
                     Morſicatim, bytynge one another.
                  
                     Morſiuncula, a lytle bitte or ſnacke.
                  
                     Morſus, us, a bytt with the teeth, a taunt in ſpekinge.
                  
                     Morſus, a, um, bitten.Plinius.
                  
                  
                     Mortalis, le, mortall.
                  
                     Mortarium, a mortar, wherin thinges are, brayed or grounden.
                  
                     Morticina caro, moren fleſhe, whiche dyeth by it ſelfe, carrayne.
                  
                     Morticini, cornes which be on mennes fete.
                  
                     Morticinum, corrupt.
                  
                     Mortiferus, a, um, which cauſeth any thinge to dye.
                  
                     Mortuale, pertayninge to deed men.
                  
                     Mortuū mare, a grete mere in Syria, where in no heuy thinge may ſynke.
                  
                     Morula, a lytel taryenge.
                  
                     Morus, a Mulbery tree, and a brembyl that beareth blacke beryes.
                  
                     Morum, a Mulbery, or blacke bery.
                  
                     Mos, moris, a maner, a cōdiciō, alſo cuſtome.
                  
                     Morem gerere, to obey.
                  
                     Moſcatulae, pearis, whiche do ſauoure lyke muſke,
                  
                     Moſculus, a calfe, alſo an herbe.
                  
                     Moſchum, Muſke.
                  
                     Moſcus, a Region in Aſia nyghe to the ryuer of Phaſis, deuyded into thre partis, in the one doo dwell people called Colchi, in the ſecond Hiberes, in the third Armenii.
                  
                     Moſes, ſis, ſi, the great captayn of the iewes which lad them out of Egipte.
                  
                     Moſini, people in Aſia towarde the north.
                  
                     Motabilis, alwaye mouinge.
                  
                     Motacilla, a byrd called a wagtayle.
                  
                     Motiuus, a, um, mouynge, not abydynge.
                  
                     Moto, are, to moue often.
                  
                     Motus, ta, tum, moued. Motus, tus, mouing.
                  
                     Moueo, ere, to moue, to remoue or put away
                  
                     Mouere animū, to ſlyre or allure the minde.
                  
                     Mouere tragoedias, to do thynges to be lamented.
                  
                     Mouere camerinam, to ſtere thinges, which ſhall be to his owne diſpleaſure, that begynneth it.
                  
                     Mox, anon, forthwith.
                  
                     Muceo, cui, to be fylthy or vinewed.
                  
                     Mucidus, a, dum, fylthy, vinewed.
                  
                     Mucor, oris, fylth, vinue, ſuche as is on bred or meate longe kept.
                  
                     Mucro, onis, the point of a ſworde or knife. ſometyme it is taken for a ſworde.
                  
                     Mucronatus, ta, tum, poynted.
                  
                     Mucus, the fylthe, whyche commeth oute of the noſe.
                  
                     
                     Mugil, lis, A fiſhe called a codde.
                  
                     Lucilius.
                     Muginor, ari, to murmure.
                  
                     Mugio, gire, to bellowe lyke a cowe or bull▪ ſomtyme it ſignifyeth the noyſe of thunder, or grete wyndes.
                  
                     Mugonia, a gate at Rome, whereby catell dyd entre into the citie.
                  
                     Mugitus, tus, bellowynge of kyne, or other noyſe lyke.
                  
                     Mularis, re, pertayninge to a mule.
                  
                     Mulceo, ſi, cere, to pacyfye, to appeaſe, to mitigate, to make ſweete, to anoynte, to polyſhe.
                  
                     Mulciber, eris, one of the names of Vulcane, called god of fyre.
                  
                     Mulctor, ctaris, ctari, to punyſſhe, or be punyſſhed.
                  
                     Mulcta, a penaltie, a condemnation, a fyne ſeſſed.
                  
                     Mulctam dicere, to gyue an iniunction.
                  
                     Mulctam committere, to forfayte, to runne in the peyne.
                  
                     Mulctam remittere, to pardone.
                  
                     Mulctra, the mylkyng, the payle, wherinto it is milked, which is alſo called Mulctrale.
                  
                  
                     Mulctrum, the acte of mylkynge.
                  
                     Mulei, certayne ſhooes of purple coloure, whiche the kynges of Alba ware, and afterwarde the noble men of Rome.
                  
                     Mulgeo, mulſi, mulgere, to mylke or ſtroke.
                  
                     Mulgo, are, to publiſhe.
                  
                     Muli mariani, forkes, wheron fardels were truſſed and borne by men.
                  
                     Muli mariani, a prouerbe referred vnto thē, whiche be obedient to euery commaundment, be it neuer ſo greuouſe. It may alſo be applied vnto thē, which be inuolued in perpetuall and intollerable laboures and buſineſſe.
                  
                     Muli mutuum ſcabunt, mules do gnappe one an other, a prouerbe applied to perſones ylle and defamed, whan one of them commendeth the other.
                  
                     Mulier, eris, A woman, proprely ſhe that is no virgine.
                  
                     Muliebre folliculum, dicebant vuluam.
                  
                  
                     Muliebria, naturall euacuations, which women haue, called their floures.
                  
                     Muliebris, bre, perteynynge to women.
                  
                     Muliebritas, delicateneſſe, tenderneſſe.
                  
                     Muliebriter, womanly, delicately, tenderly.
                  
                     Mulierarius, a folower, or dotar on women.
                  
                     Muliero, are, to effeminate, or make lyke a woman.
                  
                     Mulieroſus, a great louer of women.
                  
                     Mulio, onis, & Mulius, a dryuer of Mules, a muletour.
                  
                     Mullus, a fiſh called a Mullet.
                  
                     Mulſum, wyne and hony ſoden togither.
                  
                     Mulſus, a, um, any licour mixt with hony▪
                  
                  
                     Multa, idem quod malcta.
                  
                  
                     Multatitius, pertayning to a forfait, or payne aſſeſſyd.
                  
                     Multeſima, a part repreſentinge an infinite quantitye. Quam paruula pars, quam multeſima conſtat, ſo lytle a porcion, ſe of how wonderfull gretneſſe it is.
                  
                     Multibarbus, he that hath moche heare on his bearde.
                  
                     Multibibus, he that drinketh moche.
                  
                     Multicolorius, a, um, of many colours.Apulcius.
                  
                  
                     Multifacio, ere, to make moche of, to eſteme moche.
                  
                     Multifariam, many wayes, in many facions.
                  
                     Multifarius, dyuers in maners or condiciōs.
                  
                     Multigenetis, re, of dyuers kyndes.Plautus. Lucilius.
                  
                  
                     Multiforatilis, le, with many holes.
                  
                     Multi iugus, a, um, dyuerſe, many dyuerſe, manyfolde.
                  
                     Multiloquus, full of ſpeche.
                  
                     Multipes, hauynge many feete.
                  
                     Multiplex, plicis, manyfolde, dyuers.
                  
                     Multiſcius, a, um, knowinge moche.
                  
                     Multitia, garmentes made of fyne thredes or ſylke.
                  
                     Multiuidus, he that ſeeth moche.
                  
                     Multiuolus, deſyringe dyuerſe thinges.
                  
                     Multo, & Mulcto, are, to punyſſhe, to condemne, to put fro, to intreate yl, or diſorder.
                  
                     Multare matrimonio, to deuorſe, or diſſolue matrimony.
                  
                     Multus, ta, tum, moche, many.
                  
                     Mulus, a Mule.
                  
                     Mundanus, na, um, worldly.
                  
                     Mundities, & Munditia, clenlyneſſe.
                  
                     Mundifico, are, to klenſe.
                  
                     Mundo, are, to wype, to make clene.
                  
                     Mundus, the worlde, a womans attyre.
                  
                     Mundus, da, dum, clene, nete.
                  
                     Muneralis, le, pertayning to gyftes.
                  
                     Munerarius, he that maketh a cōmune game or playe at his propre charges.
                  
                     Muneror, aris, ari, & munero, are, to rewarde
                  
                     Mungo, xi, ere, to make clene, proprely ones noſe.
                  
                     Municipalis, le, priuately or particulerly, belonginge to one citie.
                  
                     Municipale ius, the priuate lawe of euery particuler citie.
                  
                     Municipalia magiſteria, ciuile offices in euery citie or towne.
                  
                     Municipatim, towne by towne.
                  
                     Municipium, a citie or towne incorporate, hauynge their propre officers and lawes.
                  
                     Municeps, a citezen, or burgeyſe, enioyinge the liberties of the towne.
                  
                     Munificus, liberall, Munificentior, more liberall, Munificentiſsimus, moſt liberall. in the

olde tyme Munifici, were taken for them, whyche conſented to that, whiche theyr frendes dyd or ſpake.
                  
                     Munimen, & munimentum, a fortifycation of a towne or caſtelle.
                  
                     Munio, tui, & ij, nire, to fortifye, to prepare, to repayre.
                  
                     Munia, commune dueties, offices.
                  
                     Munis, he that beareth the charges, which the people ſhulde do.
                  
                     Munus, neris a gylt, a charge, a duetie or offyce. Munera, commune playes and gaye ſightes for the peple to behold, to reioice them, prepared by officers of cities. As in Rome, ſondry playes, ſworde players, called Gladiatores, huntyng of wyld beaſtes. Alſo now in the citie of London, the watches & ſyghtes on midſomer nightes.
                  
                     Munychia, orum, the ſolemnities of Pallas.
                  
                     Murena, a lampraye.
                  
                     Murenulae, ſmalle chaynes, whiche women do weare.
                  
                     Muralis corona, a garlande gyuen to hym, whiche in the ſiege of a citie fyrſte ſkalyd the walles, and entred.
                  
                     Muralis herba, an herbe callyd perytorye, or pelytorie.
                  
                     Murani, were the kynges of Alba.
                  
                     Muratus, ta, tum, walled.
                  
                     Murcia, goddeſſe of ſlouthe.
                  
                     Murcus, a ſlouthfull or luſkyſhe perſon.
                  
                     
                        Murex, 
                              ••
                           is,
                      a ſhelle fyſhe, of whome commeth the lycour, whyche maketh purple colour. Sometyme it ſygnifyeth the ſame coloure. Alſo an herbe, whiche groweth in a pyt, where no ſonne ſhyneth.
                  
                     Murginor, ari, to tary, to be ſlouthfulle.
                  
                     Murguana regio, a countrey in the ſouthe partes of Spayne.
                  
                     Murgizo, murgizonis, an ydell or ſlouthefull perſone.
                  
                     Muria, water, wherin ſalt is ſodden, brine.
                  
                     Muricatus, ſalted in bryne.
                  
                     Murices, caltrappes, lyke thre yron pryckes ſo ioyned, that beinge throwen, one ſtandethe vpryghte, vſed in battayle for horſemenne.
                  
                     Fulgentiꝰ.
                     Muricati greſſus, where oone gothe fearefully, as if he went on caltraps or thornes
                  
                     Plaut.
                     Muricidus, a mouſe killer, a fole, a rat killer.
                  
                     Muries, a bryne made with ſalte ſodden in water.
                  
                     Murmilonica ſcuta, targettes, wherewith men faught vpon walles.
                  
                     Murmur, the noyſe of rounnynge water.
                  
                     Murmurillum. 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Murmurabundus, & murmurator, he that murmureth.
                  
                     Murmuro, to murmour, or make noyſe lyke to water.
                  
                     Murmurillo, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Murmurillum, a murmurynge.Plautus.
                  
                  
                     Murrha, a ſtone of dyuers colours, clere as criſtall, hauynge ſpottes purple & whyte.
                  
                     Murrheus, & murrhinus, a, um, of that ſtone called murrha, wherof cuppes, pottes, tables, and other veſſels were made: there be of them dyuers ſent from Venyce.
                  
                  
                     Murrhina, ſeu murrhynia, was wyne made with dyuers ſpices, as that which is callyd ypocras.
                  
                     Murtius, a hylle atte Rome, callyd alſo Auentinus.
                  
                  
                     Murtia, one of the names of Venus.
                  
                     Murus, a walle.
                  
                     Mus, muris, a mouſe or ratte.
                  
                     Muſa, a ſwete ſonge.
                  
                     Muſae, Muſes, were maydens, whome poetes fayned to be the doughters of Iupiter and Memorie, and that they were ladyes and gouernours of poetrie & muſyke, whiche were in numbre nyne. Some call them gyuers of eloquence, and doo name them goddeſſes.
                  
                     Muſaea, Muſaica, & Muſiua, be warkes cunnyngely paynted, that they ſeme to be in ſome place imbocid out, in ſom place grauen, although it be all playne.
                  
                     Muſeus, an auncient poete, whiche was in the tyme of Orpheus, & was one of them whiche went with Iaſon to the wynninge of the fliece of golde.
                  
                     Muſaeum, a houſe, whervnto lerned men in all ſciences vſed to repayre, and diſpute: it is alſo a houſe dedicate to the muſis.
                  
                     Muſca, a flye.
                  
                     Muſcula, a ſmalle flye.
                  
                     Muſcari, to be couered with moſſe.Boetius.
                  
                  
                     Muſcarium, & muſcaria, a flappe to dryue away flyes. It is alſo the toppe of fenelle, dylle, and ſuche other like herbes, wherin be the ſeedes.
                  
                     Muſcarius, a, um, pertaynynge to flyes.
                  
                     Muſcenton, a certayne Roſe, that ſpringeth of a ſtalke with many ſmal braunches, and hath leaues lyke to an olyue tree.
                  
                     Muſcerda, mouſe dunge.
                  
                     Muſchus, a beaſte, whiche beareth muſke, a muſke catte.
                  
                     Muſcinus, a, um, of a flye.
                  
                     Muſcio, onis, a catte.
                  
                     Muſcipula, a trappe, wherwith myſe or rattes are taken.
                  
                     Muſculus, a lyttell mouſe. Sommetyme an engyne of warre, whereby they are defended, whiche doo approche the walles of a place beſyeged, to fylle the dyches, It is alſo a lyttell fyſhe, whiche guydeth

the whale that he do not runne on rockis.
                  
                     Muſculi, be certayne pieces of harde fleſhe compacte with ſynewes in the body, whiche do incloſe the ſpirituall membres.
                  
                     Muſcus, moſſe, whiche groweth in welles and moyſte places, ſommetyme on trees, ſpecially in colde countreyes.
                  
                     Muſica, & muſice, muſyke.
                  
                     Muſice, hole, that nothynge lacketh.
                  
                     Muſicus, a muſycion.
                  
                     Muſmones, ſhepe with hearye wolle.
                  
                     Muſsitabundus, a manne ſpeakynge to hym ſelfe priuily.
                  
                     Muſsito, tare, to ſpeake or talke alone.
                  
                     Muſſo, are, to talke ſoftely and ſecretely, to kepe ſylence.
                  
                     Muſtace, a tree hauynge leaues lyke to laurell, but greatter and weaker.
                  
                     Muſtacula, a lyttell inſtrumente made with two rules, betwene whiche the ſhowe is put, whyles the ſole is in ſowynge.
                  
                     Muſtaceus, & muſtaceum, a caa
                        •
                     e or paſte made to comforte the ſtomacke.
                  
                     Muſtela, a beaſte called a weſell. alſo a fiſhe lyke a lampraye.
                  
                     Muſtelinus, a, um, of a weſyll.
                  
                     Muſteus, a, um, ſwete as muſte, or muſtye.
                  
                     Muſtum, newe wyne, newe ale, newe beere.
                  
                     Muſtus, ta, tum, newe, yonge, late made.
                  
                     Mutabilis, le, chaungeable, mutable.
                  
                     Muteo, mutui, tere, & muteſco, ſcere, to be muete, or dumme.
                  
                     Mutili, horned beaſtes, of nature lackynge hornes, as oxen, gotes. &c.
                  
                     Mutilus, la, lum, lackynge ſomme principalle part, mutilate.
                  
                     Mutilo, are, to cutte of, to mynyſhe, to take awaye.
                  
                     Mutinenſis color, a naturall colour, as wull or clothe neuer dyed.
                  
                     Mutio, tiui, tire, to ſpeake ſoftely, or with an vnperfyt voyce, to muttre.
                  
                     Mutito, tare, to feaſte one an other.
                  
                     Mutuli, ſcaffolde holes, or places made on the walles for culuers to brede in.
                  
                     Muto, tare, to chaunge, to tranſlate, to barter one thinge for an other.
                  
                     Muto, tonis, the priuie membre of a man.
                  
                     Mutuatitius, a, um, borowed.
                  
                     Mutunus, who was alſo called Priapus.
                  
                     Mutuó, togither, or one an other, Mutuó diligebant, They loued one an other.
                  
                     Mutuare, ſygnyfieth bothe to borowe and to lende.
                  
                     Mutuor, aris, ari, to borowe.
                  
                     Mutus, he that can not ſpeake.
                  
                     Muté, dumme.
                  
                     Mutuum, a lone, that whiche is borowed.
                  
                     Mutuus, a, um, one for an nother, mutualle.
                  
                     Mutuus amor, mutuall loue, where one loueth an nother equally.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶M ANTE Y.
                  
                     MYa, a ſhel fiſhe in the ſee called Boſphorus, whiche bryngeth forth lytell redde ſtones, and rounde.
                  
                     Myagrus, the god of flyes.
                  
                     Mycaene, & Mycaena, a citie in the parte of Grecia, called Peloponeſus, and a lyttell region, where Agamemnon raigned, the chiefe capitayne of the grekes agaynſte Troy, called nowe Morea.
                  
                     Mycon, the name of a famous paynter.
                  
                     Mycone, nes, a lyttell yle.
                  
                     Mydia, an yle, named alſo Delos.
                  
                     Mydriaſis, a ſyckeneſſe of the eyes, where no colour of the eies ar changed, but maketh them moche broder: all be it it taketh away the ſyght, or maketh a man to ſe the laſſe, and the thynges, whiche be ſene, to ſeme laſſe than they are.
                  
                     Mygale, a ratte.
                  
                     Mygdonia, a part of Macedonia on the ſee ſyde, where Niobe was tourned in to a ſtoone. Ariſtotle ſaythe, that it is a parte of Phrigia, ioynynge to Lidia. Solynus ſayth, that it was called Bebrycia, and after Bythinia.
                  
                     Mylochos, a butterfly, whiche is in mylles.
                  
                     Myoparo, onis, a kynde of ſhyppes vſed in the ſee called Mare Tirrhenum.
                  
                  
                     Myophnos, a kyller of myſe.
                  
                     Mymphur, a tourners pynne or ſpyndelle, wheron he turneth or warketh any thing.
                  
                     Myra, a citie in Licia, wherof ſaynte Nycholas was byſhoppe.
                  
                     Myriarches, a captayn of ten thouſand mē.
                  
                     Myriades, many tymes tenne thouſande.
                  
                     Myrias, adis, the numbre of ten thouſande.
                  
                     Myrica, a lyttell buſhe called in Italye Tamarico.
                  
                     Myrinus, the male kynde of a lampray, whiche hath a tothe out of his mouthe.
                  
                     Myrmus, the propre name of Apollo.
                  
                  
                     Myriophillum, an herbe called myllfoyle.
                  
                     Myriſtica nux, a nuttemygge.
                  
                     Myrlea, a towne in Bythinia.
                  
                     Myrmecia, a lyttell warte.
                  
                     Myrmecites, a ſtone, wherin is the fygure of an emotte.
                  
                     Myrmetiū, a kynd of ſpiders, lyke an emote hauyng a black bealy with white ſpottes.
                  
                     Mirmillones, were ſworde players, where the one prouoked the other to battayle.
                  
                     Myrſenium, a kynd of fenell, hauyng gretter leaues, and a ſharper taſte.
                  
                     Myrſum, a towne in the part of Grece, callyd Peloponeſus.
                  
                  
                     
                     Myrmicoleo, a lytell beaſte, which deuoureth emotes.
                  
                     Myrobalanum, a fruite growinge in India, lyke vnto plummes or damſyns, whereof be dyuers kyndes, which eaſily do purge al ſuperfluous humours, and alſo comforteth nature, in ſo moche as a manne, whiche eateth them, beinge condite, ſhall not loke oldely.
                  
                     Myrobrecharij, they whiche do make ſwete oyntmentes.
                  
                     Myron, onis, the name of an excellent carner. alſo olde oyle.
                  
                     Myropola, a ſeller of oyntementes.
                  
                     Myropolium, a place where oyntementes were ſolde.
                  
                     Myrothetium, a boxe of ſwete oyntmētes.
                  
                     Myrrha, a ſwete gumme, callyd myrre.
                  
                     Myrrheus, & myrrhinus, a, um, of myrre.
                  
                     Myrtetum, a place, where Myrtelle trees be ſette.
                  
                     Myrteus, & myrtinus, a, um, of myrtelles.
                  
                     Myrtopetalum, an herbe called blodewort.
                  
                     Myrtoum, a porcyon of the ſee, whiche is betwene the ſees called Aegeum & Ioniū.
                  
                  
                     Myrtus, a lyttell tree, bearynge bearyes of ſwete odour.
                  
                     Mys, mios, the name of a cunnyng grauer. alſo a ſhelle fyſhe of the ſee.
                  
                     Myſia, a countrey beyonde Hungarye, toward Grece. Ptholomeus writeth of two countreys called Myſia, the more and the laſſe, and both in Aſia, beyonde Bythinia, not farre from Ida.
                  
                     Myſteria, myſteries, thynges ſecrete or hid in wordes or ceremonies.
                  
                     Myſticus, ca, cum, myſticall.
                  
                     Myſtris, a fyſhe called a ſee mouſe.
                  
                     Mythologia, a declaration or expoſytion of fables.
                  
                     Mythos, a fable.
                  
                     Myxa, the fylthe whiche commeth oute of a mannes noſe.
                  
                     Myxus, a ſnuffe of a candell.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶N, ANTE A.
                  
                     
                        NABATHA, the name of a certayne citie.
                  
                     Nabathea, a countreye betwene the redde ſee and the ſee callyd Perſicum, contayning with in it Arabie.
                  
                  
                     Nabatheus, a, um, of that countreye.
                  
                     Nabis, in the langage of Ethiope, is a beeſt hauyng a heed lyke a camell, a necke lyke a hors, legges and fete lyke an oxe.
                  
                     Nablum, & nablium, an inſtrument of muſyke, called a pſaltrie.
                  
                     Naccae, & neae, fullers.
                  
                     Nactus, the participle of Nanſciſcor, Nactus ſum, I haue gotten, nactus es, nactus eſt, thou, he hath gotten.
                  
                     Nae, ſygnifieth valde, or nimis. Nae tu homo facetus es, thou arte a very mery felowe. ſomtyme it ſignifieth Certè, profectó, ita. Nae illi vehementer errant, ſurelye they be farre out of the waye. Nae ego multo libē
                        tius emerim diuorſoriū Tarracinae, In good faythe I had leauer haue bought a howſe at Tarracine.
                  
                     Naeera, a womans name.
                  
                     Naenia, a mournynge ſonge, wont to be ſongen at burielles, ſomtyme it ſignifieth the ſōge that the mother or norice doth ſinge dandyllynge of her chylde.
                  
                     Neuia, a womans name.
                  
                     Neuus, a mole or lyke marke in the body or face, from the tyme of the byrthe.
                  
                     Naiades, fayries, of the ryuers and fountaynes.
                  
                     Nain, a citie of Galyle.
                  
                     Nais, a riuer, whiche cometh out of the hil called Taurus, and runneth in to the ſee called Pontus.
                  
                     Nam, for, therfore.
                  
                     Nanciſcor, ſceris, nactus ſum, nanciſci, to get or opteyne. ſometyme to fynde.
                  
                     Nanciſci hoſpitium, to fynde a lodgynge.Pom. Feſt.
                  
                  
                     Nancitor, for nactus erit.
                  
                  
                     Nan
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , verily, truely: if it be ſette afore other wordes: if it be putte after, it ſygnifyeth for.
                  
                     Nanum, a lyttell veſſell and brode.Plaut.
                  
                  
                     Nanium, a lyttell woman.
                  
                     Nanus, a lyttell perſon, a dwarfe.
                  
                     Napataei, people in Ethiopia.
                  
                     Napeae, called goddeſſes of flowres and woddes.
                  
                     Napaei, people in the yle called Leſbos.
                  
                     Naphtha, a kynd of pitche, alſo lyme, wherwith fyre is nouriſhed.
                  
                     Napina, a place where Nauewes be ſowen.
                  
                     Napitae, people in Scithia.
                  
                     Napus, a Nauew.
                  
                     Nar, the name of a riuer.
                  
                     Narane, a riuer in Dalmatia.
                  
                     Narbaſis, a citie in Spayne.
                  
                     Narbonēſis gallia, the ſouth part of Fraūce wherin is Dolphinay, Prouance, Langedok. &c.
                  
                     Narciſcus, a flowre in facion lyke a lyllye, and whyte, ſauing that the chaleſe, wherin the floure is cloſed, is purpleiſome haue purple floures, leaues narower than leke

blades, a ſtalke halfe a foote hygh, plaine without leaues, a rounde rote and white. Alſo the name of a yonge man of excellēt beautie, who for the loue of a maid ē died, and after the fables of poetes, was tranſfourmed into the ſame lylly.
                  
                     Narcoticum, a qualytie or vertue in thynges to make a manne to ſlepe. alſo to make a membre inſenſible. Phyſytions vſe medycines, whyche haue this vertue, where the griefe or ache is otherwiſe incurable, or where they wylle cutte any parte of a mannes bodye.
                  
                     Nardinum, the name of a ſwete oyntment.
                  
                     Nardus, the herbe and rote, whiche is called Spikenarde.
                  
                     Nare, to ſwymme, ſometyme to flee.
                  
                     Virg. Geor.
                     Nares, noſethrylles.
                  
                     Narica, the name of a lyttell fyſhe, whiche dothe ſwymme very ſwyftely.
                  
                     Naris, a ryuer in Vmbria.
                  
                     Naritia, an yle in the ſee called Aegeum.
                  
                     Naritium, a citie of the people named Locri in Grece.
                  
                     Narnia, a towne in Italy.
                  
                     Narnienſes, men of that towne.
                  
                     Narratio, a narration or report of thynges that are doone.
                  
                     Narratiuncla, a lyttell narration.
                  
                     Narro, are, to telle.
                  
                     Nartheticium, a place, wherein medycines are kepte.
                  
                     Naſamones, people in Affrike about Libia
                  
                     Naſamonites, a ſtone of coloure languyne, hauynge blacke vaynes.
                  
                     Naſcor, ſceris, ſci, to be borne.
                  
                     Naſica, the ſurname of one of the Scipions a noble Romayne.
                  
                     Naſiterna, a water veſſell, wyde aboue, hauynge handelles.
                  
                     Naſo ſuſpendere, to mocke couertely, or craftelye.
                  
                     Naſſa, a fyſhers weele or bow nette, wherin if a fyſhe be ones, he can not gette out.
                  
                     Naſturtium, an herbe callyd Creſſes.
                  
                     Naſus, a noſe: ſomtime ſharpenes in ſpeche, and tauntynge wytte. alſo iudgement in letters.
                  
                     Naſuti, taunters, checkers, ſkorners, ſomtyme wytty perſonnes, whiche do quikly perceyue a thynge. alſo men, which haue their priuie membres very great.
                  
                     Naſuté, wyttyly, ſkornefully, tauntyngely.
                  
                     Naſutila, a tauntynge wenche, or a ſhrewe.
                  
                     Natalis, le, et natalitius, tia, tium, the daye of birthe or natiuitie.
                  
                     Natales, is taken for progeny or dyſcente, or bloude. Generoſi natales, gentyl bloud. Obſcuri natales, a poore dyſcente or lowe byrthe, ſomtyme it is vſed for yeres.
                  
                     Natalibus reſtitui, where a man hath armes and tytle of nobylitie,Budeus. gyuen vnto hym by the kynge.
                  
                     Natatilis, that whiche can ſwimme.
                  
                     Natatitius, a, um, that which doth ſwimme.
                  
                     Natator, toris, a ſwymmer.
                  
                     Natatorium, natabulum, et natatio, a place wherin men do ſwymme.
                  
                     Natatus, tus, the acte of ſwymmynge.
                  
                     Nates, buttockes.
                  
                     Natinatores, trauaylours, or they whiche haue moche buſineſſe.
                  
                     Natio, a nation.
                  
                     Natiuitas, tatis, byrthe.
                  
                     Natiuus, where a thyng is borne or begon.
                  
                     Natiuus color, the naturall colour.
                  
                     Nato, are, to ſwymme, ſometyme to go, to tremble, to ſayle, or rowe.
                  
                     Natrix, a water ſerpēt. alſo an herbe, whoſe rote ſmelleth lyke a gote.
                  
                     Natura, nature, membres of generacyon. Sometyme facion or maner.
                  
                     Naturalis, le, naturall.
                  
                     Naturalia, the priuy membres.
                  
                     Natus, ta, tum, borne.
                  
                     Natus, nata, ſonne and doughter.
                  
                     Natus grandis, aged or olde.
                  
                     Naualis, le, pertaynynge to ſhyppes.
                  
                     Nauale, the docke where ſhyps be laid vp.
                  
                     Nauale, a docke or place where ſhyppes are made.
                  
                     Nauarchis, the admyralles ſhyppe.
                  
                     Nauarchus, an admyrall.
                  
                     Nauaria, a countrey in Spayne called Nauarre.
                  
                     Nauci, a nutte ſhale, a thynge of naughte.
                  
                     Nauci eſſe, to be naught worthe.
                  
                     Naucifacere, to ſet naught by one.
                  
                     Naucleriacus, et nauclerius, a, um, perteynynge to a ſhyppe mayſter.
                  
                     Nauclerus, & nauiclarius, a ſhyppe maiſter.
                  
                     Naucrates, a citie in Egypte.
                  
                     Naufragium, a ſhypwrecke.
                  
                     Naufragor, aris, ari, to peryſhe on the ſee.
                  
                     Naufragus, whoſe goodes are peryſhed.
                  
                     Nauia, a holowe tree lyke a ſhyppe, whiche is occupied whan grapes be gathered.
                  
                     Nauicularius, a capitayne of a ſhyppe.
                  
                     Nauiculor, aris, ari, to rowe or be rowed in a bote for ſalace.
                  
                     Nauigabilis, le, where a ſhyppe maye paſſe, Nauigable.
                  
                     Nauigatio, a iourneye or goinge by water in a ſhyppe.
                  
                     Nauiger, the pilate of a ſhyppe, whych ruleth the ſterne.
                  
                     Nauigium, the leadynge or ſettynge forth of the ſhyppe. It is alſo all kynde of veſſelles

to ſayle or rowe in.
                  
                     Nauigo, are, to ſayle or rowe, that is to ſay, to be caried on water in a ſhippe or any other thynge lyke.
                  
                     Nauis pomparica, a ſhyppe whiche ſerueth onely for pleaſure, hauynge chaumbers and bankettynge tables for greate men to ſolace in.
                  
                     Nauis, a ſhyppe.
                  
                     Nauiter, diligently, valyauntly.
                  
                     Naulium, a citie in Liguria.
                  
                     Naulum, the fraite or fare paied for paſſage
                  
                     Naumachia, battayle on the See, alſo the place where the batayle is.
                  
                     Naumachiarij, they which do fyght on the ſee or water in ſhyppes or botes.
                  
                     Nauo, are, to accomplyſhe dylygentely, to gyue, to applye with effect, to be in ayde. Iam mihi videor nauaſſe operam ꝙ huc venerim, nowe me ſeemeth I haue well applyed my labour, that I am come hyther.
                  
                     Nauare beneuolentiam, to conferre or declare beneuolence.
                  
                     Naupegus, a ſhyppe wrighte.
                  
                     
                        Naupo
                              •
                           itus,
                      a ryuer, whiche paſſeth out of Slauony.
                  
                     Nauſea, the abhorrynge of thynges ſeene, wherby a man is prouoked to vomyte.
                  
                     Nauſeoſus, a, um, dyſpoſinge to vomyte.
                  
                     Nauſiabundus, dyſpoſed to vomyte.
                  
                     Nauſeo, care, et nauſeor, to be dyſpoſed to vomyte, ſomtyme to vomyte.
                  
                     Nauſicaa, was doughter to Alcinous, kyng of Phaeaces, whiche founde Vlyſſes, whan he eſcaped from drounynge, and brought hym to her father.
                  
                     Nauſio, ere, to open or gape as a beane doth whan he ſpryngeth.
                  
                     Nauſtilious, the ſonne of Neptunus, and father of Alcinous.
                  
                     Nauſtibulum, an hiue made of the facion of a ſhyppe.
                  
                     Nauta, et nauita, a ſhyppeman.
                  
                     Nautea, curriers bleche or lycour, alſo the ſtynkynge water, which iſſueth out of the pumpe of a ſhyppe.
                  
                     Nauticus, a ſhyppe mayſter.
                  
                     Nauticus, ca, cum, perteynyng to ſhipmen.
                  
                     Nautulus, a ſhypman, alſo a fyſhe, which is in ſimilitude lyke to ſome that ſayled.
                  
                     Nautilia, the craft of ſhypmen.
                  
                     Nauus, quicke, actife.
                  
                     Naxos, an yle in the ſee called Aegeum.
                  
                     Nazarcus, a man conſecrate or dedycate to god. Nazarei were men, which had made vowes vntyll a certayne tyme.
                  
                     Nazaret, a lytle towne in Galilea.
                  
                     Nazara, a citie in Cappadotia, afterwarde called Caeſaria.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                     NE, an aduerbe, ſignifieng forbeading or diſſuading. Tu ne cede malis, giue thou not place to aduerſitie or myſaduentures. ſometyme it is a coniunction copulatiue, and ſignifieth nor or. neyther. ſomtime rational, and ſignifieth wherfore. ſomtyme cauſal, & ſignifieth not. ſomtyme leſte, alſo or not, whither. ſomtyme it is an interrogatiue. Ego ne? I troweſt thou?
                  
                     Nea, an ile betwene Lemnos & Helleſpontꝰ.
                  
                     Necunde, nor from any place.
                  
                     Ne plura, ne multa, but to be ſhort,Cice. 
                           〈◊〉
                         Cluend
                           •
                        , & in Ve
                           •
                        . Ci. 
                           •
                         C
                           •
                        . what nedeth any longer tale, to make a ſhort tale.
                  
                     Ne multis, in fewe wordes. Ne multis Diogenes emitur, In fewe wordes Diogenes is bought.
                  
                     Ne dicam, I wyll not ſaye.
                  
                     Nectere moras, to make delayes.Cor. Tacitus li. 1
                           •
                        .
                  
                  
                     Nec, nor. neque, nor. nequaquam, no.
                  
                     Necnon, and, or alſo.
                  
                     Nequicquam, in vayne, no or not.
                  
                     Ne viuā, I wold I lyued not. Ne viuā ſi tibi concedo, I wolde I lyued not, or I wold I ſhulde not liue, if I graunt that to the.Cicero.
                  
                  
                     Neutiquam, in no wyſe.
                  
                     Nequaquam, no.
                  
                     Necubi, in no place.
                  
                     Nedum, not onely, ſomtyme nor yet, where the thynge of leaſt eſtimation is put laſte. Nedum, ſygnifieth not onely, as Fundere pro te ſanguinem, nedū pecuniam, I wolde ſpende for the not only my money, but alſo my bloode. where the thinge of mooſt eſtimation is laſt put, it ſignifieth nor yet. Ne crederem tibi obulum, nedum vitā meam, I wyll not commytte my lyfe vnto thy credēce, nor yet lende the one halfepeny.
                  
                     Nec dum, nor yet.
                  
                     Neapolis, a citie called Naples.
                  
                     Neapolitanus, na, num, of Naples,
                  
                     Nebrides, feaſtes in the honour of Bacchꝰ, alſo ſkinnes of dere wherwith they were clad which kept the ceremonies of Bacchꝰ
                  
                     Nebrodes, an hyl in Sicile, where there is great plentie of falowe dere.
                  
                     Nebrundes, the ſtones of beaſtes.
                  
                     Nebula, a vapour or myſt ryſynge from the water, whiche eyther tourneth forthwith into a cloude, or ſhortly vanyſheth.
                  
                     Nebularium, a houſe where corne is threſſhed, or wynn owed in tyme of rayne.
                  
                     Nebulo, onis, a thefe, a knaue, a lewde perſon, or vacabunde.
                  
                     Nebuloſus, a, um, myſty.
                  
                     Neceſſarius, a kynneſman.
                  
                     Neceſſarius, a, ū, neceſſary, nedefull.
                  
                     Neceſſe uel neceſsū, of force, it muſt nedꝭ be.
                  
                     Neceſsitas, tatis, nede, neceſſitie. ſometime a bonde of frendſhip or kynrede.
                  
                     
                     Neceſsitudo, dinis, 
                     idem. alſo amitie.
                  
                     Necim, the olde writers vſed for nec cum, nor with.
                  
                     Perottus.
                     Necunquam, for necunquam aliquem.
                  
                  
                     Necne, or not.
                  
                     Necum, in the olde Spanyſhe tungue was the image of Mars, garnyſhed with beames lyke the ſonne, it alſo ſignyfied in latyne mas, the male kynde.
                  
                     Necydalus, a ſylke worme, whan he is yōge ſprounge out of the ſede.
                  
                     Neco, caui, care, vel necui, to ſlee.
                  
                     Neci datus, ſlayne without weapon, as with poyſon, famyne, priſonement.
                  
                     Necromantes, a Necromancer, or caller vp of yll ſpirites.
                  
                     Necromantia, necromancy.
                  
                     Necromanticus, a necromancer.
                  
                     Nectar taris, the drinke of goddes, ſomtime it ſignifieth immortalitie.
                  
                     Nectareus, a, um, immortall, deuyne.
                  
                     Necto, nexui, nectere, to wynde or plat togither.
                  
                     Necubi, in no place.
                  
                     Necunde, from no place.
                  
                     Nefandus, da, dum, horrible, not to be ſpokē or named.
                  
                     Nefarius, a, um, curſed not worthy to lyue.
                  
                     Nefas, a curſed dede, a wycked thynge, execrable, deteſtable.
                  
                     Nefaſti dies, dayes whan it is not lefull.
                  
                     Nefrendes, pygges weaned, called ſhotes.
                  
                     Negabundus, he that denyeth.
                  
                     Negabundus, for negans, denyenge.
                  
                     Negatio, a denyer, a nay.
                  
                     Negatiuus, a, um, that whiche denyeth.
                  
                     Negito, tare, to denye.
                  
                     Plautus in 
                           •
                        ercatore
                     Negligo, glexi, gligere, to neglect, to haue lyttel regarde.
                  
                     Neglectus, tus, contempte.
                  
                     Neglectus, ta, tū, contemned not regarded.
                  
                     Negligentia, negligence.
                  
                     Negligens, tis, negligent.
                  
                     Negligenter, negligently, contemtuouſely. dyſdeynouſely.
                  
                     Nego, aui, are, to deny, to refuſe, to ſay not.
                  
                     Negocialis, le, perteynynge to denyenge.
                  
                     Plautus in 
                           ••
                        ch.
                     Negato eſſe ituram, ſay that ſhe wyl not go.
                  
                     Negotior, aris, ari, to practyſe marchaundyſe, to be occupied in buſineſſe.
                  
                     Negotioſus, he that is moch occupied with buſineſſe.
                  
                     Negociator, toris, a marchaunte, he that is buſied in an other mans affaires.
                  
                     Negotialis, ale, perteynyng to buſineſſe, occupation, or trouble.
                  
                     Negotium, remedye. Omnis res palam eſt, ne
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         vllum pol de hac re negotium eſt, quin male occidam, All the matter is knowen: therfore in this caſe in faith there is no remedy, but that I wyll kyll hym.
                  
                     Negotioſus, a, um, full of buſineſſe, care, or trouble of mynde.
                  
                     Negotium dare, to gyue in charge.
                  
                     Negotium, buſineſſe, occupation, ſomtyme trouble, care, or labour of mynde.
                  
                     Negotiorum curator, a factour or ſollicitor in a mannes buſyneſſe.
                  
                     Neleus, the father of duke Neſtor, whiche was at the ſiege of Troye.
                  
                     Nem, was vſed of old writers for ſomtime, alſo for but, or excepte.
                  
                     Nemea, a greate wodde, where Hercules ſlewe an horrible lyon.
                  
                     Nemeaeus, of the wodde callyd Nemeae, whiche is in Grecia, not farre frome the citie of Argos.
                  
                     Nemeſis, a goddeſſe, whiche was ſuppoſed to take vengeance on malefactours. ſome tyme it ſygnifieth fortune, alſo iuſtyce, alſo reproche.
                  
                     Nemartes, nymphes or maydens of the ſee.
                  
                     Ne my quidem, is applied to hym that dare not ſpeke. Ne my quidem facere audet, He dare not ones mutte, or make coūtenance to ſpeake.
                  
                     Nemo, no man, or none.
                  
                     Nemo non, ſome man.
                  
                     Nempe, is an aduerbe confyrming a thing. for bycauſe, ſurely, verily, ſometyme for.
                  
                     Nemus, nemoris, a wod for pleaſure, wherin deere or other beaſtes may fede.
                  
                     Nemoralis, et nemorenſis, perteynynge to a woode.
                  
                     Neo, neui, nere, to ſpynne.
                  
                     Neogamus, newe maried.
                  
                     Neomenia, the fyrſt day of the newe mone.
                  
                     Neophitus, a newe man, or a plante newely ſproungen.
                  
                     Neoptholemus, is in engliſhe a new knight, It was alſo the name of Pirthꝰ the ſonne of Achilies.
                  
                     Neotericus, he that is nowe, or was of late tyme.
                  
                     Nepa, vel nepes, a ſcorpion.
                  
                     Nepenthes, a drynke or an herbe, whiche cauſeth a man to forgete heuyneſſe. Alſo the herbe called dorago.
                  
                     Nepeta, a citie of the countrey of Thuſcane in Italy.
                  
                     Nephalia, feaſtes wherin no wyne was ſacryfyſed or drunke, but onely mede, and they were called the feaſtes of ſobre men.
                  
                     Nephele, a cloude, alſo the name of a womanne, whiche was mother of Helles, who gaue the name to the ſee callydde Helleſpontus.
                  
                  
                     Nephritis, peyn in the raynes of the backe.
                  
                     
                     Nepita, an herbe called nepe, or calament.
                  
                     Nenum, was ſomtyme put for non.
                  
                     Nepos, otis, the ſonne or doughters ſonne, ſometyme a waſter of goodes, a riottouſe perſon. Nepotes, do ſometyme ſignify all the diſcent, whiche commeth after a mans ſonnes or daughters.
                  
                     Nepotor, ari, to liue prodigally, or riotouſly.
                  
                     Nepotulus, a dimynutiue of Nepos. Meus Nepotulus, my lyttell ſonne, or yonge ſon, from the fyrſt diſcent.
                  
                     Nepotatus, tus, ryot, ſuperfluous expenſes.
                  
                     Neptis, the doughter of a mans ſonne or doughter.
                  
                     Neptunus, callyd god of the ſee.
                  
                     Nepus, vncleane.
                  
                     Nequa, no where.
                  
                     Nequalia, detrimentes or harmes.
                  
                     Nequam, a noughty felowe, a manne to be nothinge eſtemed.
                  
                     Nequando, at no tyme.
                  
                     Nequaquam, in no wyſe, not a whitte.
                  
                     Nequior, oris, Nequiſsimus, warſe, warſte of all.
                  
                     Nequiquam, in vayne, Nequicquam, not.
                  
                     Ne quid nimis, nothyng to to, that is to ſay, moche excedynge, or moche lackynge.
                  
                     Nequino, are, to be wanton, alſo to denie.
                  
                     Nequinū, a citie in Italy, now callid Narnia.
                  
                  
                     Nequinunt, in the olde tyme they vſed for nequeunt, they may not.
                  
                     Ne quis, that no man.
                  
                     Nequiria, vnthriftyneſſe, lecherous, wantonnes, vicious dalyaunce.
                  
                     Nequitus, & nequiter, vnthriftily.
                  
                     Nereides, nymphes or maidens of the ſee.
                  
                     Nereus, was called oone of the goddis of the ſee, and ſomtime it is put for the ſee.
                  
                     Nerio, enis, the wife of Mars, called god of battayle.
                  
                     Neritae, a certayne kynde of ſhelle fyſſhe. ſee Plinie.
                  
                  
                     Neritos, vel Neritum, an yle or citie nyghe to Epirus, a countrey of Grece.
                  
                     Nerium promōtotium, Compoſtella, where ſaint Iames the apoſtelle lyeth. It is alſo a lyttell tree, hauyng leaues lyke to an almonde tree, but greatter and fatter.
                  
                     Nero, the name of an emperour, of a monſtruous and cruell nature.
                  
                     Neruiae, harpe ſtrynges, or lute ſtringes.
                  
                     Neruiceus, a, um, of ſynewes.
                  
                     Neruicus, he that hath pein in his ſinewes.
                  
                     Neruij, people aboute Tournay.
                  
                     Nerulani, people by Rome.
                  
                     Nerulonenſes, people in Campania.
                  
                     Nerulum, a towne in the countreye callyd Lucania.
                  
                     Neruoſus, a, um, that whiche hath many ſinewes. It is ſomtyme taken for ſtronge.
                  
                     Neruus, a ſynewe, it ſignifieth ſommetyme ſtrength. Alſo ſtockes, wherin offenders be put. Nerui be alſo ſtringes of an inſtrument. Sometyme it ſygnifieth the priuye membre of a manne.
                  
                     Neſa, a countrey in Sicile, ioynynge to the hyll of Ethna, which alway ſendeth forth flames of fyre or ſmoke.
                  
                     Neſcio, ſciui, ſcire, to not know, to be ignorant of a thynge.
                  
                     Neſcius, he that dothe not knowe, or is not knowen.
                  
                     
                        Neſium, uel Neſ
                              •
                           s,
                      an yle by Campania.
                  
                     Neſia, a nymphe or mayden of the ſee.
                  
                     Neſſus, & Neſius, ſonnes of Ixion the Centaure.
                  
                     Neſſotrophion, a place, where duckes are kepte to be made fatte.
                  
                     Neſtor, oris, a Capytayne of the Grekes, which were at Troy, who lyued the ages of thre olde men, and in gyuynge counſell was excellent.
                  
                     Neu, for ne ue, nor yet.
                  
                     Neuceria, a citie of Vmbria, whyche is a parte of Italy.
                  
                     Ne ue, or not, or no.
                  
                     Ne unquam, in no wyſe.
                  
                     Neuolo, I wyll not.
                  
                     Neuri, people of Scithia.
                  
                     Neurobatae, goers on cordes.
                  
                     Neuter, tra, trum, neutrius, none of them.
                  
                     Neutiquam, in no maner of wyſe, in no condicion.
                  
                     Neutralis, le, neutre, of no parte.
                  
                     Neutro, neyther on the one parte, nor the other.
                  
                     Neuus, a marke in the vyſage or body of a manne or womanne, as a mole, a redde or blacke warte.
                  
                     Nex, necis, deathe by force.
                  
                     Nexilis, nexile, any thynge that may be knit.
                  
                     Nexo, as, & is, nexui, nexere, to knitte often.
                  
                     Nexus, a, um, knytte, bounden.
                  
                     Nexus, nexus, uel nexi, a bond, an obligation
                  
                     Nexi, free men, that do bynde theym ſelues to labour or ſeruyce,Var
                           ••
                        . to be acquited of the dettes, whiche they owe.
                  
                     Nexus inire, to be bounde by oblygation or couenaunt. alſo to be wrapped in bondes, as is the commune ſayenge.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶N, ANTE I.
                  
                     NI, but if, except, leſte that.
                  
                     Nicander, the propre name of a man.
                  
                     Nicanor, a mans name.
                  
                     Nicator, a great vanquyſher.
                  
                     Nicca, & Nicia, a citie in Aſia.
                  
                     
                     Niceteria, thynges gyuen for vyctorie, as rynges, colers of golde, and crownes or garlandes.
                  
                     Nicopolis, a citie in Egipte, where the emperour Octauian vanquyſſhed Antonie & Cleopatra.
                  
                     Nicomedia, a citie in the countrey of Bithinia, in the laſſe Aſia.
                  
                     Nicoſtrata, the mother of Euander the old kynge of latynes.
                  
                     Nicto, tere, to vent as the hound doth, whiche foloweth the dere or hare, or other game.
                  
                     Nicto, are, to wynke.
                  
                     Nictus, tus, a wynkynge, as whan one doth ſygnifie his mynde to an other by loking.
                  
                     Nidifico, are, to make a neſte.
                  
                     Nidere, ſomtime to ſauor, ſomtime to ſhine.
                  
                     Nidor, oris, a ſauour or ſmell of ſome thing burned or roſted: ſometyme it ſignifyeth grennynge. alſo brightnes.
                  
                     Nidulor, aris, to brede as a byrde dothe, to make a neſte, or eyre.
                  
                     Nidulus, a lyttell neſte.
                  
                     Nidus, a neſte, ſommetyme it ſignifieth the byrde that bredeth. Alſo a veſſelle lyke to a neſte. Alſo Nidi be coffyns, wherin marchantes do lay their ſondry wares.
                  
                     Nigella, a wiede growinge in corne, callyd alſo Lolium, cockle. Alſo a blacke ſeede, good to ſmelle vnto agaynſte rewmes or diſtillations.
                  
                     Nigellus, a, um, ſomewhat blacke, browne.
                  
                     Niger, gra, grum, blacke, fowle. Alſo it is ſometyme vſed for deed.
                  
                     Nigidius, a noble philoſopher of Rome.
                  
                     Nigredo, nigrities, & nigritia, black colour.
                  
                     Nigrefacio, & nigreſio, to make blacke.
                  
                     Nigreo, & nigreſco, to be blacke.
                  
                     Nigrico, care, to be ſomewhat blacke.
                  
                     Nigris, a fountayne in Ethiopia, whiche is of ſomme men ſuppoſed to be the heed of the greatte ryuer Nilus.
                  
                     Nigro, are, to make blacke, alſo to be black.
                  
                     Nigror, oris, blackeneſſe.
                  
                     Nihildum, not yet.
                  
                     Nihilifacio, cere, to ſette naught by.
                  
                     Nihili pendo, ere, to eſteme nothynge.
                  
                     Nihilominus, netheleſſe.
                  
                     Nihil, & nihilum, nothynge, nought.
                  
                     
                        
                           ••••
                        tus in 
                           ••
                        cch.
                     Nihil cum fidibus graculo, Nihil cum amacino ſui, The dawe hathe nothynge to doo with the lute: nor the ſowe with maiorā: A prouerbe applyed to them, whiche preſumynge to moche of their owne wyttes, do meddel malapertly with thinges, wherof they can no ſkylle.
                  
                     Nil, nothynge, none, nought.
                  
                     Nilion, a ſtone lyke a Topace, but that it is more duſkyſhe.
                  
                     Nilus, a great ryuer in Egipte, callyd alſo Geon, and is one of the greatteſt ryuers of the worlde.
                  
                     Niliacus, & niloticus, ca, cum, of Nile.
                  
                     Nimbifer, the bringer of ſtorms or ſhoures.
                  
                     Nimblis, an yle in the ſee called Ionium.
                  
                  
                     Nimbus, a ſodayne great ſhowre or ſtorme of rayne or hayle. Alſo a cloude or a great wynde, alſo a veſſell, oute of the whyche wyne is drawen or powred.
                  
                     Nimboſus, ſtormy, or ſhowrynge.
                  
                     Nimirum, vndoubtedly, ſurely. ſomtyme it ſignifieth but yet, no meruayle.
                  
                     Nimis, & nimium, an aduerbe, ſignifyenge abundance.
                  
                     Nimis bonus, to good. Nimis malus, to ylle.
                  
                     Nimietas, ſuperfluouſnes.
                  
                     Nimius, a, ū, wherof is to moch, or exceſſe.
                  
                     Ningo, ninxi, ningere, to ſnowe.
                  
                     Ninguidus, da, guidum, where there is moche ſnowe.
                  
                     Niniue, a great cite in Aſſyria, alſo an other greatte citie in the corner of Iudea, towarde Arabia.
                  
                     Ningulum, none, nor any.
                  
                     Ninus, a great kynge of Aſſiria, & Babilon.
                  
                     Niobe, a woman, who hauynge a greatte numbre of chyldren, and they beyng deed all at ones, ſo moche lamented and ſorowed, that ſhe loſte hir ſpeche: wherfore the paynyms fayned, that ſhe was turned to a ſtone.
                  
                     Niphates, a ryuer in the coūtrey of Scithia
                  
                     Niptrum, a lauer.
                  
                     Nis, was of olde tyme vſed for nobis.
                  
                  
                     Niſaee, a ladye of the fayrye.
                  
                     Niſeus, a place in Media, where fayre horſes were bredde.
                  
                     Niſſa, a citie in Lydia.
                  
                     Niſi, but if, excepte.
                  
                     Niſus, a kynges name, of whome it is fayned, that he had one golden heare. It is alſo a kynde of haukes.
                  
                     Niſus, ſa, um, the participle of Nitor, teris.
                  
                  
                     Niſyros, a lyttell yle by Grece.
                  
                  
                     Nitedula, a ſeld mouſe. Alſo a glow worme that ſhineth by nighte.
                  
                     Nitella, a toothe pike. ſometyme it ſignifyeth elegancy in ſpeche.
                  
                     Niteo, tui, tere, to be cleane, nete, gaye.
                  
                     Niteſco, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Nitidé, clenlye.
                  
                     Nitido, are, to make cleane or bryght.
                  
                     Nitidus, da, dum, cleane, brighte.
                  
                     Nitor, teris, niti, to be ſtyffe, or to reſyſte agaynſte a burdeyn, to indeuour, to leane on a thynge, to flee, to be ſuſtayned, to inforce hym ſelfe, or take pein, to trauayle.
                  
                     Nitere, to lyue a pleaſaunt lyfe.
                  
                     
                     Nitor, oris, clenneſſe, brightneſſe, gayneſſe.
                  
                     Nitrea, a region or Contray in Egypte, alſo the name of two cities in Egypte, aboue the citie of Memphis.
                  
                     Nitrum, Salte peter.
                  
                     Niualis, le, of ſnowe.
                  
                     Niuatus, ta, tum, made colde as ſnowe.
                  
                     Niueus, a, um, of ſnowe, ſnowy.
                  
                     Niuoſus, full of ſnowe, or where it ſnoweth often.
                  
                     
                        Nixu
                              •
                           io,
                      I will endeuour me, I will aſſay to do a thinge.
                  
                     Nixus, a, um, borne as a childe is.
                  
                     Nixus, us, ui, birth of a childe.
                  
                     Nix, niuis, ſnow.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶N. ANTE. O.
                  
                     NO, are, to ſwymme.
                  
                     Nobilis, noble, notable.
                  
                     Nobilitas, nobilytie, nobleneſſe.
                  
                     Nobilito, tare, to make noble, or to adde to dignitie, or eſtimation, to cauſe to be knowen.
                  
                     Noceo, cui, cere, to hurt, to indamage.
                  
                     Nocteſco, cere, to be darke.
                  
                     Noctes atticae, a booke that Aulus Gellius made, which was ſo called, bycauſe it was writen in the wynter nyghtes at Athenes.
                  
                     Nocticorax, a night crowe.
                  
                     Noctifuga, he that fleeth or exchuith the night.
                  
                     Noctiluca, is a name, whereby the Moone is called bycauſe that ſhe doeth ſhyne by night, alſo a lytle beeſt, which ſhyneth by nyght.
                  
                     Noctiuagus, a wanderar or goar by nyghte.
                  
                     Noctu, at night, or in the nyght, by nyght.
                  
                     Noctua, an owle.
                  
                     Noctuae Athenis, oules to Athenes, a prouerbe, whereby is ſignified any thinge to be abundant, and more than ynoughe.
                  
                     Nocturnus, na, um, of the night.
                  
                     Nocuus, a harme doar.
                  
                     Nodo, are, to knytte.
                  
                     Nodus, a knot.
                  
                     Nodoſus, a, um, knotty, or full of knottis.
                  
                     Nodus herculis, where there can be founde nor begynnynge nor endinge, that whiche may neuer be loſed.
                  
                     Nodus is alſo in an hoſt in batayle, a throng of men, ſo thicke, that it can not be perced.
                  
                     Nodum in ſcyrpo quaeris, Thou ſekeſt for a knot in a ruſhe, it is applyed to him, which is ſcrupulouſe in a thing that is not doubtfull, but playne.
                  
                     Noëgeum, a whyte napkyn.
                  
                     Noëma, maye be called euery ſentence.
                  
                     Noënon, for non.
                  
                     
                        Noëo
                              •
                           ae,
                      the wertes, which be in the chekis of a gote or ſwyne.
                  
                     Noes, a ryuer in Thracia, whiche runneth into the ryuer of Iſter, or Danow.
                  
                     Nolani, people in Italy.
                  
                     Nolito, or Noli, do not.
                  
                     Nolo, non vis, nolui, nolle, to not will.
                  
                     Nolo, I will not.
                  
                     Nomarcha, a mayre, bayliffe, or prouoſte.
                  
                     Nomades, people in Scithia, called nowe Tartary.
                  
                     Nomae, ſores, which be greuous.
                  
                     Nomen, minis, a name, or nowne, ſometyme it ſignifieth worſhyp, auctoritie, nobleneſſe of bloode, kynred. Alſo cauſe. Eo nomine, for that cauſe. Meo nomine, for my ſake.
                  
                     Nomenclator, oris, an officer, which called euery man by his name.
                  
                     Nomenclatura, a namynge of men.
                  
                     Nomentum, a towne in Italy by Rome.
                  
                     Nomina, beſyde the commune ſignification, doeth alſo ſignifie dettours or dettes, alſo articles writen.
                  
                     Nomina facere, to lende to many men.
                  
                     Nomina exigere, to demaunde or calle for dettes.
                  
                     Nominatim, by name.
                  
                     Nominibus honeſtis, for an honeſt pretence or conſyderation.
                  
                     Nomino, are, to name.
                  
                     Nomiſma, coyne.
                  
                     Nomiſsis, nyne pounde weyght of braſſe.
                  
                     Nomophilax, acis, a kepar of lawes.
                  
                     Nomus, a iuriſdiction, as a mayraltie, a baylywyke, or prouoſtſhyp of a towne.
                  
                     Non, no, not.
                  
                     Nonaginta, foureſcore and ten.
                  
                     Nongenti, nyne hundred.
                  
                     Nonus, a, um, the nynthe.
                  
                     Non ita pridem, not longe agone.
                  
                     Non modo, not onely.
                  
                     Nonnullus, ſome man.
                  
                     Nonnunquam, ſometyme.
                  
                     Non ſobrius, drunke.
                  
                     Non tacenda, prayſeworthy.
                  
                     Nonacris, a place in the countray of Arcadia.
                  
                     Nonae, nyne dayes in euery moneth before the Idus.
                  
                     Noricum, a contray in Germany, wherein is the duchy of Bauaria, or Beuar, alſo the towne of Nurenbergh.
                  
                     Norma, a rule.
                  
                     Normandia, a contraye in Fraunce called Normandy.
                  
                     Normatus, a, um, ruled.
                  
                     Noruegia, a royaulme called Norwaye.
                  
                     Noſcito, tare, to knowe moche.
                  
                     Noſco, noui, noſcere, to knowe, to fauoure

tenderly.
                  
                     Noſcomion, an hoſpytalle or place, where ſycke folke are kepte.
                  
                     Notabilis, le, notable.
                  
                     Notae, notes, cyfers, markes, made for remembraunce of ſome thynge.
                  
                     Notarius, a clerke, whiche wryteth inſtrumentes or plees.
                  
                     Noteſco, notui, ſcere, to be knowen or made knowen.
                  
                     Nothus, a baſtarde.
                  
                     Nothia, that whiche by ſome lawes is appoynted to a mans baſtarde.
                  
                     Notifico, are, to make knowen.
                  
                     Notio, knowlege. Notitia, idem.
                  
                  
                     Noto, are, to note or marke, to make a mark or token, to write after an example.
                  
                     Notus, ta, tum, knowen: alſo a frende, or of acqueyntaunce.
                  
                     Notus, noti, the ſouthwynde.
                  
                     Nouacula, a barbers knyfe or raſer.
                  
                     Noualis, lande ſowen euery other yere.
                  
                     Nouelletum, a newe growen vyne.
                  
                     Nouello, are, to tylle newe grounde, or ſet newe vynes.
                  
                     Nouellus, a, um, newe.
                  
                     Nouem, nyne. Nouenus, the nynthe.
                  
                     Nouenarius numerus, the numbre of nyne.
                  
                     Nouendium, the ſpace of nyne dayes.
                  
                     Nouendiale ſacrum, ceremonies the nynth day after the burienge.
                  
                     Nouenniae, a citie in Thracia.
                  
                     Nouerca, a ſtepmother, or ſtepdame.
                  
                     Nouercari, to do lyke a ſtepdame.
                  
                     Nouitius, a, um, newe or late begonne.
                  
                     Nouo, are, to make newe.
                  
                     Nouocomenſes, a people in Italy.
                  
                     Nouum Comum, a towne in Italy.
                  
                     Nouuncium, of nyne ounces or ynches.
                  
                     Nouus, ua, um, newe, freſſhe, late commen vp or begonne.
                  
                     Noui homines, men of late commen vppe, whiche are not gentylmenne of an auncyent ſtocke.
                  
                     Nouiſsimus, ma, mum, the laſte.
                  
                     Nouiter, newely, or lately.
                  
                     Nouiſsime, laſte of all.
                  
                     Nox, noctis, nyght.
                  
                     Noteſco, ſcere, to be nyght.
                  
                     Noxa, peyne, offence, or treſpace. ſomtyme it ſignifieth hurte or harme.
                  
                     Noxia, a faulte.
                  
                     Noxius, noxia, noxium, harmefull.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶N, ANTE V.
                  
                     NVbecula, a lyttell clowde.
                  
                     Nubes, a clowde.
                  
                     Nubilarium, a howſe, wherinto corne is caryed for feare of rayne.
                  
                     Nubilis, maryable, of ful age to be wedded.
                  
                     Nubilo, are, to make clowdy or darke.
                  
                     Nubiloſus, a, um, full of clowdes.
                  
                     Nubilus, a, um, clowdy, darke,
                  
                     Nubo, nupſi, nubere, to be wedded, or to wedde, proprely of the womans part.
                  
                     Nucamenta, thynges hangynge downe from the boughes of trees or pitchtrees, and are no leaues.
                  
                     Nuceria, a towne in Campania.
                  
                     Nuceus, ea, eum, of a nutte.
                  
                     Nuci frangibula, a nutte cracke.
                  
                     Nucleus, the kernell of any thynge.
                  
                     Nucula, & nucella, a lyttell nutte.
                  
                     Nudipedalia, ceremonies done bare foted.
                  
                     Nuditas, nuditatis, nakedneſſe, ſympleneſſe, playnneſſe.
                  
                     Nudius tertius, the day before yeſterdaye: Nudius quartus, Nudius quintus, Fowre dayes paſſed, fyue dayes ſens.
                  
                     Nudare, to make naked, to diſcouer, or opē.
                  
                     Nudus, da, dum, naked, vncouered.
                  
                     Nugae, nugarum, tryflynge tales, fables, mery matters.
                  
                     Nugalis, le, tryflynge.
                  
                     Nugamenta, tryfles.
                  
                     Nugatorius, a, um, tryflynge.
                  
                     Nugax, acis, a tryfler or ſabler.
                  
                     Nugigerulus, & nugigerus, a teller of lyes.
                  
                     Nugiuendus, a ſeller of tryfles.
                  
                     Nugor, aris, ari, to tryfle, or go about vayne thynges.
                  
                     Nugator, toris, a tryfler or mocker.
                  
                     Nullatenus, in no wyſe.
                  
                     Nullibi, no where.
                  
                     Nullo negotio, withoute peyne or laboure, without any difficultie.
                  
                     Nullus, a, um, none.
                  
                     Nullus ſum, I am vndone.
                  
                     Nullus dum, no man yet, none to this day.
                  
                     Num, for an, or vtrum, whiche hapneth in a demaunde or queſtion. Num ego te ſpoliaui? Dyd I robbe the?
                  
                     Num nam, for num.
                  
                     Numa, was the ſeconde kynge of Romaynes.
                  
                     Numatio, hauynge great ſtore of money.
                  
                     Numellae, a tumbrelle, wherein menne be punyſſhed, hauyng their heedes and fete put into it.
                  
                     Numen, proprelye is the wylle of God. Sommetyme the power of god, ſomme tyme it ſygnyfyeth god, ſommetyme apparayle.
                  
                     Numerabilis, rabile, that may be numbryd.
                  
                     Numeralis, rale, pertaynynge to numbre.
                  
                     Numerarius, ſeu numerator, he that caſteth accompt, or reckneth a thyng in numbres.Auguſtinꝰ
                  
                  
                     
                     Numeratius, ia, um, wherin is numbre.
                  
                     Numeratim, in numbre, or by numbres.
                  
                     Numerato, promptely, redily, ſometyme in accompt or reckenynge.Fab. Quin. v
                           •
                        . 
                     De Actore facile dicente ex tempore dictum eſt ingenium eū in numerato habere, of the plaintyfe, whā he ſpeaketh quyckely and without ſtudy, it is ſayde, that he hath a quycke wytte and a redy. Claudius Iſidorus teſtamento ſuo dixit,
                     Plin. li. 31. 
                     quamuis multa Ciuili bello perdidiſſet, tamen relinquere ſeruorum quatuor millia, iuga boum tria millia ſexcenta, reliqui poecoris ducenta quinquaginta millia, In numerato pōdo ſexcenta millia, Claude Iſidore ſayde, that not withſtandynge that he hadde loſte moche in the Ciuyle warres: yet hadde he lefte in his teſtament foure thouſande ſlaues, three thouſande and ſyxe hundred yoke of oxen, of other cattel two hundred and fyfty thouſande, In money redy tolde ſyx hundred thouſande pounde.
                  
                     Numero, are, to numbre or counte, to telle money, to reken catell.
                  
                     Numeroſus, greate in nombre.
                  
                     Numerus, nombre, ſometyme quantitie, as of grayne, it is alſo a preciſe order in harmony, in lengthe and ſhorteneſſe of ſyllables. And therfore ſommetyme verſes be called Numeri.
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        , in 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      Alſo it ſignifyeth company or feloweſhyp. It is alſo taken for the warſte ſorte of the people.
                  
                     Numeris omnibus abſolutus, on euery part perfytely.
                  
                     Numidia, a royalme in Affrike.
                  
                     Numida, a man of Numidia.
                  
                     Numitius, a ryuer in Italy by Lauinium.
                  
                     Nummarius, nummaria, rium, pertaynynge to money.
                  
                     Nummarius, a keper and louer of money.
                  
                     Nummarus, moneyed, ryche in money.
                  
                     Numitor, toris, the grandfather of Romulus and Remus on the mothers ſyde.
                  
                     Nummularius, he with whome exchaunge of money is made.
                  
                     Nummulus, a lytle coine or piece of money
                  
                     Nummus, & numiſma, moneye. It was a coyne, whiche was the tenthe parte of a golden peny.
                  
                     Nummus adulterinus, counterfayt money.
                  
                     Numella, a payre of ſhakelles, or fetters for a horſe.
                  
                     Nunc, nowe, at the laſte.
                  
                     Nunquando for num aliquando.
                  
                  
                     Valla in Rauden.
                     Nuntiatio, reporte, relation.
                  
                     Nuntio, are, to tell or ſygnifye.
                  
                     Nuntius, a meſſanger, ſometyme a meſſage.
                  
                     Nuntium, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Nuncupo, are, to name.
                  
                     Nuncupare uota, to make a ſolemne auowe.Caeſar.
                  
                  
                     Nuncupare teſtamentum, to declare a wylle or teſtament by mouthe.
                  
                     Nuncupatio, a namynge, a declaration of a wylle.
                  
                     Nundinae, the market days, whiche in olde time was the nynthe daye: and than dyd the huſbande men come to the citie to bie and ſelle, and alſo to here their lawes declared, whiche were newe made.
                  
                     Nūdinalis le, & nūdinarius, a, um, pertaining to a market or fayre.
                  
                     Nundinatio, marchaundyſe exercyſed in fayres.
                  
                     Nundinator, toris, a market man.
                  
                     Nundinor, naris, to ſelle openly: ſometyme to bye often.
                  
                     Nunquam, neuer.Ci. in ver.
                  
                  
                     Nunquam non, euer.
                  
                     Nunquid, a demaunde. Nunquid ego ſum? Is it not I?
                  
                     Nunquis, que, quid? Is there any.
                  
                     Nunquid vis? wylle ye anye thynge with me? or, Is there any thynge that I maye do for you?
                  
                     Nuper, late, awhyle agoone. Sommetyme longe ago.
                  
                     Nuper admodum, a lyttell whyle ago.
                  
                     Nuperrimus, the laſte of all.
                  
                     Nuperus, a, um, ſignifieth late done, or hapned, or newe begonne.Plautus in 
                           •
                        apt.
                  
                  
                     Nuptialis, le, pertaynyng to mariage.
                  
                     Nuptiae, mariage or weddynge.
                  
                     Nupturio, ire, to deſyre to marye.
                  
                     Nuptus, ta, tum, maryed.
                  
                     Nuptus, & nupta, the huſbonde and wyfe.
                  
                     Nuptus, tus, mariage.
                  
                     Nurſia, an olde citie in Italy.
                  
                     Nurus, a daughter in law, the ſonnes wyfe.
                  
                     Nuſquam, no where.
                  
                     Nuſquam gentium, no where, neuer.Valla in Rauden.
                  
                  
                     Nuſquam non, for vbi
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , euery where.
                  
                     Nutrico, are, & nutrio, ire, to nouryſhe.
                  
                     Nutricatus, tus, norture.
                  
                     Nutritius, the foſter father.
                  
                     Nutritius, nutritia, nutritium, that nouryſſhethe.
                  
                     Nutrix, cis, a nourſe.
                  
                     Nutricula, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Nutus, tus, a becke, or countenaunce with mouynge the eye or hande.
                  
                     Nuto, tare, to becken or wynke.
                  
                     Nutu, ac tenutu, with a becke and rebecke, with a calle and a becke.
                  
                     Nux, nucis, a nutte.
                  
                     Nux auelana, a fylberde.
                  
                     Nux iuglans, a walle nutte.
                  
                     Nux pinea, a pyneappull.
                  
                     Nux graeca, an almonde.
               
            
            
               
               
                  ¶N, ANTE Y.
                  
                     NIcteris, a reremous or backe, with litel fete, that they ſeme to haue none.
                  
                     Nicticorax, racis, a nyghte crowe, or ſhryche crowe.
                  
                     Nictileia, ſacrifices by night vnto Bacchꝰ.
                  
                     Nyctilopes, he that dothe ſee nothynge by nyght, and lyttell in the euenynge.
                  
                     Nictimene, the daughter of Nictes, which lay with her father, and afterwarde was tourned into an owle, who wolde not be ſeene but at nyght.
                  
                     Nymphae, goddeſſes of the waters, or ſpirited, beinge conuerſaunt aboute waters, elfes, women of the fayrie. ſometyme the Muſes be ſo called. alſo yonge bees, as ſone as they haue receyued their fourme.
                  
                     Nymphea, naturall bathes.
                  
                     Nymphus, he that is wedded, the brydegroome.
                  
                     Nyſa, a mans name. alſo a citie in Arabia.
                  
                     Nyſia, a kynd of Iuie, hauyng black beries.
                  
                     Nyſerus, an yle by Grecia.
                  
                     Nyſus, the name of a manne.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶O, ANTE A.
                  
                     
                        OATARICA, the ſpaune of fiſſhe ſalted.
                  
                     Oaxis, a ryuer in the yle of Crete or Candy.
                  
                     Oaxus, a cytie in Crete or Candye.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶O ANTE B.
                  
                     OB, for at, ob rem, for my profyte, ob oculos,
                     Plaut. before myn eyes.
                  
                     Obaeratus, bounden by erneſt money.
                  
                     Obacero, are, to lette a man that he can not telle out his tale.
                  
                     Obambulo, are, to walke a gaynſt an other. alſo to walke togither, or with an other.
                  
                     Obacerbo, are, to make one angrie.
                  
                     Obareſco, ſcere, to drye all aboute.
                  
                     Obaudio, ite, to here hardly, or vnwillingly. ſometyme to obey.
                  
                     Obba, a bottelle.
                  
                     Obcaeco, care, to blynde.
                  
                     Obdo, dere, to thruſte agayne, or put to.
                  
                     Obdormio, ire, to ſlepe faſt or ſoundly.
                  
                     Obduco, xi, ere, to lay ouer, or couer a thing ſomtyme to vncouer or open. alſo to bring agaynſt or ouerthwart a place.
                  
                     Obdulceſco, ſcere, to be ſwete aboute.
                  
                     Obdureo, rui, ere, & obdureſco, ſcere, to be harde. Obduro, are, to make harde.
                  
                     Obedio, dire, to obeye.
                  
                     Obedo, dere, to conſume or eate al aboute.
                  
                     Obeliſcus, a great ſtone, ſquare like a butte, waxing ſmaller & ſmaller, vntyl the toppe, of a great height, made plaine by a warkman: there were of them diuers in Rome.
                  
                     Obelus, a ſpyt or broche, alſo a longe ſtrike in writing like a ſpit, for a note or diuerſite.
                  
                     Obeo, iui, ire, to go to, to go aboute, to be at hande, to mete with one.
                  
                     Obeſus, a, um, fatte, groſſe of body.
                  
                     Obire mortem, obire diem, to dye.
                  
                     Obire vadimonium, to go to be ſuretie.Liuius.
                  
                  
                     Obire legationem, to go in ambaſſade.
                  
                     Obire prouinciam, to exerciſe auctoritie.
                  
                     Obire bellum, to go to battayle.
                  
                     Obire haereditatem, to take poſſeſſion of landes, wherein a manne hath a ſtate of inherytaunce.
                  
                     Obedibo, was in the old time vſed for obediam, I ſhall obey.
                  
                     Obequito, tare, to ryde aboute.
                  
                     Oberro, are, to wander aboute.
                  
                     Obeſco, care, to fede fatte.
                  
                     Obeſus, a man that is very fatte.
                  
                     Obeſitas, fatteneſſe.
                  
                     Obeſus, a, um, in Virgil is fatte,Vergilius. Suetonius in Neuio it ſygnifieth leane or lyttell. it is moſt commonly taken for fatte in the bodye.
                  
                     Obex, bicis, an obiecte or lette.
                  
                     Obgannio, & oggānio, ire, to whiſter in ons eare. Alſo to tell a thynge often.
                  
                     Obherbeſco, ſcere, to growe vppe as herbes doone.
                  
                     Obiaceo, cui, cere, to lye aboute.
                  
                     Obiecto, tare, to obiect, or often impute, or lay to ones charge, alſo to caſte out.
                  
                     Obiectum, any thinge that is before a mannes eyen, and may be ſene.
                  
                     Obiectus, ta, tū, throwen or layde agaynſte.
                  
                     Obiectus, tus, the layenge or ſettynge of a thynge before ones eyes.
                  
                     Obiicio, ieci, iicere, to lay or throwe againſt, or to lay before one.
                  
                     Obigitare, to ſtere or moue before.Sex. Pom.
                  
                  
                     Obinunt, they dye.
                  
                     Obiter, by the waye, incidently, beſyde the purpoſe, in the meane tyme, preciſely.
                  
                     Obirus, ta, tum, the acte or concluſion.
                  
                     Obitus, tus, the dieng or deceſſe of a mā. ſomtime the cōming of one. The ancient writers toke obitum for the acceſſe of one.
                  
                     Obiurgo, are, to chide or rebuke.
                  
                     Obiurgatio, chydynge, rebukynge.
                  
                     Obiuro, rare, to bynde by an othe.
                  
                     Obiurgator, & obiurgatrix, he or ſhe that chydeth or rebuketh.
                  
                     Oblatio, offryng. Oblatus, ta, tum, offred.
                  
                     Oblecto, ari, & oblector, ari, to delite. Oblectatio oblectamē & oblectamentū, recreatiō
                  
                  
                     
                     Oblicio, to take recreation or pleaſure.
                  
                     Obligo, are, to bynde.
                  
                     Obligatio, an obligation or bonde.
                  
                     Obligurio, ire, to eate delicate meates gredily or rauenouſely, and to conſume goodes in feaſtynge and bankettynge.
                  
                     Obliquus, a, um, contrary to ſtraight.
                  
                     Cor. Tacitus lib. 2.
                     Oblique perſtringere, to taunte or checke.
                  
                     Oblimo, are, to couer with mudde or ſofte claye. ſometyme to ſtoppe or daube.
                  
                     Oblino, ere, to imbrue or make foule.
                  
                     Obliteratus, ta, tum, ſcraped out, or blotted.
                  
                     Oblitero, are, to ſcrape out, or putte out of remembraunce.
                  
                     Obliteratio, a ſcrapynge or blottynge oute of a worde.
                  
                     Oblitus, ta, tum, forgotten.
                  
                     Oblitus, imbrued, defyled.
                  
                     Obliuioſus, a, um, forgettefull.
                  
                     Obliuiſcor, ſceri, ſci, to forgette.
                  
                     Obliuium, forgetfulneſſe.
                  
                     
                        Oblo
                              •
                           utio,
                      yll reporte.
                  
                     Plautus in C
                           ••
                        gul.
                     Obloquor, eris, qui, to ſpeake agaynſte or contrarie, to reporte ylle, to curſe.
                  
                     Obloquutor, an yll reporter, or detracter.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈1 paragraph〉
                        
                     
                     Oblucinio, are, to erre.
                  
                     Oblucinaſſe, to haue erred.
                  
                     Obmanens, abydynge longe.
                  
                     Obmoueto, moue or putte to.
                  
                     Obmordeo, ere, to byte.
                  
                     Obmuteſco, as we communely ſay, I holde my peace, I ſpeake not, I hold my tonge.
                  
                     Obnato, tare, to ſwymme agaynſte.
                  
                     Obnecto, to knytte faſte.
                  
                     Obnexus, a um, faſte knytte.
                  
                     Obnexio, a faſte knyttynge.
                  
                     Obnitor, teris, ti, to reſyſte.
                  
                     Obnoxius, a, um, bounden, ſubiecte, apt, in daunger. ſometyme it ſygnifyeth gyltie or fautie. Sum tibi obnoxius, I am bounden vnto the, obnoxius morbis, ſubiect to ſickneſſe. Periculis obnoxius, ſubiecte to perylles. &c. Minari interdū ferro, niſi ſibi obnoxia foret, And thretned hir ſommetyme with his weapon, yf ſhe wold not be obediente to his requeſtes.Saluſtius. Colum. 5. Ci. ad At. 
                     Obnoxium feris, Caſte out to wylde beaſtes.
                  
                     Obnoxie, fearefully, lyke a ſubiecte.
                  
                     Obnubo, bere, to hyde.
                  
                     Obnubilo, are, to make darke.
                  
                     Obnuere, to couer the heed or body.
                  
                     Obnuntiare, to denie, to reſyſte agaynſte a thynge purpoſed.
                  
                     Obolus, a poyſe wayinge halfe a ſcruple. it was alſo a coyne of ſyluer, whiche varied in poyſe after the countrey, as obolus Atticus,
                     Salu. in orati. Memmii. 
                     obolus Romanus, obolus Hebraicus.
                  
                  
                     Oborior, ri, to begin to ſpring or come forth
                  
                     Obrado, raſi, dere, to ſhaue againſt the heer.
                  
                     Obortus, a, um, begonne or ſpronge, as rumor obortus, tydynges ſpronge.
                  
                     Ob rem, for the purpoſe.
                  
                     Obrepo, pere, to come priuily or ſteale in, to come vnwares or vnloked for.
                  
                     Obrepere ad honores,
                     Ci. in 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      to come or attayne to honour by crafty diſſimulation.
                  
                     Obreptio, the gettynge or obteynynge of a thynge in fourme aforeſayde.
                  
                     Obrepticiae literae, letters opteyned by the ſayde meanes.
                  
                     Obrideo, dere, to laugh agaynſt one.
                  
                     Obrideo, ſi, dere, to laugh at one, or to mock one. Obſio, a mocke.
                  
                     Obrigeo, gui, gere, & obrigeſco, ſcere, to be or waxe ſtyffe for colde.
                  
                     Obrion, one of the yles called fortunate.
                  
                     Obryzum, pure or fyne golde.
                  
                     Obripio, ripui, ripere, is in hydynge ſomme thyng, whiche ſhuld be ſpoken, to atteyne the thynge that we deſyre.
                  
                     Obrodo, roſi, dere, to gnawe aboute.
                  
                     Obrogo, are, to checke or interrupte a man in his ſpeeche. Obrogare legem, to derogate one lawe by an other.
                  
                     Obruo, ere, to ouerthrow, to couer a thing in caſtynge an other thynge ouer it.
                  
                     Obrutania fulmina, lyghtnynges, which ſodaynely happen, throwynge downe and burnynge thynges, before they be procured or loked for.
                  
                     Obſaturo, rare, to be fylled to moche with a thynge.
                  
                     Obſaluto, are, to offre my ſelfe to ſalute one.
                  
                     Obſatum, olde writers vſed for halowed.
                  
                     Obſaeuio, ire, to be wode angry againſt one.Plaut
                           ••
                         in Epid.
                  
                  
                     Obſcoeno, are, to brynge or cauſe yll lucke.
                  
                     Obſcoenus, na, num, abhomynable, all thyng whiche is to be eſchewed, dyſſhoneſt, vncleane, pernicious, Alſo brynging yl lucke.
                  
                     Obſcoenitas, villany in actes, rybauldrie.
                  
                     Obſcurus, a, um, darke, hydde, dyſfuſe, vnknowen, of no gentyll bloode.
                  
                     Obſcuritas, darkeneſſe, difficultie, vngentylneſſe of bloudde.
                  
                     Obſcuro, are, to make darke, to ſhadow, to hide, to kepe in ſilence or from the knowlege of other, to make of no reputation.
                  
                     Obſecratio, a ſpeciall deſyre.No. 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Obſecro, are, to beſech or hartily pray, Obſecrare ab aliquo, to deſyre of one.
                  
                     Obſecro, is ſomtyme an aduerbe. Hem, obſecro anis eſt? Howe, I pray the is that he?Terent in Eunuc
                           •
                        o.
                  
                  
                     Obſecundo, are, to make proſperouſe, alſo to obey or do all thing at an other mās wil, to make a thing better than it ſemeth to be.
                  
                     Obſecundanter, obediently.
                  
                     Obſepio, iui, ire, to incloſe about wt an hedge
                  
                     Obſequela, dilygence, indeuour.
                  
                     
                     Obſequia, thynges done to the pleaſure or appetite of hym, that they be done for.
                  
                     Obſequens, obedient.
                  
                     Obſequentiſsime, with great obedience.
                  
                     Obſequere animo, Take thy pleſure, make good chere.
                  
                     Obſequibilis, diligent, redy to do that, whiche is commaunded.
                  
                     Obſequioſus, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Obſequium, redynes to do all that is commaunded. ſometyme it ſygnifieth flattery.
                  
                     Obſequor, eris, qui, to folow an other mannes pleaſure.
                  
                     Obſero, ſeri, rere, to ſowe or ſette aboute, to plante.
                  
                     Obſero, are, to locke or ſhutte a doore.
                  
                     Obſeruabilis, le, mete to be obſerued, worthy to be had in reuerence.
                  
                     Obſeruantia, reuerence, obſeruaunce.
                  
                     Obſeruatio, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Plautus in Aſinar.
                     Obſeruo, are, to awayte diligently with the eyes, and alſo the mynde, to honoure, to take good hede, to haue in reuerence.
                  
                     Obſeruare ianuam, to kepe the doore.
                  
                     Obſes, idis, an hoſtage, or pledge in warres
                  
                     Obſeſsi, they whiche ar beſieged, that they may not iſſu out of the place where they ar.
                  
                     Obſeſſor, oris, he that layeth ſiege.
                  
                     Obſidiae, arum, lyenge in awayte, to take away any thynge craftily.
                  
                     Obſidianum nitrum, a glaſſe whiche is pure blacke.
                  
                     Obſidionalis corona, a garlande gyuen to them, whyche delyuered a towne or fortreſſe beſyeged with ennemyes, whyche was of graſſe.
                  
                     Obſidior, aris, ari, to ly in await to take one.
                  
                     Obſidium, obſidio, obſeſsio, a ſyege about a towne or fortreſſe.
                  
                     Obſido, & obſideo, ſeſsi, dere, to lay ſiege.
                  
                     Obſigno, are, to cloſe letters & ſeale them. Alſo to ſygne them.
                  
                     Obſignator, toris, he that putteth to his ſele or ſygne to a dede or inſtrument.
                  
                     Obſipo, are, to throwe or caſte, as whanne men of the countrey do ſay.
                  
                     Obſipa pullis eſcam, Caſte meate to the chyckens.
                  
                     Obſiſto, ſtiti, ſiſtere, to reſyſte.
                  
                     Obſitus, ta, tum, wrapped, ſette about with herbes or trees.
                  
                     Obſoleſco, ſcere, to decaye, to waxe olde, to be out of vſe.
                  
                     Obſoletus, ta, tum, decayed, olde, oute of vſe, worne, as a garment, whan it is bare.
                  
                     Valla in Rauden.
                     Obſonium, all meates, excepte breade and potage.
                  
                     Obſonus, ſona, num, that whiche hathe an yll ſowne.
                  
                     Obſono, & obſonor, nari, to feeſt or banket.
                  
                     Obſonito, tare, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Obſonatio, feaſtynge or bankettynge.
                  
                     Obſonator, & obſonatrix, he or ſhe that maketh feaſtes or bankettes.
                  
                     Obſono, are, to ſowne yll.
                  
                     Obſorbeo, bui, bere, & obſorbo, pſi, bere, to ſuppe vp all.
                  
                     Obſordeo, dui, ſordere, to be fylthye or vncleane, or ſluttyſhe. Nonius declaryth it to waxe olde.
                  
                     Obſtaculum, an obſtacle or impediment.
                  
                     Obſtetrico, care, to do the offyce of a mydwyfe.
                  
                     Obſtetrix, tricis, a mydwyfe.
                  
                     Obſtinare, obſtinately, or fyrmely.
                  
                     Obſtinatus, ta, tum, obſtinate, firme, or ſtable
                  
                     Obſtinatio, obſtynacie, ſtyffenes in opinion.
                  
                     Obſtino, are, to be obſtinate, or perſiſt firme in one ſentence or purpoſe.
                  
                     Obſtipo, pare, to ſtoppe.
                  
                     Obſtipus, crouped ſhouldred.
                  
                     Obſtitum, croked, ſometyme vyolated.
                  
                     Obſto, ſtiti, ſtare, to withſtande, to lette.
                  
                     Obſtrepo, pere, to crye out on one, or make a noyſe.
                  
                     Obſtrigillo, are, to reſiſt or repugne againſt, to ſpeake in detraction of one.
                  
                     Obſtringo, xi, gere, to bynde or tye.
                  
                     Obſtrictus, bounden.
                  
                     Obſtringere fidem, to make a faythefulle promyſe.
                  
                     Obſtrudo, fi, dere, to hyde, to ſtoppe a mans throte, that he can not eate meate.Plautus in Stich. Pom. Feſt.
                  
                  
                     Obſtrudulentum, a ſtoppynge.
                  
                     Obſtruo, xi, ſtruere, to ſhutte, to ſtoppe.
                  
                     Obſtructus, ſtopped or ſhutte.
                  
                     Obſtruere luminibus, to ſette that a manne canne not loke out of his wyndowes,Cice. pro domo ſua. or to ſtoppe his lyghtes.
                  
                     Obſtupidus, a, um, aſtonyed.
                  
                     Obſtupefacio, facere, to abaſſhe,Plautus in Milite. or make abaſhed.
                  
                     Obſtupeſco, ſcere, to be abaſſhed.
                  
                     Obſum, obſui, obeſſe, to hurte or hynder, or indamage.
                  
                     Obſurdeſco, obſurdeſcere, to be or waxe deaffe.
                  
                     Obtempero, perare, to obey, or be at commaundement.
                  
                     Obtendo, to laye an excuſe.
                  
                     Obtendiculum, a colourable aunſwere.
                  
                     Obtentus, tus, a pretence.
                  
                     Obtero, triui, obterere, to treade or thruſte downe, to ſuffocate, to bruyſe.
                  
                     Obtego, obtegere, to couer aboute.
                  
                     Obteſtatio, an humble deſyre, proprely not to do a thyng. Alſo to take god or ſome other thynge to wytneſſe.
                  
                     
                     Obteſtor, aris, ari, humbly to beſeche, to deſyre for goddes ſake, or for the remembraunce of ſome thinge, whyche to hym that is deſyred, is thankfully herde.
                  
                     Obtexo, ere, to wayue aboute.
                  
                     Obticeo, cui, cere, to keepe ſylence, not to ſpeake.
                  
                     Obturo, are, to ſhutte.
                  
                     Obtueor, eri, to beholde, to loke on.
                  
                     Obturatio, ſhuttynge.
                  
                     
                        Obtineo, 
                              •
                           ere,
                      to opteyne, to holde, to retayne ſtyll, to gete, ſometyme to haue. Si iſtam animi firmitudinē obtines, ſalui ſumꝰ, If thou haſte that firmeneſſe of courage, we be ſaulfe.
                  
                     Obtingere, to happe.
                  
                     Obtigit, it happened.
                  
                     Obtorpeſco, obtorpui, peſcere, to be verye ſlow or dull.
                  
                     Obtorqueo, obtorſi, obtorquere, to wringe or wrythe aboute.
                  
                     Obtrecto, tare, to ylle reporte, to depraue, to haue in de
                        •
                     pyte.
                  
                     Obtrectater, toris, an yl reporter, or backbyter.
                  
                     Obtrectatio, ylle reporte.
                  
                     Obtrigo, are, to bynde by an othe.
                  
                     Obtrudo, ſi, dere, to thruſte downe, to putte to with force. Obtrudit fores, He pullid to the doore.
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         in 
                           〈◊〉
                        . Alſo to ſet forth. Aliquid prius obtrudamus, Lette vs fyrſte ſette forthe ſommewhat.
                  
                     Terent in 
                           〈…〉
                        .
                     Obtrudere vxorem, to gyue to a man a wyfe againſt his will or appetite.
                  
                     Obtrunco, uncare, to ſlee, alſo to ſtryke of a mans heed.
                  
                     Obtundo, dere, to ſtryke, to breake, to make dull, to hurte a man with ſpeking, to make werye.
                  
                     Obturbo, are, to trouble all.
                  
                     Obtuſus, a, um, dulle.
                  
                     Obtutus, tus, & obtuitus, a looke or regard.
                  
                     Obuagio, gire, to crye oute, as a childe.
                  
                     Obuallo, are, to enuyronne or compaſſe aboute with a dyche or walle.
                  
                     Obuaricator, toris, he that tourneth one out of the ryght waye, or letteth hym that he maye not paſſe.
                  
                     Obuaro, are, to peruerte.
                  
                     Obuarico, care, to ſtoppe or lette oone of his paſſage.
                  
                     Obuenio, nire, to comme agaynſte, to mete with. alſo to happen.
                  
                     Obuerſor, aris, ari, to be preſente, to come in remembraunce.
                  
                     Cicer. pro Sextio.
                     Obuerto, & obuerſo, tere, to tourne agayne, or backe. Sed mihi ante oculos obuerſabatur reipub. dignitas, quae me ad ſe rapit. But before myne eyes camme the eſtate of the publyque weale, whiche plucketh me vnto hyr.
                  
                     Obuiam, an aduerbe, which ſignifieth before in the waye, againſt one. Obuiam ire, to go againſt one, to preuent.
                  
                     Obuio, are, to meete with one.
                  
                     Obuius, a, um, that which meteth with one.
                  
                     Obumbro, brare, to make darke with a ſhadowe: ſometyme to defende.
                  
                     Obuolo, are, to flie againſte.
                  
                     Obuos ſacro, the auncient Romayns vſed for obſecro, I beſeche you.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶O, ANTE C.
                  
                     OCca, an harowe or dragge, whyche hath yron teeth, wherwith cloddes are broken.
                  
                     Occatio, a breakynge of cloddes, or harrowynge.
                  
                     Occaeco, care, to make blynde.
                  
                     Occalleo, ere, to waxe or be harde fleſſhed, or brauned, lyke as a bore is.
                  
                     Occano, & occino, occanui, & occini, occanere, & occinere, to ſynge agaynſt one, to laye in rebuke.
                  
                     Occaſo, ſere, to be loſte, or vndone.Plautus in Caſi.
                  
                  
                     Occaſio, occaſyon.
                  
                     Occaſiuncula, a ſmalle occaſyon.
                  
                     Occaſus, us, dethe of manne or beaſte. Alſo the goynge downe of the ſonne, or ſonneglade.
                  
                     Occatorium, an harrowynge.Colum
                           •
                        . li. 2. Pom. Fe
                           ••
                        .
                  
                  
                     Occedo, pro accedo.
                  
                  
                     
                        Occentaſsint for conuitia fecerint,
                      They ſhal gyue rebukes or wordes of reproche.
                  
                     Occento, tare, to crye oute againſt one with rebukefull wordes.
                  
                     Occentus, tus, where one ſyngeth againſt another. It maye be alſo taken for a countretenor.
                  
                     Occepſo, pro incepero, I ſhall begynne.Plaut
                           ••
                        .
                  
                  
                     Occidens, tis, the weſt, or ponent.
                  
                     Occidio, onis, a ſlaughter.
                  
                     Occido, di, dere, to ſlee or wounde to deth, to fall greuouſly.
                  
                     Occiſa res eſt, the matter is daſſhed.
                  
                     Occitantur, for frequenter occiduntur, they be ſlayne here and there, or in dyuers places.
                  
                     Occido, dere, to fall downe, to peryſſhe vtterly, to dye, to goo downe, as the ſunne doeth, and other ſterres.
                  
                     Occidit ſpes noſtra, oure hope is loſt.Plautus in Pſeudo
                           ••
                        
                        ▪
                     
                  
                  
                     Occiſa eſt haec res, this thinge is loſt or in deſpayre.
                  
                     Occiduum, the place where the ſunne goeth downe.
                  
                     Occino, nere, to ſynge to another.
                  
                     
                     Occilare, to beare or buffat.
                  
                     Plaut. in Caſina.
                     Occiſsimus, of all other mooſte loſt or deſperate.
                  
                     Occifio, onis, a ſlaughter or deth of men or catell.
                  
                     Occidi, I am deed, I am loſt.
                  
                     Occipio, pere, to begynne.
                  
                     Occiput, & occipitium, the hynder parte of the heed.
                  
                     Occlamito, tare, to crye oute.
                  
                     Occludo, dere, to ſhytte faſte.
                  
                     Occludere linguam, to ſtoppe a man frome ſpeakynge.
                  
                     Occluſus, occluſior, occluſiſsimus, faſt ſhut.
                  
                     Occo, occare, to harrowe and breake cloddes and balkes in the corne fieldes, Alſo to couer with erthe.
                  
                     Occulo, lere, to hyde.
                  
                     Occulto, tare, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Ocultus, ta, tum, hyd, whiche is not knowē.
                  
                     Occulte, paiuyly, vnknowen.
                  
                     Occumbo, cubui, cumbere, to be ſlayne, to be deedly wounded.
                  
                     Occupatitius ager, the fielde, whiche is neglected of the owner, & labored by other.
                  
                     Occupo, are, to occupie, to get or take before an other man, to vſe in commune, to take or holde a thynge with force, to lette or empeche, to poſſede, ſomtyme to lende for auauntage.
                  
                     Occupans, tis, he that dothe occupie or vſe a thynge, the occupier.
                  
                     Cl. in Ver. act. 2.
                     Occupatus, let, in buſyneſſe, occupyed.
                  
                     Occupatio, a colour in rhetorike, where the playntyfe in preuentynge the wordes of the defendaunt, reherceth that whiche he will laye for excuſe, and diſproueth it.
                  
                     Plautus in Menech.
                     Occupare conſilium, to fynde aduyſe or coū
                     ſayle.
                  
                     Occupare locum, to take or kepe a place with force.Liui, li. 33.
                  
                  
                     Occurro, ſi, rére, to meete with, to come to remembraunce, to offre hym ſelfe. Alſo to reſiſte, to runne, to come to mynde, or remembrance, alſo to be proffred.
                  
                     Occurſo, are, the frequentatiue of occurro, to come often to remembraunce, to mete ofte, or runne agaynſte one.
                  
                     Occurſus, us, a runnynge agaynſte one.
                  
                     Oceanus, the ſee, whiche gothe aboute all the worlde. Alſoo a great poole made in Rome, for many perſones to ſwymme in.
                  
                     Oceanius, a, um, of the occean ſee.
                  
                     Ocellatus, ta, tum, that whiche hath eyen, or holes lyke to eyen.
                  
                     Ocha, a gooſe.
                  
                     Ocquiniſco, ſcere, to inclyne or bow to.
                  
                     Ochus, a ryuer which paſſeth throughe Acarnania, a countray in grece.
                  
                     Ochra, oker, whiche paynters do vſe.
                  
                     Otior, aris, ari, to be vnoccupyed, or withoute buſyneſſe.
                  
                     Otioſus, ydell, vnoccupied, quyete.
                  
                     Otium, vacation from labour, leyſer, quietnes, ydelnes, lacke of buſynes.
                  
                     Ocreae, legge harneyſe, bootes.
                  
                     Ocreatus, boted or harneiſed on the leggis.
                  
                     Octangulus, a, um, eight cornerd.
                  
                     Octo, eight.
                  
                     Octies, eight tymes.
                  
                     Octonus, a, um, the numbre of eight, in ſondry partis.
                  
                     Octobris, the moneth of Octobre.
                  
                     Octopes, hauynge eight feete.Sueton. in Cali. Quint.
                  
                  
                     Octophorum, a carre with eight wheles.
                  
                     Oculatus, full of eyen, alſo quick ſigted, circumſpect, eſpyenge a thinge ſhortly.
                  
                     Oculatus teſtis, a witneſſe whiche ſawe the thinge.
                  
                     Oculeus, full of eyen, wyly.
                  
                     Oculis captus, blynde.
                  
                     Oculitus eam amat, he loueth her as well as his owne eyen.
                  
                     Oculus, an eye, alſoo a yonge budde of a tree.
                  
                     Oculū adijcere, to be in loue with the thing, which is ſene.
                  
                     Ocymum, an herbe.
                  
                     Ocyor, ſwifter, ocyus idem.
                  
                  
                     Ocyſsimus, a, um, moſt ſwift.
                  
                     Ocyus, ſooner, quicklyer.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶O, ANTE D.
                  
                     ODaea, places, wherin ſyngynge is exercyſed.
                  
                     Ode, a ſonge.
                  
                     Odfacio, for olfacio, cere, to ſmelle.
                  
                     Odi, I hate, or haue hated: Odiſſe, to hate, or haue hated.
                  
                     Odioſus, he that is hated, diſpleſant, troublous, tediouſe.
                  
                     Odioſe, with hate, diſpleaſantly.
                  
                     Odit eum cane peius, & angue, He hatethe him wars than a dogge or a ſerpente: as who ſayth, mortally without hope of reconcylynge.
                  
                     Odites, oone of the ſonnes of Ixion the Centaure.
                  
                     Odium, hate, diſpleaſure, tediouſenes.
                  
                     Odoeporicon, an Itenerary, wherin is writen the diſtance of one place from an nother, or a lyke thyng, as the ieſtes of princis are, aſſignynge their iourneys.
                  
                     Odor, oris, & odos, ſauour, ſente.
                  
                     Odoramentum, euery thynge that ſauoureth well. alſo ſauour.
                  
                     Odorarius, a maker or ſeller of thinges that

ſmelle ſwete.
                  
                     Odoratus, ta, tum, that which is perfumed. ſometyme that whiche doth ſauour, odoriferous, or ſmellynge ſwete.
                  
                     Odorator, a hounde made to the ſute.
                  
                     Odoriferus, a, um, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Odoriſecus, a hounde or ſpanell, which hunteth by ſent.
                  
                     Odoro, & odoror, ari, to ſmell.
                  
                     Odorus, a, um, that whiche ſendeth furthe ſauour, or hath a good ſauour.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶O, ANTE E.
                  
                     OEagius, a ryuer in the countraye of Thracia.
                  
                     Oeanthe, a citie, alſoo the floure of a vyne.
                  
                     Oebades, kynge Darius horſekepar, by whoſe polycye he atteyned to the kyngedome of Perſia.
                  
                     Oebalia, the countraye in Grece, called alſo Laconia.
                  
                     Oebalus, a mannes name.
                  
                     Oechalia, a citie in Laconia.
                  
                     Oeconomia, the orderinge and prouydinge of thinges concernyng houſholde, alſoo an order in writinge, whereby euery thinge is ſet in his propre place.
                  
                     Oeconomica, pertayninge to huſbandry.
                  
                     Oeconomus, a ſtewarde of houſholde.
                  
                     Oeci, placis, where women do ſitte & worke with woull or ſylke.
                  
                     Oecumenicus, vniuerſall, pertayninge to all the worlde.
                  
                     Oecumenicum conſilium, a general counſail, wherein thinges are vniuerſally treated concerninge all countreys.
                  
                     Oedipus, a man, which diſſolued ſubtyll and darke queſtions.
                  
                     Oedipodionius, nia, um, belongynge to Oedipus.
                  
                     Oenanthe, the bery of a wylde vyne.
                  
                     Oenamhinum, an oynemente made of the ſayde bery.
                  
                     Oeneus, the father of Deianira, the laſt wife of Hercules.
                  
                     Oenophorus, a ſeruaunte, whyche bringeth wyne to the table.
                  
                     Oenophorum, a potte wherein wyne is caryed.
                  
                     Oenopola, a vyntenar, or tauernour.
                  
                     Oenopolium, a wyne tauerne.
                  
                     Oenotria, Italy.
                  
                     Oenotrides, two Iles nyghe to Calabria.
                  
                     Oeſipum, the fylthy oyle, which is in wull, that is in the flankes of a ſhepe, or aboute his necke, which oyle is ſoden oute, & vſed for medicyne.
                  
                     Oeſtrum, woodneſſe, or madde fury: alſoo a fly, which maketh a great noyſe, whan he flyeth, ſome do ſuppoſe it to be, a dor, lyke to a bee, but that he is blacke & grettar.
                  
                     Oeta, a mountayne in Theſſaly.
                  
                     Oeteus, the father of Medea, wyfe of Iaſon.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶O, ANTE F.
                  
                     OFfa, a poodinge, alſo a diſh made with fatt broth, harde cheſe, peper, and cynamom, or other lyke iunkat. ſomtyme it is taken for a morſell.
                  
                     Offarius, & offaria, a maker of ſuche iunckettes.
                  
                     Offatim, in morſelles.
                  
                     Offector, toris, a dyar.
                  
                     Offella, a lytell morſell, as of fleſhe mynced, alſo a potage made with pieces of fleſſhe, as ſtuyd brothe or forced gruell.
                  
                     Offendo, dere, to meete with, to fall into, to fynde by chaunce, to ſtryke or hytte any thinge vnware, to offende. Offendere apud aliquem, to do a thinge, whyche lyketh not theym that do ſee it done.
                  
                     Offendiculum, an impediment or let, an obſtacle.
                  
                     Offendimentum, & offendix, the knotte of a ribon or laſe, wherewith a bonet or hatte is knytte faſt to the heed.
                  
                     Offenſa, offenſio, & offenſus, us, an offence.
                  
                     Offenſatio, a metynge.
                  
                     Offenſaculum, that which is layd in a mans waye, whereat he ſtumbleth.
                  
                     Offenſator, ſatoris, he that ſtackereth in redinge, as yf he were not perfyte in reding,Quint. or redeth otherwyſe than it is wryten.
                  
                     Offenſans, tis, that which hurteth or letteth.
                  
                     Offenſo, are, to hytte ofte, or to lette.
                  
                     Offenſiuncula, a ſmall offence.
                  
                     Offercio, to ſtuffe or fill.
                  
                     Offero, obtuli, offerre, to offre, or preſent, to gyue willyngly, to promyſe.
                  
                     Offerumentae, ſtrypes.Plau i
                           •
                         Rudes. 
                     Ne offerumentas habebis plureis in tergo tuo, 
                           
                              
                           
                           quam
                         vlla nauis lōga clauos, tum ego ero mendaciſsimus, and yf thou haue not moo ſtrypes on the ſkyn of thy backe, than a galy hath nayles, I ſhall be the falſyſt lyar that euer was.
                  
                     Offerumenta, offrynges, thynges offred to God.
                  
                     Offerre auxilium, to promyſe ayde.
                  
                     Offerre crimen,
                     Iuſtin. to put a complaynte againſt one.
                  
                     
                        Offerre incendium, Cice. ad Pont,
                        Cicero in 
                              •
                           ael
                              ••
                           
                           ▪
                         
                        Domus ardebat in Palatio non fortuiro, ſed oblato incēdio,
                      My houſe in the Palaice dyd burne not by any chaunce, but by fyre thraſt in

by ſome man.
                  
                     Pla
                           •
                        tus in 
                           •
                        en.
                     Offerre mendicitatem, to bringe one vnto pouertie.
                  
                     Offerre moram, to let.
                  
                     Offerre ſe obinam, to mete with one.
                  
                     Cic. off. 3. Terent. in Adelph.
                     Offerre ſtuprum, to commit aduoutry.
                  
                     Offerre vitium virgini, to defloure a virgyn.
                  
                     Officere luminibus, to ſtoppe the lyghtes.
                  
                     Officina, a werkhouſe, a ſhoppe.
                  
                     Officialis, ale, pertayninge to offices or dueties.
                  
                     Quint Ilia.
                     Officialis, an officer.
                  
                     Officio, ficere, to hurte, ſometyme to do, alſo to dy cloth.
                  
                     Officioſus, a ſeruyſable man, or he that is glad to pleaſe, or doeth well his duetye.
                  
                     Officioſus dolor, a grief which procedeth of a good cauſe or raiſon.
                  
                     Officium, office, duetye, or a thinge, whiche ought to be done. It is ſometyme taken for honour done to one, and it may be vſed for that, whyche we do calle homage, done in ſuche fourme as our lawe doeth appoynt it, it is alſo taken for benefyte.
                  
                     Cic. de amicitia.
                     Officium vſurpare, to do his duetye.
                  
                     Officioſe, diligently, ſeruiſably.
                  
                     Offirmo, are, to abyde in one purpoſe or opinion, to be obſtinate.
                  
                     Offlecto, xi, tere, to tourne a thinge contrary or aboute.
                  
                     Offoco, are, to powre water into the mouth of a man or beaſt.
                  
                     Offritiae, crafty or deceytfull taches.
                  
                     Offringo, ere, to breake with a plough, lande cared before.
                  
                     Offuciae, cawrellis, crafty wayes to deceyue.
                  
                     Offula, a lytell morſell.
                  
                     Offundo, fuſi, dere, to powre aboute, to make darke or blynde, to ſtayne, to caſt in, or bringe in.
                  
                     Offuco, care, to put water or other lycour into a mannes mouthe, to ſowke downe, as they vſe to do to lyke men, which for feobleneſſe canne not by them ſelfes take any ſuſtenaunce.
                  
                     Offuſeo, are, to make blacke, or darke.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶O, ANTE G.
                  
                     OGdous, a kynge of Egypte, whyche firſt buylded the citie of Memphis.
                  
                     Ogdoas, adis, the numbre of eyght.
                  
                     Ogdolapis, a ryuer which commeth oute of the hilles called Alpes, and runneth to Rome.
                  
                     Oggannio, ire, to prate, to braule, to ſpeake with chydinge.
                  
                     
                        Oggero, 
                              •
                           si, gerere,
                      to caſt in, or ſet.
                  
                     Oculos oggerere, to caſte or ſet the eyes on one.
                  
                     Oggraſſari, to go.Plaut. in Trucu.
                  
                  
                     Ogyges, he which firſt buylded the citie of Thebes.
                  
                     Ogygeus, a, um, made or foūde by Ogyges.
                  
                     Ogygea, an Ile betwene Phenicea and Syria.
                  
                     Ogyris, an Ile in Syria.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶O. ANTE. H.
                  
                     OHe, an exclamation, ſignifienge that he, which ſpeketh that worde 
                        •
                     s ſaciate or wery of that, which he ſeeth or heereth.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶O, ANTE I.
                  
                     ¶Oino meli, wyne and hony ſoden togither
               
            
            
               
                  ¶O, ANTE L.
                  
                     OLea, is mooſt proprely the frute of an olyue: yet ſometyme it is vſed for an olyue tree.
                  
                     Oleaceus, a, um, oyly.
                  
                     Oleacū, a colour, which is mixt with grene, blacke, yelowe, and whyte.
                  
                     Oleaginus, a, um, of an olyue tree.
                  
                     Oleagineus, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Olearis, re, & olearius, a, um, pertayninge to oyle.
                  
                     Olearius, a maker of oyle.
                  
                     Olearus, one of the Iles called Ciclades.
                  
                     Oleaſter, a wylde olyue.
                  
                     Oleaſtellus, a diminutif of Oleaſter.
                  
                     Oleaſtrinum, oyle of wylde olyues.
                  
                     Olearus, a, um, of oyle.
                  
                     Oleitas, the tyme of gatheringe of olyues.
                  
                     Olenus, a citie in Grece.
                  
                     Olenius, a, um, of that citie.
                  
                     Olentica, thinges which haue an yll ſauour.
                  
                     Oleo, eui, & olui, olere, to ſauour, or haue ſauour.
                  
                     Oleoſus, a, um, ful of oyle.
                  
                     Oleſco, leſcere, to growe.
                  
                     Oletum, a place where olyues do growe, alſo the dung or ordure of a man, proprely it is a draught or iakes.
                  
                     Oleum, oyle.
                  
                     Olfacio, feci, facere, to ſmell.
                  
                     Olfacto, are, to ſmell moche or often.
                  
                     Olfactus, tus, the ſence of ſmellyng.
                  
                     Olibantum, a meaſure of wyne.
                  
                     Olidus, da, dum, that which hath a great ſauour, eyther good or badde, mooſte communely ſtinkinge.
                  
                     Oligarchici, they whiche doo aduaunce the ſtate of noble men and ryche men, aboue

the popular aſtate.
                  
                     Olim, ſometyme, as well in the tyme paſſed as in the tyme to come, nowe late, longe tyme paſſed.
                  
                     Olitor, a gardynar, or ſellar of herbes and rootes.
                  
                     Olitorius, a, um, pertayning to a pot garden.
                  
                     Oliua, an olyue tree.
                  
                     Oliueta, the tyme of gatherynge of olyue beryes.
                  
                     Oliuerum, a place where doo growe olyue trees.
                  
                     Oliuina, plenty of olyues, alſoo reuenues, which do come of olyues.
                  
                     Oliuitas, & oleitas, the qualytie of olyues, the gatheringe tyme of olyues.
                  
                     Olino, are, to gather olyues.
                  
                     Plautus in Pſeudolo.
                     Oliuum, oyle olyue.
                  
                     Olla, a pot.
                  
                     Ollares, grapes conſeruyd in pottes.
                  
                     Olli, for iili.
                  
                  
                     Varro.
                     Ollula, a lytell pot.
                  
                     Ololy goues, crokynge frogges.
                  
                     Olor, oris, a wylde ſwanne.
                  
                     Olus, leris, herbes which ſerue for potage, pot herbes.
                  
                     Oluſcula, ſmall herbes.
                  
                     Olus atrum, an herbe called perſely.
                  
                     Olympia, a citie betwene the hilles of Oſſa and Olympus.
                  
                     Olympia, orum, playes and greate games, on the hyll of Olympus, made to the honour of Iupiter.
                  
                     Olympiacus, ca, cum, pertaynynge to that playes or hyll.
                  
                     Olympias, piadis, the ſpace of fyue yeres, whereby the olde grekes dyd account, as we do now by the yeres of oure lorde: as 
                        •
                     he firſt Olympias, the ſeconde, the third. and ſo forth.
                  
                     Olympicus, ca, cum, of Olympus.
                  
                     Olypionices, he that hath had victory in the games at Olympus.
                  
                     Olympius, a, um, heuenly.
                  
                     Olympus, a mountayne or hyll in Grece, aboue the which appereth no clowde: and therfore amonge the Poetes it is vſurped for heuen.
                  
                     Olynthus, a citie in Thracia.
                  
                     Olyras, a ryuer in Grece by the place called Thermopylas.
                  
                     Olyfippum, a citie in portugall, nowe called Vlyſbona, in englyſh Luſſeborn.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶O, ANTE M.
                  
                     OMaſum, a fat gut, or chitterling.
                  
                     Omen, minis, lucke, alſo a worde or ſentence ſodaynly ſpoken, after the which ſome thing hapneth to folowe according thervnto, aboue the expectation of them which herde it.
                  
                     Omentum, the call or ſewet, wherein all the bowelles are lapped, alſo the thynne ſkyn in the heed, wherein the brayne is contayned: of ſome called the ryme of the brayne, and of ſurgeons Pia mater.
                  
                     Omentatus, ta, tum, mixt with ſewet.
                  
                     Ominor, aris, ari, & omino, aui, are, to geſſe what ſhall happen or folowe.
                  
                     Ominator, oris, he that telleth a mans lucke or fortune.
                  
                     Ominoſus, a, um, lucky.Terea. in 
                           •
                        ea
                           ••
                        .
                  
                  
                     Omiſſus, a, um, left, not medled with. Omiſſo animo, Vbi te vidi animo eſſe omiſſo, whā I ſawe that thou caryddeſt for nothinge.
                  
                     Omitto, omiſi, omittere, to forbeare, to leue, to neglect.
                  
                     Omitte hunc, let hym alone, pardon hym.Terea. Phor
                           ••
                        .
                  
                  
                     Omitte me, let me go.
                  
                     Omne tulit punctū, he touched euery point, A prouerb. applyed to hym, whiche omitteth nothinge expedient or neceſſary, and is therfore of all men commendyd.
                  
                     Omnibus numeris, in all poyntes. Res eſt omnibus numeris abſoluta, it is a thing perfyte in all poyntes.
                  
                     Omnifariam, all maner of wayes, of euery kynde.
                  
                     Omnifarius, a, um, ſondrye, dyuerſe,
                  
                     Omnigenus, a, um, of euery kynde.
                  
                     Omnimodus, da, dum, all maner.
                  
                     Omnino, holy, throughly, allwaye, finally.
                  
                     Omnipotens, tis, allmyghty.
                  
                     Omnis, ne, all.
                  
                     Omophagi, they which do eate raw fleſhe.
                  
                     Omphax, acis, a grape not fully rype.
                  
                     Omphacium, licour made of frute that is not ripe, as of grapes, and than is it called veriuyſe.
                  
                     Omphacium vinum, a grene wyne not pleaſaunt or ſwete.
                  
                     Omphacinum olcum, oyle made of olyues, not beinge rype.
                  
                     Omuteſco, teſcere, to be dombe, and can not ſpeke.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶O, ANTE N.
                  
                     ONae, ſwete fygges.
                  
                     Onager, onagri, a wylde Aſſe.
                  
                     Onerarius, a, um, that which ſeruethe for bourdon.
                  
                     Onero, are, to charge, bourdon, or lade.
                  
                     Onerare populum, to put impoſitions or taxes on the people.
                  
                     Oneratus, ta, tum, bourdayned, ladyd.
                  
                     Onerarius, raria, rarium, that whereon bourbourdayne

is layde.
                  
                     Oneroſus, a, um, bourdeinous.
                  
                     Onixes, a kynde, of marble.
                  
                     Oniſcus, a worme, which bendeth him ſelfe lyke a bow whan he goeth, which is reed, and founde vnder trees, which haue lyen longe on the grounde.
                  
                     Onoba, a citie.
                  
                     Onocentaurus, a beaſt halfe a man, halfe an aſſe.
                  
                     Onocrotalus, a byrde lyke to a ſwanne, whiche putting his heed into the water, brayeth lyke an aſſe.
                  
                     Onomatopeia, a worde made of ſowne or pronouncinge, as bletinge of a ſhepe, lowinge of a cow, hiſſinge of an adder.
                  
                     Ononium, a blynde nettyll.
                  
                     Onus, oneris, a bourdon, a lode.
                  
                     Onuſtus, ta, tum, lodyd.
                  
                     Onyx, ychis, a whyte ſtone, lyke to a mannes nayle, alſo ſome be founde in Inde, which are of dyuerſe colours, hauynge whyte ſpottes lyke vnto eyen.
                  
                     Onychinus, na, um, made of the ſtone called Onyx.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶O, ANTE P.
                  
                     OPaco, care, to ſhadowe.
                  
                     Opacus, ca, cum, ſhadowed, or in the ſhadowe.
                  
                     Opera, ae, wark, labour.
                  
                     Operae, plurali tantum, warkmen, labourers.
                  
                     Opera, warkes, buyldinges, priuate or commune.
                  
                     Operam do, operam impendo, operam nauo, I do myne yndeuour, I put to my diligēce I ſpend my labour.
                  
                     Operarius, a laborar.
                  
                     Operarius, a, um, that whiche is done with labour.
                  
                     Operculo, are, to keuer a veſſell.
                  
                     Operculum, a keueringe or lede.
                  
                     Operaeprecium, profytable, neceſſary, a ioyfull thinge, moche to be eſtemed.
                  
                     Operimentum, any thinge that keuerith.
                  
                     Operio, rui, to keuer, or hyde.
                  
                     Operior, iris, iri, to tary, to abyde.
                  
                     Operor, aris, ari, to wark.
                  
                     Operatio, the wark, or that wheraboute a man laboureth.
                  
                     Operoſus, a, um, buſy, diligent in labouringe laboriouſe, paynefull.
                  
                     Opertorium, a coueringe.
                  
                     Ophiaca, pertaynynge to ſerpentes, they were bookes, which Nicander, and Petridius wrate, of the nature of ſerpentes.
                  
                     Ophiophagi, people in Ethiope, whiche do eate ſerpentes.
                  
                     Ophiucus, the name of Eſculapius, bycauſe that he is ymagyned to holde a ſerpent in his hande.
                  
                     Ophites, a ſtone hauynge ſpottes lyke a ſerpente.
                  
                     Opicus, pica, picum, vnclene, diſhoneſt, ſhameles.
                  
                     Opici, they whyche vſed abhominable rybauldry.
                  
                     Opifex, ficis, a warkman, a craftys man.
                  
                     Opifi cium, the wark.
                  
                     Opigena, Iuno, Iuno was ſo called of women, bycauſe they ſuppoſed, that ſhe holpe them when they trauayled.
                  
                     Opilio, onis, a ſhepeherde.
                  
                     Opima ſpolia, the ſpoyle, which by one chief Capytayne is taken frome another in batayle, as his cote armure or harneys.
                  
                     Opimé, aboundauntly, richely.
                  
                     Opimo, are, to make fat.
                  
                     Opimus, ma, mum, fat, alſo riche.
                  
                     Opimium, ſeu opimianum vinum, wyne whiche moughe endure good, two hundred yeres.
                  
                     Opinabilis, le, that maye be conceyned in opinion.
                  
                     Opinio, onis, opinion, ſometyme hope, alſo fame.
                  
                     Opino, for opinor, I ſuppoſe.
                  
                     Opinor, pinaris, nari, to ſuppoſe,Plautus in Bacch. to haue opinion.
                  
                     Opinatus, ta, tum, ſuppoſed.
                  
                     Opinator, toris, a ſuppoſar.
                  
                     Opiparé, plentuouſly.
                  
                     Opiparus, a, um, aboundaunt, freſh, or gaye. Coena opipara, a delicate ſouper.
                  
                     Opis, opis, a lady, companyon to Diana, ſhe was alſo wyfe to Saturnus, and by her is ſignified the erth amonge the Poetes.
                  
                     Opiſtographus, a booke wryten on the back ſyde.
                  
                     Opiſthotonicus, he that can not tourne his necke.
                  
                     Opiſthotonos, the cricke, or diſeaſe, whiche letteth a man to tourne his necke.
                  
                     Opiter, itris, he whoſe father deyed before his grandfather.
                  
                     Opitulor, aris, ari, to helpe.
                  
                     Opitulator, oris, a helpar.
                  
                     Opitulus, Iupiter, Iupiter the helpar at neede.
                  
                     Opium, the iuyce of an herbe called blacke Popye, alſoo Opius, is he that fighteth in armure.
                  
                     Opobalſamum, balme naturall, whyche in a part of Iudea, called Ierocinthe, ſtilleth oute of a lytle thorne.
                  
                     Opoponax, acis, the iuyce of an herbe, called Panax.
                  
                     
                     Oporice, a medicine made of fruytes.
                  
                     Oporae, all fruites whiche do growe in the laſt ende of ſomer.
                  
                     Oporotheca, a place, wherein frute is kept.
                  
                     Oportet, it behoueth, it is expedient or neceſſary.
                  
                     Oppedo, dere, to fart againſt one.
                  
                     Oppeto tere, to dye: alſo to be ſlayne.
                  
                     Oppetere ſebrem, to fall into the feuer.
                  
                     Oppidanus, a cytezen or townes man.
                  
                     Oppidicus, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Oppidatim towne by towne.
                  
                     Oppidó, an aduerbe, ſignifienge very moch, ſometyme it ſignifieth furthwith, veryly.
                  
                     Oppidulum, a lytell towne.
                  
                     Oppidum, a walled towne, or citie.
                  
                     Oppignero, are, to laye in pledge.
                  
                     Oppilo, are, to ſtoppe or ſhit.
                  
                     Oppleo, ere, to fill full.
                  
                     Opploto, are, to lament.
                  
                     Oppono, ere, to lay or put againſt.
                  
                     Opportunus, na, num, that whiche is in due tyme, and as it ought to be.
                  
                     Saluſtius 
                           ••••
                        g
                           •
                        r.
                     Opportunus iniuriae, fete or apte to take wronge.
                  
                     Opportunitas, tatis, oportunitie, conuenient tyme.
                  
                     Opportunáe, opportunatly conuenientely, as it ought to be.
                  
                     Opprimo, ere, to oppreſſe, to kepe or ſhit in, to take ſodaynely, to rauyſhe a woman, to grieue, to thruſt harde.
                  
                     Opprobrium, & opprobramentū, a reproche
                  
                     Opprobro, are, to obiect againſt one, to reproche.
                  
                     Oppugno, are, to aſſault.
                  
                     Ops, opis, the ſuſter and wyfe of Saturne: alſo it ſignifieth ayde or helpe.
                  
                     Opes, richeſſe.
                  
                     Opſonator, atoris, a puruayour of vytayles, or Catar.
                  
                     Opſonatus, tus, & opſonatio, preparation for dyner, or ſouper.
                  
                     Opſonito, tare, to prepare often for dyner or ſouper.
                  
                     Opſonium, al thinge belonginge to a meale, except bred and drynke.
                  
                     Opſono, nare, & obſonor, onari, to prepare thynges neceſſarye for dyner, ſouper, or bankat.
                  
                     Optabilis, le, that which is deſyred.
                  
                     Optato, with deſire.
                  
                     Opticus, ca, cum, perſpectife, pertaynynge to ſight.
                  
                     Optice, the ſcience whereby the raiſon of ſight is knowen.
                  
                     Optimates, the heed men of a citie, alſo they whiche defende the parte of nobilitie and riche men.
                  
                     Optimatus, tus, the ſtate or condiciō of heed men of a towne or contraye.
                  
                     Optimus, beſt.
                  
                     Optio, the choyſe, the requeſt or deſyre. It was alſo to a captayne in warres, a miniſtre to do his commaundement, and be aſſiſtent vnto hym.
                  
                     Opto, tare, to deſyre, to chouſe, to require. Adopto, coopto, exopto, vide ſuis locis.
                  
                  
                     Opulento, tare, to make riche or plenteouſe.
                  
                     Opulentus, ta, tum, ryche abundant.
                  
                     Opulentia, & opulentitas, rycheſſe.
                  
                     Opuncalo, he that ſyngethe lyke to a ſheparde.
                  
                     Opuleſco, ſcere, to be ryche.
                  
                     Opus, operis, a warke, a laboure. Eius opere by his meane or diligence.
                  
                     Opus eſt, it is neceſſary, or nede. Si opus ſit, yf nede be.
                  
                     Opus, opuntis, a citie in Locris.
                  
                     Opus inteſtinum, that which moſt communly is called implemētes of houſhoulde, proprely of tymber, as fourmes, ſtooles, cupboordes and other lyke thinges.
                  
                     Opus eſt conuento. Ita res ſubita eſt, celeriter mihi hoc homine opus eſt, The chaunce is ſo ſodayne, or the mater requireth ſuche haſt, that I muſt nedes ſpeke with the man ſhortly or quickely.
                  
                     Opus eſt facto, it muſt nedes be done, or executed.
                  
                     
                        Opus eſt remiſſam.
                        Terent. i
                              •
                            Hecyra. 
                        Voſmet videte iā Laches & tu Pamphile, remiſſam opus ſit nobis an reductam domum,
                      Now Laches and Pā
                     phile aduyſe your ſelfes wel, whither it be neceſſary, that ſhe be ſent home, or fetched home.
                  
                     Opus ſunt tibi, thou haſt nede of them.Plautus in Capt. Terent. in Heau. 
                     Vt cū deſponderim, des qui aurum ac veſtem, at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         alia quae opus ſunt, That whan I haue affiauncyd her, thou delyuer money and apparayle, and all other thinges nedefull.Plautus 
                           〈◊〉
                         Muſic.
                  
                  
                     Opere maxumo, with all meanes poſſible, in moſt harty wyſe. Rex Seleucus me opere orauit maxumo, vt ſibi lationes cogerem, Kynge Seleucus deſyred me, as moche as he poſſibly mought, that I wolde geate him ſouldiours to be aboute his perſone.Terent. in Eunuc
                           ••
                        
                      
                     Thais maximo te orabat, opere vt cras redires, Thais deſyred the as hartyly as ſhe can, that thou woldeſte come agayne to morowe.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶O, ANTE R.
                  
                     ORa, the extreme part of euery thing, as the edge, the brym, the ſkirtes, the hem, the border, the cabull that tyeth the ſhyppe.
                  
                     
                     Ora marittima, the ſee ſyde.
                  
                     Oraculum, where aunſweres were gyuen by ydolles: ſometyme the aunſwere, ſomtyme the ſayinge of ſome wiſe man.
                  
                     Orarium, the veſtement, wherin the prieſt dothe ſaye maſſe.
                  
                     Orata, a fyſhe called a gylte heed.
                  
                     Oratio, an oration, a prayer.
                  
                     Orator, toris, an oratour.
                  
                     Oratoria, Rhetorike.
                  
                     Oratoriae, lyke an oratour, or in fourme of Rhetorike.
                  
                     Oratorius, a, um, pertaynynge to an orator.
                  
                     Oratus, tus, prayer.
                  
                     Orbiculatus, ta, tum, made rounde.
                  
                     Orbiculus, a lyttell cerkle.
                  
                     Orbicus, ca, cum, rounde.
                  
                     Orbis, a cerkle. Alſo the worlde.
                  
                     Orbes, dyſhes, the holes of the eien. ſometyme the eyen.
                  
                     Orbem facere, where people doo gather them rounde togyther in battayle.
                  
                     Orbita, a whele, ſometyme the tracke that wheeles do make in the grounde.
                  
                     Orbo, are, to depryue.
                  
                     Orbus, proprely blynde.
                  
                     Orbi, they whyche haue loſte their chylderne. Alſo orphanes.
                  
                     Orbitas, the lacke of chylderne: ſometyme the lacke of a father.
                  
                     Orbitus, ta, tum, rounde as a cerkle.
                  
                     Orca, a great monſter of the ſee: alſo a great veſſell, as a butte or vate, wherein Rennyſhe wyne is putte. Alſo a boxe, wherin dyce be ſhaken, and after throwen on the tables. ſometyme a coffer. wherin womēs payntynge is kepte.
                  
                     Orchades, thyrty Iles in the ſee by Scotlande.
                  
                     Orcheſtra, a place, wherin the Senatours & honourable perſons ſat to behold plays
                  
                     Orchomenus, a mountayne in Theſſaly. alſo a citie in Euboea.
                  
                  
                     Orcomana, a beere, wheron deade corſes doo lye.
                  
                     Orcus, a ryuer of helle: alſoo an nother in Theſſalye. it is ſometyme taken for helle.
                  
                     Ordinarius, a, um, wherin order is obſerued ordinarye. ſometyme a ſcoffer or geſter.
                  
                     Ordinare, to order or diſpoſe.
                  
                     Ordior, iris, orſus, iri, to be begynne to ſpeake.
                  
                     Ordo, dinis, order, the dewe place, the aſtate of menne.
                  
                     In ordinem redigere, to keepe oone within his boundes, that he doo not excede his degree.
                  
                     Suluſtius in Iug.
                     Ordines, is in battayle that, whyche is callyd the raye.
                  
                     Ordines ſeruare, to kepethe raye.
                  
                     Ordinatim, in order.
                  
                     Ordines conturbare, to breake or ſcatter the raye.
                  
                     Orea, the bytte for a horſe.
                  
                     Oreus, a name of Bacchus.
                  
                     Oreſtes, the ſonne of Agamemnon.
                  
                     Ore tenus, to the mouthe.
                  
                     Orexis, is moſte taken for vomyte, all be it ſygnifieth appetite.
                  
                     Organa, all inſtrumentes of muſyke.
                  
                     Organum, an inſtrumente pertaynynge to buyldynge, alſo an ordinance of warres.
                  
                     Organarij, makers of inſtrumentes.
                  
                     Orgia, ceremonies or ſonges, pertaynyng to infernall goddes, or to Bacchus.
                  
                     Orgyia, a meaſure contaynynge .vi. foote. Suidas dothe write, that it is the ſpace, whiche is conteyned betweene the handes ſtretched abrode, whyche I ſuppoſe is a ſpanne.
                  
                     Oria, a fyſhers boote
                  
                     Orichalcum, a mettal, whiche as I ſuppoſe is lattyn.
                  
                     Oriculum, for auricula, a lytell eare.
                  
                     Oricos, a citie of Epire.
                  
                     Oriens, orientis, the Eaſte.
                  
                     Orificium, the mouthe of any thynge.
                  
                     Origanum, an herbe, callyd organny.
                  
                     Origo, ginis, a begynnynge, kynde.
                  
                     Orion, a ſygne in the fyrmament.
                  
                     Orior, eris, & oriris, riri, to be borne, to ryſe, to appiere.
                  
                     Oriundus, commen by auncetours oute of ſome countrey or citie. ſommetyme borne, Nati Carthagine, ſed orundi a Syracuſis, Borne at Carthage, but by auncetoures deſcended frome Syracuſe in Sicile.
                  
                     Oriza, a grayne callyd Ryſe, which is moſt commonly eaten in Lente, with Almonde mylke.
                  
                     Orminium, an herbe lyke to horehounde.
                  
                     Ornamentum, apparayle, alſo honour.
                  
                     Ornithoboſcion, a howſe where poultry is fedde, a cowpe.
                  
                     Ornithon, thonis, a place wherein byrdes are kepte.
                  
                     Orno, nare, to garniſh, to decke or trymme, to make faire, to prepare, to make meete, to honoure with ſome auctoritie or dignitie.
                  
                     Ornatus, ta, tum, apparayled, trimmed, garnyſhed, inſtructed, fournyſhed.
                  
                     Ornatus, tus, apparayl, trymming, deckyng.
                  
                     Oro, orare, to praye, to demaunde, to ſpeke openly and eloquently, as Oratours do, to pleade.
                  
                     Orobia, a kynde of Frenkynſence in lyttell graynes.
                  
                     Orontes, a ryuer by the cytie of Antyoche.
                  
                     Orphanus, he whyche lacketh his father

and fatherly ſuccour.
                  
                     Orpheus, a poete, ſonne of Apollo, and Calliopes.
                  
                     Orpheus, a, um, of Orpheus.
                  
                     Orſus, he beganne.
                  
                     Orſus, he that begynneth to do a thynge.
                  
                     Orſus, a, um, begonne.
                  
                     Orthodoxia, the right opinion or faith.
                  
                     Orthodoxus, a man of the ryghte opynyon or faythe.
                  
                     Orthogonius, a ryght corner.
                  
                     Orthographia, the ryght forme of writing.
                  
                     Orthopnoea, a diſeaſe, whan a manne can not fetche his breathe, but holdynge his necke vpryghte.
                  
                     Orthopnoeci, they which haue that ſicknes.
                  
                     Orthoſtadios, a garmente, whiche was alwaye worne vngyrte.
                  
                     Ortus, ti, uide Hortus.
                  
                  
                     Orti penſiles, gardeynes made on howſes, or pyllours.
                  
                     Ortus, ta, tum, borne.
                  
                     Ortus, tus, the byrthe or natiuitie, Alſo the ryſynge of the ſonne.
                  
                     Ortygia, the name of an Ile.
                  
                     Ortix, tigis, a byrde callyd a quayle.
                  
                     Oryx, gis, a beaſte of the kynde of gotes.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶O, ANTE S.
                  
                     OS, oris, the mouthe, alſo the vyſage: ſometyme the proporcion of all the body,
                        
                           〈1 paragraph〉
                        
                      ſometyme countenance, alſo preſence, and language.
                  
                     Os diſtorquere, to make a mowe.
                  
                     Os durum, a ſhameleſſe knaue.
                  
                     
                        Os ſublini
                              •
                           e,
                      to mocke or deceyue craftily, with faire wordes or promyſes.
                  
                     Plin de vi. 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                     Os, oſsis, a bone. Oſſum, idem.
                  
                  
                     Oſae, lawes concernynge deuotion.
                  
                     Oſanna, I pray the ſaue vs.
                  
                     
                        Oſaſ
                              •
                           m,
                      for Odi, I hate.
                  
                     Oſcedo, dinis, yanynge or gapyng. ſommetyme ſtenche.
                  
                     Oſci, people in Italye.
                  
                     Oſcillo, are, to bowe downe.
                  
                     Ocilla, lytle images of waxe to be offred.
                  
                     Oſcillum, a lyttell mouthe. ſometyme a lyttell ymage or poppette.
                  
                     Oſcines, byrdes, whiche by theyr voyces do ſygnifie ſomewhat to come or happen.
                  
                     Ocinum, a generall name of byrdes, whyche do ſynge, a ſyngynge byrde.
                  
                     Oſcis, the abhomynable vſe of carnalle ſynne.
                  
                     Oſcito, tare, to gape, as menne do for lacke of ſleepe.
                  
                     Oſcitatio, gapynge, Alſo quyeteneſſe from laboure.
                  
                     Oſcitanter, ſoftely, aduyſedly, ſobrely.
                  
                     Oſcitabundé, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Oſculana pugna, battaylle, wherein they, whyche were before vaynquyſſhed, haue the vyctorie.
                  
                     Oſculum, a lyttell mouthe, alſo a kyſſe.
                  
                     Oſculor, aris, ari, to kyſſe.
                  
                     Oſiris, oſiridis, the ſonne of Iupiter begot on Neobe, the daughter of Phoroneus, which ſucceded Phoroneus in the kingdome of the Argiues, and afterward was kyng of Egypt, who after his death was honoured for a god.
                  
                     Oſſa, a highe mountayne in Theſſalye.
                  
                     Oſſeus, a, um, bonye, or of a bone.
                  
                     Oſsiculatim, one boone from an nother in pieces.
                  
                     Oſsifragus, fraga, gum, that whyche breaketh boones.
                  
                     Oſsilegium, a gatherynge of bones.
                  
                     Oſsiculum, a lyttell bone.
                  
                     Oſſuaria, a ſhryne or lyke thyng, where the bones of deed men are put.
                  
                     Oſtendo, di, dere, to ſhewe.
                  
                     Oſtento, oſtentare, to ſhewe often. Alſoo to booſte.
                  
                     Oſtentum, a thynge, whiche happeneth ſeldome, and betokeneth, that ſome ſtrange thynge ſhall happen. As a blaſyng ſterre, thunder on a fayre daye. Sometyme it ſignifieth a thynge monſtruous.
                  
                     Oſtento, tare, to boſte.
                  
                     Oſtentatio, booſtynge.
                  
                     Oſtentus, tus, a ſkorne.
                  
                     Oſtia, oſtiorum, the entrees of greatte ryuers, ſometyme hauens.
                  
                     Oſtia, a towne nyghe to Rome.
                  
                     Oſtiarius, a porter.
                  
                     Oſtiatim, from doore to doore.
                  
                     Oſtienſis, a lyttell hauyn at Rome.
                  
                     Oſtium, a doore or gate.
                  
                     Oſtraciſmus, a maner of exylynge of men atte Athenes, whyche excellyd other in power or authorytie: whyche exyle was doone by delyuerynge of oyſter ſhelles, wherin the name of hym, whiche ſhould be exyled, was wryten.
                  
                     Oſtracum, a ſhelle.
                  
                     Oſtrea, an oyſter.
                  
                     Oſtrearius panis, Browne breadde, the whyche menne are wonte to eate with oyſters.
                  
                     Oſtreatus, oſtreata, oſtreatum, harde as an oyſter.
                  
                     Oſtrinae ueſtes, garmētes of purple coloure.
                  
                     Oſtrum, purple or other lyke colour.
                  
                     Oſus, oſurus, participles of Odi.
                  
                  
                     Oſus ſum, oſus es, oſus eſt, I hate, thou hateſt, he hateth.
               
            
            
               
               
                  ¶O, ANTE T.
                  
                     OTior, ſwyfter.
                  
                     Otior, ari, to be ydell or at reſte.
                  
                     Otioſus, a, um, ydell, ſure.
                  
                     Otioſe, idelly, at leiſer, ſurely, without care.
                  
                     Otium, idelnes, vacation from labour, alſo leyſer, reſte, quietnes.
                  
                     Othryades, a mans name of Lacedemonia.
                  
                     Othrys, a hylle in Theſſaly.
                  
                     Otides, byrdes lyke to partriches.
                  
                     Otus, a ſhryche owle.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶O, ANTE V.
                  
                     OValis corona, a garlande of myrtels, gyuen to hym, whiche had vyctory without effuſion of bloudde.
                  
                     Ouatio, a ſmall triumph of a prince or captayne, whiche had victorie of his enmies without ſlaughter of men, or where battayle was not denounced: in the whyche tryumph the capitayne went on foote, or onely dyd ryde on a horſe, with a garland of myrtelles on his heed, and his ſouldyours ſyngynge aboute hym.
                  
                     Ouatus, ta, tum, whiche is in ſymylitude of an egge.
                  
                     Ouans, ouantis, reioyſynge, being ioyfull.
                  
                     Ouiaria, a flocke of ſhepe.
                  
                     Ouicula, a lyttell ſheepe.
                  
                     Ouifera gallina, a broude henne.
                  
                     Ouile, a folde or ſheepehowſe.
                  
                     Ouillus, a, um, of a ſheepe. Ouinus, idem.
                  
                  
                     Ouis, a ſheepe.
                  
                     Ouo, are, to reioyce with noyſe or voyce in a multitude.
                  
                     Ouum, an egge.
                  
                     Ouum ouo ſimile, one egge lyke an nother, applyed vnto theym, whiche be lyke of condicions or perſone.
                  
                     Ouo prognatus eodem, of oone father and mother, or brought vp vnder one maiſter, or in one ſchoole.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶O, ANTE X.
                  
                     OXygala, ſower mylke.
                  
                     Oxygarum, ſharpe ſawce.
                  
                     Oxylapathon, ſorrell.
                  
                     Oxymeli, honye and vynegre ſodden togyther.
                  
                     Oxyporon, ſharpe ſawce.
                  
                     Oxyporopola, he that ſelleth meat in ſharp ſauce, or ſowce.
                  
                     Oxyſaccharum, ſuger and vynegre ſodden togither, of ſomme menne called Syrupus aceroſus ſymplex.
                  
                  
                     Oxytoca, medicines to make a womanne to brynge forth hyr byrthe quyckely.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶O, ANTE Z.
                  
                     OZena, ſoores aboute the noſe, which haue an yll ſauour.
                  
                     Oſe, ſtynche of the mouthe.
                  
                     Ozinum, an herbe callyd baſyll.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶P, ANTE A.
                  
                     
                        PABVLARIS, pabulare, pertaynynge to fourrage or meate for beaſtis.
                  
                     Pabulatio, fourraginge.
                  
                     Pabulator, a forra grour.
                  
                     Pabulor, aris, ari, to goo in forragynge. ſomtime to fede, as a beaſt dothe.
                  
                     Pabulum, forrage or meate for beaſtes.
                  
                     Pacatè, peaſybly.
                  
                     Pace tua, pace ueſtra, by thy lycence, by your leaue, or lycence.
                  
                     Pachiri, hylles in the laſſe Aſia.
                  
                     Pachiſos, a ryuer of Sicile.
                  
                     Pachynus, a mountayne in Sicile on the ſee ſyde, or an elbowe of the lande there.
                  
                     Pacifer, feri, a brynger of peace.
                  
                     Pacificatorius, a, um, that whiche dothe pacyfie.
                  
                     Pacifico, care, to pacifie.
                  
                     Paciſcor, ſceris, ſci, to make couenaunte,Plinius. to bargayne,
                  
                     Paco, are, to mitigate, to apeaſe, to accorde.
                  
                     Pactilis, le. platted, Pactilis corona, a platted garlande.
                  
                     Pactio, an accorde, agreement.Eraſm. in Chiliad.
                  
                  
                     Pactoliopes, excedynge rycheſſe.
                  
                     Pactolus, a ryuer in Lydia, hauynge golden grauelle.
                  
                     Pactum, ſometyme a participle ſygnifienge couenanted, promyſed, ſomtime a nowne, ſignifienge a couenant.
                  
                     Pactum tranſitionis, a ſafe conduite,Ti. L
                           •
                        uius. to paſſe from one countrey to an other, a paſport.
                  
                     Pacuuius, the name of a noble poete.
                  
                     Padua, & Patauium, a Cytie in Italye, by Venyce.
                  
                     Padus, a ryuer in Italye callyd the Po.
                  
                     Paduſa, a ryuer, whyche ſomme ſaye is an arme of the Po.
                  
                     Paean, an hymne in the prayſe of Apollo. ſommetyme the ſame Apollo. It is nowe taken for any hymne, made to the lande of God, or our Ladye.
                  
                     Paedagium, lodgynge for ſeruauntes and chylderne.
                  
                     
                     Paedagogium, a bonde ſeruaunt.
                  
                     Paedagogus, he that is appoynted to await on chyldern to ſee them well ordred.
                  
                     
                        Paeda
                              •
                           etus,
                      a mans name.
                  
                     Paederaſtes, a louer of chylderne in vnhoneſte wyſe.
                  
                     Paederaſtia, a viciouſe loue of chylderne.
                  
                     Paedia, erudition and inſtitution in good artes, as Gellius teacheth.
                  
                     Paedico, paedicaui, pedicare, to commytte buggerye.
                  
                     Paedor, paedoris, ſluttyſſheneſſe, vncleanneſſe, fylthe.
                  
                     Paedotribes, & pedotribá, a ſchoolemayſter.
                  
                     Paeon, a foote in metre, whiche is of oone longe ſyllable and thre ſhorte.
                  
                     Paeonia, an herbe callydde Pyonye. Alſo a countreye in Europa, and is a parte of Macedonye.
                  
                     
                        P
                              •
                           ſtum,
                      a citie in Lucania, where there is abundance of Roſes.
                  
                     Paeſtanus, na, num, of that citie.
                  
                     Paetus, he that loketh a ſquynte vpward.
                  
                     Paganalia, ploughmens holyday, as wakes be nowe adayes.
                  
                     Paganus, a man of the countreye, or of the vyllage: ſommetyme it is taken for hym that goth not to battayle.
                  
                     Pagaſa, a towne of Theſſaly, whiche after was called Demetrias.
                  
                     Pagatim, vyllage by vyllage.
                  
                     Pagina, the ſyde of a leafe in a boke.
                  
                     Paginula, a lyttell ſyde of a leafe in a boke.
                  
                     Pago, gis, pepigi, gere, pactus, to make couenaunt.
                  
                     Pagus, a vyllage.
                  
                     Pagytis, the name of a ryuer and of a citie, of whiche the people are called Pagyritae.
                  
                  
                     Pala, a ſpade, alſo a p
                        •
                     ele to put in breadde into the ouen. Alſo a fanne to make wind. Alſo the brodeſt parte of a rynge.
                  
                     Palae, wedges or pieces, or gaddes of mettall whan it is fyned.
                  
                     Palaca, pieces of fyne golde.
                  
                     Palaemon, onis, was callid a god of the ſee.
                  
                     Palaeſtina, a countrey in Syrie, ioynynge to Arabie, called in holy ſcripture Philiſt
                           •
                        im.
                  
                  
                     Palaeſtra, a wraſ
                        •
                     lyng place: alſo the exercyſe of wraſtlynge.Ci. de ora tare primo It is alſo the comelyneſſe of mouynge and geſture, according to the ſtate or degree of the perſon, which ſheweth it.
                  
                     Palaeſtricum, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Palaeſtricus, a wraſteler.
                  
                     Palaeſtricus, ca, cum, pertaynyng to wraſtelynge.
                  
                     Palaeſtrita, he that vſeth wraſtlynge.
                  
                     Palam, openly, before men, that all menne may ſee it.
                  
                     Palamedes, a noble greke, whyche ſounde certayne letters of greeke, Alſo to ſette an arraye in an hooſte, and the fourme of watches, with the watche worde.
                  
                     Palangae, leauers or porters, wherewith they left and beare tymbre, and ſuche like thynges of greatte weight.
                  
                     Palango, palangare, to beare on leyuars or porters.
                  
                     Palangarii, men, whyche do beare on leyuers or porters, thynges of great poyſe or weyghte.
                  
                     Palatiar, & palatual, a Sacrifyce doone at Rome on the hylle callyd Palatinum.
                  
                  
                     Palatio, onis,
                     Vitrunius▪ li. 2. a foundacyon made in a maryſe grounde with pyles of tymber.
                  
                     Palantes, they that wander about, and wote not whither to go.
                  
                     Palanteum, a citie buylded on the hyll callyd Palatinus.
                  
                     Palantia, a citie in Arragonia.
                  
                     Palatha, a preſſed fygge.
                  
                     Palatim, an aduerbe ſygnifienge ſcattered and wandrynge here and there.
                  
                     Palatina officia, offices within a princes palayce or courte.
                  
                     Palatinus mons, an hylle at Rome.
                  
                     Palatium, a palaiſe of an emperour or great kynge.
                  
                     Palatus, ſeu palatū, the rouſe of the mouth.
                  
                     Palea, chaffe of corne, alſo a griſtell, whyche fallethe downe frome the necke of a cocke or capon.
                  
                     Palearium, the Dewelappe of a Rudder beaſte. Alſo a place, wherein chaffe is kepte.
                  
                     Paleatus, made or myxte with chaffe.
                  
                     Pales, called goddeſſe of ſhepeherdes and of paſture.
                  
                     Palene, a cytie, ſoo called of Pallena, the daughter of Sython, and wife of Cletus.
                  
                     Palepaphos, a cytie of Cypres.
                  
                     Paleſcamander, a ryuer in Troye.
                  
                     Palicenus, a fountayne in Sicilia.
                  
                     Palilia, ſhepeherdes holydayes kept in the honour of Pales.
                  
                     Palimpſeſtus, parchemente raſed.
                  
                     Palingeneſia, a regeneration or ſecond natyuitie.
                  
                     Palinodia, a contrarye ſonge, or retractynge of that, whiche oone hathe ſpoken or wryten: Nowe of ſomme menne called a recantynge.
                  
                     Palinodiam canere, to retracte that, whyche one hath ſpoken or writen.
                  
                     Palinurus, was the Mayſter of the ſhyppe, wherin Aeneas camme into Italye. Alſoo an Elbowe of the lande of Sycile into the See.
                  
                     
                     Paliurus, a bryer, whiche beareth a codde, wherin are thre or foure blacke ſedes.
                  
                     Palla, a womans gowne.
                  
                     Pallace, a concubyne.
                  
                     Palladium, the ymage of Pallas.
                  
                     Palladius, a mans name, whyche wrote of huſbandrye.
                  
                     Pallancana, a ſharpe oynyon, whyche cauſeth the eyen to water.
                  
                     Palladius, a, um, that ſongeth to Pallas.
                  
                     Pallas, autis, the ſonne of Euander, ſommetyme kynge of Latynes. Alſo a Gyant.
                  
                     Pallas, adis, called goddeſſe of battaile, and alſo of wyſedome.
                  
                     Pallax, acis, a concubyne, ſuche as one kepeth in ſtede of his wyfe.
                  
                     Palleo, lui, lere, to be pale.
                  
                     Palleſcere, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Palliaſtrium, a courſe mantell.
                  
                     Palliatae fabulae, Comedyes or enterludes made in Grecia, and the perſonages ther in were Grekes, as Togatae fabulae, were enterludes in Rome, and the perſonages Romaynes, ſoo called bycauſe the ouermoſte habyte of Grekes was called Pallium, of the Romaynes Toga.
                  
                  
                     Palliatus, cladde in a mantell.
                  
                     Pallio, are, to concele or hyde.
                  
                     Palliolatim amictus, cladde in a palle.
                  
                     Palliolatus, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Palliolum, a ſhorte mantelle.
                  
                     Pallium, a mantelle, ſuche as knyghtes of the garter do weare.
                  
                     Pallor, oris, a paleneſſe of colour.
                  
                     Paluſter, ris, tre, & tra, trum, of the fenne.
                  
                     Palma, the palme of the hande. Alſo a meſure called a handbrede, ſometyme an ore to rowe with. Alſo a palme tree or daate tree. ſometyme it ſygnifyeth vyctorie.
                  
                     Palmam praeripere, to take the praiſe or honour from an other.
                  
                     Palmare facinus, an acte worthy the palme or ſygne of vyctorie.
                  
                     Palmarium, worthye the ſygne or token of vyctorie.
                  
                     Palmaria ſpacia, a handbrede ſpace.
                  
                     Palmata, & palmaris ueſtis, a garmente of bawdekyn, whiche the conſule dyd weare in tyme of peace, and the vyctour in tyme of warre.
                  
                     Palmes, itis, the ſmall and tender branches, moſte proprely of a vyne.
                  
                     Palmerum, the place, wherein date trees do growe.
                  
                     Palmens, a, um, of a palme tree.
                  
                     Palmifer, & palmiger, that beareth palme, or date trees.
                  
                     Palmipedalis, a meaſure of a foote and a handebrede.
                  
                     Palmipedes aues, all byrdes, whyche hau
                        •
                      hole fete, as cōmonly al water foules haue.
                  
                     Palmipes, ſplay footed.
                  
                     Palmyra, a great caſtelle or fortreſſe in the myddell of Syria.
                  
                     Palmyrena, a countrey in Syrie.
                  
                     Palmo, are, to bynde togyther: Alſo to do any thynge with the palme of the hande.
                  
                     Palmoſus, full of palme trees.
                  
                     Palmula, a lyttell oore or ſculle. alſo a date.
                  
                     Palmus, & palmeum, a meſure. If it be palmus maior, it is of fyue fyngers, or a hāde bredth. If it be minor, it is but four fingers
                  
                     Palo, are, to hedge or pale in: alſo to wāder.
                  
                     Palor, palaris, to go aſonder here and there ſcattered.
                  
                     Palpebrae, the heares whiche do growe on the cheekes.
                  
                     Palpito, rare, to quake or tremble.
                  
                     Palpator, toris, & palpo, ponis, a flatterer.
                  
                     Palpo, & palpor, ari, to fele, alſo to flatter.
                  
                     Paludamentum, a cote armure.
                  
                     Paludatus, cladde in a cote armure.
                  
                     Palumba, & palumbus, a ſtocke douue, or rynge douue.
                  
                     Palumbarius, a certayne hawke, whiche is longe and blacke, and flieth the moſt part by nyghte.
                  
                     Palumbes, wodde culuers.
                  
                     Palus, li, a ſtake or pooſte.
                  
                     Palus, paludis, a fenne or maryſe.
                  
                     Pamphagi, people in Ethiopia, whiche do eare of all maner of thynges.
                  
                     Pamphilia, a region in the laſſe Aſia.
                  
                     Pampillum, a charyotte.
                  
                     Pampilona, a cite in the royalme of Nauer.
                  
                     Pampinarium, a heape of grene braunches. It is alſo the tender braunche, whyche groweth out of the harde tree.
                  
                     Pampinarius, a, um, & pampineus, a, um, of grene braunches.
                  
                     Pampino, are, to cutte of the ſmall branches of a vyne.
                  
                     Pampinus, a vyne leafe, or grene braunche.
                  
                     Panagron, a greatte ſweepe nette, whyche taketh all maner of fyſhe.
                  
                     Pan, panis, callyd the god of ſhepardes.
                  
                     Panax, acis, an herbe, whiche hath a leafe lyke to the leaues of a fygge tree. Alſo a longe ſtalke moſy, and on the top a 
                        ••
                     ap, wherein are ſweete ſeedes, with a ſharpe ſent: and a hath a yelowe floure, and groweth in dyuers partes of Grecia.
                  
                  
                     Panarium, a pantry, where bread is kepte.
                  
                     Panchaia, a region in Arabie.
                  
                     Pancarpia, a garlande made of dyuers floures, or of all floures that maye be founde.
                  
                     Pancraciaſtes, a man experte and excellente in all feates of actiuitie.
                  
                     
                     Pancratium, exerciſe in all feates, as wraſtlynge, rounnynge, leapynge, caſtynge of the darre, and other lyke exercyſes of ſtrengthe.
                  
                     Pancratius, he that dothe exercyſe the ſaid feates.
                  
                     Pandana porta, a gate of the citie of Rome, whiche was fyrſte and laſte opened, for all thynges to be brought into the citie.
                  
                     Pandecta, comprehendynge all thynges: it is alſo the volume of the lawe ciuile, called alſo the digeſtes.
                  
                     Pandiculario, gapynge.
                  
                     Pandiculor, aris, to gape as they do, which come from ſlepe.
                  
                     Pando, didi, dere, paſſum, & panſum, to open
                  
                     Pando, aui, are, to bowe downe.
                  
                     Pandocheus, an inholder.
                  
                     Pandochium, an inne, or commune lodging.
                  
                     Pandus, a, um, open.
                  
                     Panegytis, a mart or fayre, or great aſſēbly.
                  
                     Panegyricus, an open and ſolemne commē
                     dation of princis.
                  
                     Pangaeus, an elbowe of Thracia.
                  
                     Pango, pepegi, & panxi, pangere, to ſet, to plante, to ioyne one thyng to an other, to faſten, to dryue in, to wryte, to ſinge, to tel.
                  
                     Panhormus, a citie in Sicile.
                  
                     Panicum, a ſodayne feare, wherby ſommetyme men be diſtraught, or oute of theyr wyttes.
                  
                     Panicula, that whiche on ſomme herbes or trees do hange downe lyke heares, longe and rounde.
                  
                     Panicum, a grayne.
                  
                     Panifex, ficis, a baker.
                  
                     Panificium, the crafte of bakynge.
                  
                     Panis, breadde.
                  
                     Panis nauticus, byſkette.
                  
                     Panis ſecundarius, raunged bread, or chete breadde, or crybell breade.
                  
                     Paniſcus, a god of the woddes.
                  
                     Pantacratiaſta, he that fyghteth with handes and feete.
                  
                     Suidas.
                     Pantathlus, he that contendeth in all maner of games.
                  
                     Panneus, a, um, woullen.
                  
                     Pannicularia, thynges of ſmalle valure.
                  
                     Pannicularius, a draper that ſelleth clothe.
                  
                     Pannonia, the royalme of Hungary.
                  
                     Pannonij, Hungariens.
                  
                     Pannoſus, he that weareth pore apparell.
                  
                     Pannuelium, a handekercher.
                  
                     Pannus, clothe.
                  
                     Panomphaeus, a name of Iupiter, ſygnyfyenge that he hereth all mens voyces.
                  
                     Panſa, playne footed.
                  
                     Panſelmos, the full moone.
                  
                     Pantagia, a ryuer in Sicyle.
                  
                     Pantaſilea, a quene of Amazon.
                  
                     Pantheon, a temple of all the goddes.
                  
                     Panthera, a beaſte callyd a Panter, whiche hath ſpottes of ſondry colours.
                  
                     Pantheron, a nette, wherwith all maner of foule is taken.
                  
                     Pantices, a greatte bealye, alſo the fluxe.
                  
                     Pantomimus, a dyſſarde, whyche can fay
                        ••
                      and countrefeyte euerye mannes geſture.
                  
                     Panurgia, ſubtyltie.
                  
                     Panus, panula, & panulla, a kyrnell in the ſhare or gryne of a manne, or behynde the care. It is alſo a weauers rolle, whereon the webbe of cloth is rolled or wounden.
                  
                     Papare, to calle dad as a chylde dothe.
                  
                     Papas, a father, as chylderne doo calle Dadde.
                  
                     Papauerata ueſtis, a garmēt not pure white, but of the colour of popye.
                  
                     Papauer, eris, an herbe callyd Popie.
                  
                     Papè, an interiection of wondrynge, wylle ye ſee, a wonderfull thynge.
                  
                     Papaeus, in the tongue of Scithia, ſygnyfieth Iupyter.
                  
                     Paphlagonia, a regyon in Aſia.
                  
                     Paphos, & Paphia, a cytie in the ylande of Cypres.
                  
                     Papia, a cytie in Lumbardy, callyd Pauia.
                  
                     Papilio, onis, a butterflye.
                  
                     Papilla, a lyttell wheale or pouſſhe in the ſkynne of a man. Alſo a cocke in a cundyte, whereout water commeth. More ouer the nyppell or teate of a womannes breaſte.
                  
                     Pappa, pappe made with mylke and floure.
                  
                     Pappo, pappare, to eate.
                  
                     Pappus, a grandeſyre or grandfather. It is alſo an herbe called groundſwell.
                  
                     Papula, a whelke.
                  
                     Papyrus, ſeu papyrum, is a great ruſhe, whiche groweth in the fennes & marys groū
                     des in Aegypt and Syria, tenne cubytes hygh: wherof the fyrſt paper was made, wheron men dyd write. we haue growing in our fenny groundes lyke ruſſhes with blacke knoppes, longe and rounde, whiche are called Nowe Papyrus is callyd paper, wherin menne doo vſe to wryte or prynte bokes.
                  
                     Papyratius, of paper, or of the ſayd ruſhe.
                  
                     Papyrius, the ſurname of a noble Romayn.
                  
                     Par, ris, lyke, equalle, meete, euen, reaſonable.
                  
                     Pares, two lyke one to the other in fourme or degree.
                  
                     Parem eſſe, to be ſufficient, to do or ſuſtayne a thinge.
                  
                     Paria, payres, two togither of any thinge.
                  
                     Paria facere, to requyte, to do one thinge for

another, lyke for lyke.
                  
                     Par referre, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Par pari, to recompence one thinge with another of equall eſtimacion.
                  
                     Par impar, a game that children vſed, called euen or odde.
                  
                     Parabilis, le, that which may be ſone goten, or will be ſone redy.
                  
                     Parabola, a compariſon, or reſemblaunce.
                  
                     Paracletus, an exhortar, a comfortar, an aduocate.
                  
                     Paraclytus, a man infamed, yll reported of.
                  
                     Paradiaſtole, a dilatinge of a mater by an interpretation.
                  
                     Paradigma, an example.
                  
                     Paradiſus, Paradiſe.
                  
                     Paradoxa, a ſentence, contrary to the opinyon of dyuerſe.
                  
                     Paradromis, a galery, or walke.
                  
                     Paraeneſis, a precepte contaynynge an exhortation.
                  
                     Paraeneticus, ca, cum, contaynynge ſuch precepte or inſtruction.
                  
                     Paragoge, is a figure, whan a letter or ſyllable, is added to a worde, as Dicier for dici.
                  
                  
                     Paragraphe, a thynge wryten before a ſentence.
                  
                     Paragraphus, & paragraphum, a paragrafe.
                  
                     Paralipomenon, left oute, vnſpoken, or vnwriten, which ought to haue bene ſpoken or wryten.
                  
                     Parallell, lynes in the ſphere of the worlde equally diſſaunt, whereby the ſon, whan he paſſeth, cauſeth variacion in houres of the daye.
                  
                     Paralyſis, a ſickeneſſe called the Palſy.
                  
                     Paralyticus, he that is takē with the Palſey.
                  
                     Paranymphus, he that is the mediatour in matrymony betwene the man and the woman: ſhe whiche is on the womans part is called Pronuba.
                  
                     Varro. de lin. lat.
                     Parapechium, a lyght cloke.
                  
                     Parapherna, that whiche is added vnto the womannes dower, called the ioynture.
                  
                     Paraphraſis, an imitation of wordes, ſetting oute the ſence or meanynge of the autour more playnely.
                  
                     Paraphraſtes, he that doeth not tranſlate worde by worde, but expreſſeth the ſentence of the autour more openly.
                  
                     Pararium aes, was double wages, gyuen to horſmen for hauinge two horſis.
                  
                     Paraſanga, a myle in Perſya, contaynynge fifty furlonges.
                  
                     Paraſceue, a preparacion, alſo good fryday.
                  
                     Paraſiopeſis, a figure in ſpekinge, whan we fayne that we will not ſpeke, and yet couertly it is declared what we do meane.
                  
                     Paraſitus, a haunter of other mennes tables vncalled for, alſo he which to fill his bely with meate and drinke, ſpeaketh all way to the appetyte of hym, with whome he dyneth or ſoupeth.
                  
                     
                        Paraſ
                              ••
                           aſter,
                      he that countreſayteth him that is called Paraſitus.
                  
                     Paraſtarae, certayne ſtones in pyiars. Paraſtata alſo one of the bones in the ſhanke of the legge.
                  
                     Paraſtates, ſtones, which do ſuſtayne bothe ſydes of a doore, called Iambes.
                  
                     Paratragoedio, are, to bragge or crake, to ſpeke grete or hyghe wordes.
                  
                     Parcae, ladyes of deſteny, alſo it ſignifieth the ſelfe deſtyny, or diſpoſicion in prolonging or ſhortnynge lyfe.
                  
                     Parco, peperci, parcere, to ſpare, to forgyue, or pardone, to let or prohibite, to leue, to forbeare or abſteyne.
                  
                     Parcere prerio, to ſpare for coſt.
                  
                     Parcere metu, to put awaye feare.Vergilius.
                  
                  
                     Parcé, ſcarcely, nyggardly, nyghly, fayre and ſoftly.
                  
                     Parciter, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Parcitas, frugalytie,No. Mar. or moderacyon in lyuynge.
                  
                     Parcus, a nygarde.
                  
                     Parcus, ca, cum, nighe, or nygarde, ſcarce in expences, ſometyme it ſignifieth ſeeld.
                  
                     Parcus comitatu, he that hath a ſmal trayne.
                  
                     Parcus opera, an eaſy warkeman, he that is more ydell than occupyed.
                  
                     Pardus, a carte of the mountayne, ſome take it for a Panthere.
                  
                     Pardalus, a byrde of dunne colour, whyche fleyth in flockes.
                  
                     Parectata, & Parectatus, he that is newly iſſued out of a childes yeres,No. Mar. and beginneth to haue the tokens of a man.
                  
                     Parectonia, the mother of Plato, the mooſt noble philoſopher.
                  
                     Parens, father, mother, or any other auncetour.
                  
                     Parentela, auncetry.
                  
                     Parentalia, feſtes made at the buryenge of auncetours.
                  
                     Parentheſis, is a ſentence comprehendyd within another ſentence, without any detriment therunto, beinge marked with one halfe circle at the begynnynge, and another at the ende, as in this wyſe. Nihil adeo principem decet, (quod omnes quidem fatentur) quantū iuſtitia, prudentiae, at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         liberalitati aequaliter coniuncta, Nothinge ſo well becometh a prince (which all men do confeſſe) as Iuſtice equally ioyned with wiſdome and bounteouſnes.
                  
                     Parento, tare, to celebrate the funeralles of auncetours or frendes.
                  
                     
                     Pappi, the floures of thiſtels, whiche be lyke fethers.
                  
                     Pappous, a, um, pertaynynge to my grandfather.
                  
                     Paranomaſia, a figure in ſpekinge, where one worde is lyke to another, but of dyuers ſygnifications. Nam inceptio eſt amē
                        tium, non amantium, this begynnynge is of madde men, not of louers.
                  
                     Paratus, ta, tum, redy.
                  
                     Paraté, redyly.
                  
                     Pareo, rui, rere, to appiere, to be ſeene, to obeye.
                  
                     Parergon, ſome thinge added to, beinge no part of the matter, as whan a payntour doeth make an ymage, he doeth adde to trees, or townes.
                  
                     Parethonium, a whyte colour that peynters do laye, whiche is fonde in Egypte.
                  
                     Paribit, for pariet, ſhe ſhall bringe forth a childe.
                  
                     Parici, iuges aſſigned for capitall cauſes, as murdre or felony that requireth deth.
                  
                     Paries, etis, a wall of a houſe.
                  
                     
                        Parieti loque
                              •
                           is,
                      thou ſpeakeſt to the walle, which maye be ſayde of him, that will not eftſones reherce that, whyche he heryth ſpoken.
                  
                     
                        Parieta
                              •
                           ia,
                      an herbe called Pelitory.
                  
                     Parietinae, olde walles.
                  
                     Parilia, feſtiuall dayes, which the Romains kept for preſeruation of their cattell.
                  
                     Parilis, le, equall.
                  
                     
                        Parili
                              •
                           as,
                      equalytie, ſymilitude in quantitie or qualitie.
                  
                     Pario, peperi, parere, to bringe forth childrē, the lyke thinge in beaſtes, ſometyme to bringe forth generally.
                  
                     Parius, a, um, of the yle called Parus, frome whens is brought marbelle ſtone, called Parium marmor.
                  
                  
                     Parito, tare, to prepare.
                  
                     Pariter, in lykewyſe, equally, ſemblably.
                  
                     Parma, a Targat, which foote men dyd vſe.
                  
                     Parmula, a bucklar.
                  
                     Parnaſides, the nyne muſes, or ladyes of ſciences.
                  
                     Parnaſsidae veſtes, apparayle belongynge to maydens.
                  
                     Parnaſſus, a mountayne in Grece, hauynge two toppes, vnder the whyche the nyne muſis dydde inhabyte or dwell.
                  
                     Paro, are, to prepare, to geate, to apparell.
                  
                     Paro, onis, a lytell ſhyppe or hulke.
                  
                     Parochus, an officer, whiche prouyded for wood and ſalt, for ambaſſadours, alſo it is now vſed for a preeſt, which is a curate, or pariſh preeſt.
                  
                     Paroecia, a paryſhe.
                  
                     Parodus, a paſſage.
                  
                     Paroemia, a prouerbe accommodate to the mater and tyme.
                  
                     Paroeci, paryſſhonars, or they, whiche do dwell within one pariſhe.
                  
                     Paropſis, idis, a potage diſſhe, or potynger.
                  
                     Paros, an yle.
                  
                     Parotides, kernelles behynde the eares.
                  
                     Paroxiſmus, the fitte in a feuer.
                  
                     Parthaſia, a countrey in Grecia, called alſo Archadia.
                  
                  
                     Parthaſius, an excellent payntour.
                  
                     Particida, murderars of their parentes, betrayours of their countray, ſomtyme murdre generally.
                  
                     Patricidium, murdre of kynſfolke, or traiſon to the propre countraye.
                  
                     
                        Pa
                              •
                           ricidium, Marricidium,
                      murdre of father and mother.
                  
                     Pars, partis, part.
                  
                     Partes primas agere, to playe the firſt part.
                  
                     Partes primae, the chiefe parte.
                  
                     Parſimonia, moderate expenſes.
                  
                     Parſi, the pretertence of parco, I haue ſpared.
                  
                     Parthenis, an herbe called Motherwort.
                  
                     
                        Parthenium,
                        Dioſc
                              ••••
                           
                           ▪
                        
                      is an herbe whiche hath ſmall leues lyke to Coriander, & a floure whyte ſomewhat yelowe within, and hath a greuouſe ſauour. Some poticaryes do take it for the laſſe mugwort, but I fynde not, that it is taken for feuerfue. Celſus wryteth, that it groweth on walles.
                  
                     Parthenope, the olde name of the citye of Naples.
                  
                     Parthia, a countraye in Aſia.
                  
                     Parthi, people of that countraye.
                  
                     Parthicus, a, um, of the countray of Parthia.
                  
                     Partiarius, a partinge felowe, or copartner.
                  
                     Particeps, cipis, he that taketh part.
                  
                     Participo, are, to gyue part, or take part, to make another man partner, or of counſayl.
                  
                     Particula, a portion.
                  
                     Particularis, re, particuler.
                  
                     Particulariter, particulerly.
                  
                     Particulatim, particularly.
                  
                     Particulones, coheyres, or comperceners, which haue inheritaunce togither.
                  
                     Partim, partly, in part, ſome tyme part. Partim hominum venerunt, part of the men dyd come.
                  
                     Partio, onis, a byrth.
                  
                     
                        Partior, iris, iri, partitum, & partio, ire,
                        Plaut. 
                              〈◊〉
                           .
                      to part to deuyde.
                  
                     Parthiſſus, a ryuer on the north part of Germania.
                  
                     Partitio, a particion, or diuiſion.
                  
                     
                        Partitudo, for partus,
                      the byrth of a childe.
                  
                     Partus, ta, tum, goten with labour.
                  
                     
                     Parturio, iui, & rij, to labour as women do in trauayle with childe.
                  
                     
                        Partus, 
                              •
                           us, & par
                              •
                           i, & partuis,
                      the byrth of a childe, ſometyme the childe ſelfe.
                  
                     Parulis, a ſwellynge of the goomes.
                  
                     Paruifacio, cere, to ſet lytle by.
                  
                     Parui aeſtimo, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Paruipendo, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Paruitas, the lytelneſſe.
                  
                     Parum, a lytle.
                  
                     Parumper, a lytle whyle, or tyme, alſo very lytle: ſometyme quickely.
                  
                     Paruus, a, um, lytle.
                  
                     Saluſtius
                     Paruulus, a lytell one.
                  
                     Parum habere, to ſet lytle by.
                  
                     Paſalli, pomaunders.
                  
                     Paſcales, ſhepe or pultry, whych do fede at large.
                  
                     Paſcha, Eaſter.
                  
                     Paſchalis, le, pertayninge to Eaſter.
                  
                     Paſceolus, a letherbagge.
                  
                     Paſcito, tare, to fede.
                  
                     Varro. dere ruſt.
                     Paſco, paui, paſcere, & Paſcito, are, to feede, to gyue meate to another, to noryſſhe or brynge vp, to augmente.
                  
                     Paſcere oculos, to content or playſe the eyē with the beholdinge of a thinge.
                  
                     Paſcor, ſceris, paſci, to fede as beaſtes done.
                  
                     Paſcua & Paſcuum, paſture.
                  
                     Paſcuus, a, um, that whych ſerueth to feede catell.
                  
                     Paſiphae, the wyfe of Minos the kynge of Crete, who hauinge company with a bull, brought forth the monſtre, called Minotaurus, whyche was halfe a man and halfe a bulle.
                  
                     Paſſales, be as well ſhepe as pultry, whiche fede abrode.
                  
                     Paſſex, eris, a ſparowe, alſo a fiſſhe, called a playce.
                  
                     Paſſerculus, a lytle ſparowe.
                  
                     Paſsili, a lytell grayne called vatches or fitches.
                  
                     Paſsim, here and there, ſometyme it ſignifieth frome all places, ſometyme indifferently, alſo ouer all.
                  
                     Paſsio, a paſſion, grief.
                  
                     Paſsiuus, a, um, that which ſignifieth paſſion, or cauſeth paſſion or grief.
                  
                     Paſsiui amatores, they whyche doo loue all women indifferently.
                  
                     Paſſum, licour made of rayſons.
                  
                     Paſſus, a, um, ſpred abrode, or open.
                  
                     Paſſus, us, a pace, which doth contayne fyue feete.
                  
                     Paſtillus, vel paſtillum, a paſty.
                  
                     Paſtinaca, an herbe called parſhyps, allſo a fiſhe.
                  
                     Paſtino, are, to velue in a garden: repaſtino, vide in R.
                  
                  
                     Paſtinatus, tus, deluinge.
                  
                     Paſtinum, a debill, or ſettynge ſticke.
                  
                     Paſtio, onis, paſturinge, or fedinge of catell.
                  
                     Paſtomis, an inſtrument, which is ſet on the noſethrilles of horſis, that will not be ruled, and is called of horſebreakers, Barnacles.
                  
                     Paſtophori, certayne preeſtis in Egypte.
                  
                     Paſtophorium, the chamber of the Sexten, or him which kepeth the Temple.
                  
                     Paſtor, oris, a ſheparde or herdman.
                  
                     Paſtoralis, le, pertayninge to the ſhepharde or herdman.
                  
                     Paſtorius, a, um, 
                     idem,
                  
                  
                     Paſtoricius, a, um, of fedynge or graſinge of catell.
                  
                     Paſtus, a, um, he that hath eaten.
                  
                     Paſtus, tus, meate, fedynge.
                  
                     Patagium, a cloke of cloth of golde, vſed to be worne on riche garmentes.
                  
                     Patagiati, they whyche doo weare ryche clokes.
                  
                     Patagiarij, the craftyſmen that maketh ſuch clokes.
                  
                     Patara, a citie in the countraye of Licia.
                  
                  
                     Patauium, a citie in Italy called Padua, nigh vnto Venice.
                  
                     Patauini, men of that citie.
                  
                     Patefacio, cere, to make open, to declare, to diſcloſe.
                  
                     Patefio, fieri, to be diſcloſed or diſcouered.
                  
                     Patella, a lytle panne or a ſkiller.
                  
                     Pateo, tui, tere, to be open.
                  
                     Pater, tris, a father.
                  
                     Patera, a broode piece or bolle of golde or ſyluer.
                  
                     
                        Pater
                              •
                           amilias,
                      the good man of the houſe.
                  
                     Paterpatratus, to whome it pertaynyd, whā trues ſhulde be takē, to receyue the othes and appoyntement of bothe partes, and was there in, chief and principall ambaſſadour.
                  
                     Pater patrimus, he that is a father, and hath his father lyuynge.
                  
                     Paternus, a, um, pertaynynge to a father.
                  
                     Pateſco, ſcere, to be open.
                  
                     Pathe, troubles or vexacions of mynde, paſſions.
                  
                     Pathetica oratio, an oration mouing the hearer to indignation or pitie.
                  
                     Pathmos, an Ile in the ſe called Aegeum.
                  
                  
                     Patibulum, a woden lock of a dore, or a barre wherewith the doore is made faſt, alſoo a place of tourment, a gybbet, galowes, or croſſe.
                  
                     Patientia, patience.
                  
                     Patillum, a paire of tongues or other lyke inſtrument, wherewith coles are taken vp.
                  
                     
                     Patina, a dyſh wherein meate is caryed.
                  
                     Patinarium, meate, which is ſtewed vppon a chaffynge dyſſhe.
                  
                     Patior, pateris, pati, to ſuffre.
                  
                     Plautus in Aſinar.
                     Patitor, ſuffre thou.
                  
                     Patrae, tarum, a citie in Achaia.
                  
                  
                     Patrator, oris, he that doeth a thinge.
                  
                     Patres conſcripti, ſenatours.
                  
                     Patria, a countraye.
                  
                     Patriarcha, a prince or chief man of the fathers. It was alſo the name of dignytie, of fyue chief Archebyſhoppes, as of Rome, Antioche, Alexandry, Ieruſalem, and Cō
                     ſtantinople.
                  
                     Patriarchatus, the dignitie of a patriarche.
                  
                     Patricida, he that killeth his father.
                  
                     Patricidium, the murdre of a mans father.
                  
                     Plautus in Can.
                     Patrice, nobly, or lyke a noble man.
                  
                     Patricius, a ſenatours ſonne, or commen of Senatours.
                  
                     Patrimonium, goodes commen by inheritaunce, patrimony.
                  
                     Patrinus & Patrimis, he whiche hath his father lyuinge.
                  
                     Patrinus, a, um, of the father, or pertayning to the father.
                  
                     Patritus, ta, tum, that which happeneth to one by his father.
                  
                     Patrius▪ a, um, of the countreye.
                  
                     Patrizo, & Patriſſo, are, to be lyke a father.
                  
                     Patro, are, to perfourme.
                  
                     Patrocynor, aris, ari, to defende them, which be poure, or be falſely accuſed.
                  
                     Patroclus, a noble greke, companyon to Achilles.
                  
                  
                     Patrocinium, defence of men beinge in trouble or ſuyte.
                  
                     Patronymicum nomen, a name taken of an auncetour, as Priamides the children of Priamus.
                  
                     Patronus, he that is aduocate on the defendauntes part.
                  
                     Patrueles, coſyn germayns, or right coſyns on the fathers ſyde.
                  
                     Patruus, the fathers brother.
                  
                     Patruus magnus, my fathers vncle.
                  
                     Patruus maximus, my grandfathers vncle.
                  
                     
                        Pat
                              •
                           agia,
                      a ryuer in Sicile.
                  
                     Patulico, care, to be open.
                  
                     Patulus, a, um, wydeopen.
                  
                     Patulus bos, an oxe or cowe, whoſe hornes do ſtande wyde open.
                  
                     Paucis, in fewe wordes.
                  
                     Paucus, ca, cum, fewe.
                  
                     Paucitas, tatis, fewneſſe.
                  
                     Pauculus, a, um, very fewe.
                  
                     No. Mar. Pom. Feſt.
                     Paucies, ſeldome.
                  
                     Pauciens, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Pauens, tis, he that feareth for a tyme.
                  
                     Paueo, ere, to feare.
                  
                     Pauera, wheate, whyche ſpringeth not well out of the hoſe whan it groweth in care.
                  
                     Paueſco, ſcere, to be aferde.
                  
                     Pauicula, a pauynge bytell,Cato der
                           •
                         
                        
                           •
                        uſt. wherewith ſtones be dryuen into the grounde in the makinge of a pauement.
                  
                     Pauidus, he that allwaye feareth.
                  
                     Pauidé, fearefully.
                  
                     Pauimento, are, to make a pauement.
                  
                     Pauimentum, a pauement, or place paued, 
                        •
                      floore.
                  
                     Pauio, ire, to ſtryke.
                  
                     Pauito, tare, to be ſore aferde.
                  
                     Pauliſper, a very lytle whyle.
                  
                     Paulum, & Paulo, a lytle.
                  
                     Paulatim, lytle and lytle.
                  
                     Paulominus, lytle laſſe.
                  
                     Paulo mox, by and by.
                  
                     Paulo prius, a lytle erſt.Plautus i
                           •
                         Menech.
                  
                  
                     Paululum, very lytle.
                  
                     Paululum modo, neuer ſo lytle.Terent. i
                           •
                         Heau.
                  
                  
                     Paululo tum erat contenta, ſhe was than cō
                     tent with a very lytle.
                  
                     Pauo, onis, & Pauus, a pecoke.
                  
                     Pauor, oris, extreme feare.
                  
                     Pauper, pauperis, a poure man.
                  
                     Pauper, peris, an adiectif poure.
                  
                     Pauperies, & Paupertas, tatis, pouertie.
                  
                     Pauper, ra, rum, poore.
                  
                     Pauperculus, & paupercula, a poore man, or poore woman.
                  
                     Paupero, are, to make poure.
                  
                     Paupertinus, na, num, poure.
                  
                     Pauſa, a pauſe, leyſour.
                  
                     Pauſias, a noble payntour.
                  
                     Pauſo, are, to pawſe.
                  
                     Pauxillatim, by lytle and lytle.
                  
                     Pauxilliſper, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Pax, pacis, peace, a quiete lybertie.
                  
                     Paxillus, a lytle ſtake.
                  
                     Pax ſequeſtra, a truce betwene two hoſtis.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶P, ANTE E.
                  
                     PEccatum, a ſynne, an offence.
                  
                     Pecco, care, to offende or ſynne.
                  
                     Pecorarius, a herdeman, alſo he that doeth hyar catell.
                  
                     Pecorarius, a, um, pertayninge to catell.
                  
                     Pecorinus, a, um, of rother beaſtis.
                  
                     Pecten, inis, a wayuers lowme, alſo a combe. it is alſo the place aboute the pryuy membres, where heare doeth growe, it is alſo the ſtickes, wherwith a mā ſtryketh doulcemers whan he doeth playe on them, alſo a fiſhe, ſometyme a harowe.
                  
                     Pectinatim, in the facion of a combe.
                  
                     Pectino, to kembe, or to harowe.
                  
                     
                     Pectitus, ta, tum, kembyd, or harowyd.
                  
                     Pecto, xui, tere, to kembe, or trymme heare, to carde woulle, to ſette a harpe or other lyke inſtrument.
                  
                     Pectoralis, le, pertayninge to the breſt. Faſcia pectoralis, a breſt kerchef.
                  
                     Pectorium, a certayne carte ſometyme vſed in Fraunce.
                  
                     Pectoroſus, a, um, grete breſtyd.
                  
                     Pectunculus, a lytell fiſſhe.
                  
                     Pectus, toris, the breſt.
                  
                     Pectuſculum, a lytle breſt.
                  
                     Pecuarla, ſtore of catell: alſoo places where they be kept, alſo multitude of catell, alſoo reuenues that commeth of catell.
                  
                     Pecuariam rem facere, to breede catel.
                  
                     Pecuarius, a breedar of catell.
                  
                     Pecuarius, a, um, belongynge to catell.
                  
                     Pecu, indeclinabile. Pecua, in the plurell numbre, catell, beaſtes.
                  
                     Peculator, & Peculatrix, he and ſhe that ſtealeth a commune treaſor.
                  
                     Peculatus, robbery of the cōmune treaſour, or of a prince.
                  
                     Peculiaris, re, propre, or ſpeciall.
                  
                     Peculiariter, proprely, ſpecially.
                  
                     Peculio, are, to punyſſhe by the purſe.
                  
                     Peculioſus, riche, of grete ſubſtaunce.
                  
                     Peculium, ſubſtaunce, that rycheſſe, which is onely in money and catell.
                  
                     Peculor, aris, ari, to ſteale a commune treaſour, or any thinge frome a prince.
                  
                     Pecunia, money, it is taken of the olde Ciuilions, for all thynges, whyche we calle catell.
                  
                     Pecunioſus, ryche.
                  
                     Pecus, cudis, ſeu Pecus, pecoris, all maner of catell: ſometyme the multitude or flocke of catell, ſometyme it is taken onely for ſhepe or gotes.
                  
                     Peda, & Pedatura, the ſteppe or token of a mannes foote.
                  
                     Pedalis, of a foote.
                  
                     Pedamen, & Pedamentum, a ſtake or forke, whereby a vyne, hoppes, or other lyke thinge is ſuſtayned, or borne vppe.
                  
                     Pedaneum, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Pedaneus, a, um, of the quantitie of a foote, in length, or diſtaunce.
                  
                     Pedanei iudices, inferior iuges, which went on foote.
                  
                     Pedarij, were Senatours, whiche dyd not ſhewe their opynions in wordes, but onely meuynge them ſelfes towardes thoſe perſonnes, whiche had rayſonned, whoſe ſentences they dyd approue, lyke as they do in the parliament houſe.
                  
                     Pedatim, where one fote goeth with the other, foote by foote.
                  
                     Pedatio, the ſettynge vp of vynes.Cato.
                  
                  
                     Pedatò, ſodaynly.
                  
                     Pedatus, footed.
                  
                     Pedem ſtruere, to take him to his feete, to runne awaye.
                  
                     Pedem referre, to retreate or go backe.Caeſar. Cicer. pro Plan.
                  
                  
                     Pedem conferre, to come to a point of a mater in controuerſy.
                  
                     Pedepreſsim, a foote paſe, ſoftly.
                  
                     Pes, pedis, a foote, ſomtyme it is taken for al the legge, frome the thyghe to the ſole of the foote.
                  
                     Pedes ire, to go on foote.
                  
                     Pedes, feete in metre, ſometyme lyſe.
                  
                     Pedes, ditis, a foote man in batayle.
                  
                     Pedeſter, he that goeth on foote, or is on foote.
                  
                     Pedetentim, ſoftely and fayre, by lytle and lytle.
                  
                     Pedecoſus, louſy, or full of lyſe.
                  
                     Pedem ponere, to begynne a mater.
                  
                     Pedare, to ſet proppes, or to prop vp a vyne or tree, that it ſhal not fall or bowe downe.
                  
                     Pedem reuocare, to retrayte or recule back.
                  
                     Pedeſtris oratio, a numerouſe ſpeakynge or wrytinge in the fourme of a verſe, or metre allthoughe it be not a verſe.
                  
                     Pedicillus, a lytle worme, whyche breedeth betwene the ſkynne and the fleſſhe.
                  
                     Pediculatus, ta, tum, any thinge whiche hath a ſtalke, as the mooſt part of frute.
                  
                     Pedicularis morbus, the louſy ſickeneſſe.
                  
                     Pedio, dire, to ſtampe with the foote.
                  
                     Pediolus, a lytle foote.
                  
                     Pedica, any thinge, wherewith the foote is tyed, as a fettar, a payre of gyues, or ſtockes.
                  
                     Pedicoſus, & Pediculoſus, louſy.
                  
                     Pediculus, a fiſſhe, the ſtalke of an apple or peare, or other frute: alſo a louſe.
                  
                     Pediſſequus, & Pediſſequa, a ſeruaunte, who foloweth allwaye the maſter, or maſtres.
                  
                     Peditatus, an hoſte of footemen.
                  
                     Pedo, pepedi, pedere, to farte.
                  
                     Pedum, a ſhepecroke.
                  
                     Peganon, the herbe called Rue, or herbe grace.
                  
                     Pegaſides, the Muſis.
                  
                     Pegaſus, a horſe, which was fayned to haue wynges: it is alſo a ſigne or numbre of ſterres in heuen.
                  
                     Pegma, matis, a ſtage, whereon pageantes be ſet: or whereon plate & iewels do ſtand to be loked on.
                  
                     Peieratio, periury, a forſweringe.
                  
                     Peiero, are, to ſwere falſely.
                  
                     Peior, peius, warſe.
                  
                     Pelagus, the ſee.
                  
                     Pelagicus, ca, cum, of the ſee.
                  
                     
                     Pelamis, midis, fiſſhe called Tuny.
                  
                     Pelargos, a byrde called a ſtorke.
                  
                     Pelaſgis, a countraye in Grece called Arachadia.
                  
                     Pelaſgi, people whiche came out of Grece, & inhabited Italy: they be alſo Arcadiens.
                  
                     Pelaſgicus, ca, cum, of Arcadia.
                  
                     Pelias, a kynge of Theſſalia, vncle to Iaſon.
                  
                     Pelicus, a prince, of whom the people called Peligni toke their name.
                  
                     Pelides, the ſurname of Achilles.
                  
                     Peligni, people in Italy, which came out of Illiria.
                  
                     Pelion, a hill in Theſſalia.
                  
                     Pella, a citie in Macedonia. alſoo a payle, whereinto kyne are mylked.
                  
                     Pellax, acis, he that deceyueth with fayre wordes.
                  
                     Pellacia, ſayre ſpeche to deceyue.
                  
                     Pellex, ſhe that is a wedded mannes harlot.
                  
                     Pellicator, a deceyuer with fayre wordes.
                  
                     Pellicatus, tus, the acte or lyfe of her, which companieth with a weddyd man, aduoutry on her part.
                  
                     Pellicio, pellexi, cere, to deceyue with fayre wordes, to moue a man pleaſauntly to do a thynge.
                  
                     Pellectus, meuyd, tempted.
                  
                     Pelliceus, cea, ceum, of a ſkynne or hyde.
                  
                     Pellicula, the ſkynne.
                  
                     Pellicalo, are, to couer with a ſkynne.
                  
                     Pellio, onis, a ſkynnar.
                  
                     Pellis, a ſkynne.
                  
                     Pellitus, cladde in ſkynnes.
                  
                     Pella, pepuli, pellere, pulſum, to put oute or expell.
                  
                     Pelluceo, cere, to ſhyne bryght, to ſhyne through.
                  
                     Pellucidus, a, um, very cleere.
                  
                     Pellucide, clerely.
                  
                     Pelluo, luere, to waſſhe cleane.
                  
                     Pellunium, a baſon, wherein mens fete are waſſhed.
                  
                     Peloponneſus, a countraye in Grece, called nowe Morea: and lyeth betwene the ſee called Ionium, and the ſee called Aegeum.
                  
                  
                     Pelops, pelopidis, whiche vaynquyſſhed on horſbacke in runnynge Oenomaus, father of Hippodamia, and wedded her.
                  
                     Peloris, a kynde of ſhelfiſſhe.
                  
                     Pelorus, a hill in Sicile on the ſee ſyde.
                  
                     Pelta, a Targat or buckler, lyke an halfe moone.
                  
                     Peltati, they whyche do weare ſuche bucklars.
                  
                     Peluis, a baſon.
                  
                     
                        Peluſium,
                        Pom. Feſt.
                      a citie in Egypte.
                  
                     Peminoſus, a, um, ſtinkinge.
                  
                     Penates, the gentyles called goddis of mās lyfe: they be ſomtyme taken for the mooſte ſecrete partes of the houſe.
                  
                     Penarius, & Penarium, a cellar or ſtore houſe.
                  
                     Pendeo, es, pependi, pendére, penſum, to hange, or be hanged, to depende, ſomtyme to be in payne.
                  
                     Pendere animi, to be troubled in mynde, to doubte what to do, to ceſſe frome all other thinges, and to attende to one thynge, to be in ſuſpence.
                  
                     Pendere poenas, to be punyſhed.
                  
                     Pendo, is, pependi, dere, to ponder or waye, to conſyder, to eſteme or value, to paye, to ſuſtayne or ſuffre, looke for dependo, ſuſpē
                        do, expendo, in their firſt lettres.
                  
                     Pendulus, la, lum, that hangeth.
                  
                     Pené, allmooſt.
                  
                     Penelope, the wyfe of Vlyxes.
                  
                     Penelopes telam retexere, ſignifieth to do & vndo, to take moche labour in vayne.
                  
                     Penes, with, or at.
                  
                     Penes hunc, with him.
                  
                     Penetrabilis, trabile, that maye perce, or be perced.
                  
                     Penetrale, the inner part of the houſe.
                  
                     Penetro, are, to perce.
                  
                     Peneus, a ryuer in Grecia, which dyuydeth the countrayes of Elis and Achaia.
                  
                     Penicella, a paynters pencell, wherewith he paynteth.
                  
                     Penicillus, peniculum, & penicillum, a paynters penſell.
                  
                     Peniculamentum, the hemme of a garment, the ſkirtes.
                  
                     Peniculus, ſiue peniculum, any thinge whyche ſerueth to bruſſhe or wype cleane any thynge.
                  
                     Penis, a tayle: alſo the ſecrete membre of a man.
                  
                     Penitus, ta, tum, tayled, hauynge a tayle, alſo pénitus inwarde.
                  
                     Penitus, an aduerbe, vtterly, to the vttermooſt, farre of.
                  
                     Penna, a penne, or quyll.
                  
                     Pennarium, a pennar.
                  
                     Penniculum, a fether.
                  
                     Penniger, pennigera, gerum, that which beareth fethars.
                  
                     Pennula, a lytle fether.
                  
                     Penſa, that whyche is payed for a thynge bought, the payement. Penſa, in the plurell numbre, thredes of flax or woull, whan it is ſpunne, whyche maye be called yarne.
                  
                     Penſiculatè, wayghtely.
                  
                     Penſiculo, are, to ponder a thynge.
                  
                     Penſilis, le, that whych hangeth, or ſtondeth on hyghe.
                  
                     Pēſile horreū, a garnard, where corn is kept
                  
                     
                     Penſilis homo, a man hanged.
                  
                     Penſi nihil liabere, to ponder or conſyder no thynge,Val. in po. not to ponder or conſyder any thynge.
                  
                     Penſio, a pencion or yerely rent.
                  
                     Penſito, tare, to ponder welle a mattier, to pay money, to make recompence.
                  
                     Penſitor, a ponderer or wayer. Verborum penſitatores ſubtiliſsimi,
                     Gellius. The mooſte ſubtyll ponderers of wordes.
                  
                     Penſo, are, to ponder or way a thynge.
                  
                     Penſos, oris, a wayer.
                  
                     Penſus, a, um, wayed, examyned, ſomtyme it ſygnifieth good and wyſe.
                  
                     Penſum, the flaxe, whyche is bounden on the diſtaffe,Ci. de ora. out of the whiche the threde is drawen. ſommetyme it ſygnifieth the threde that is ſpunne. It is alſo the execution or mynyſtration of an offyce. Alſo regarde that one hath to a thynge.
                  
                     Plautus in tru
                           •
                        ulen.
                     Penſilis hortus, a gardeyne made vpon the roufe of a houſe, or vpon pyllars.
                  
                     Penſilis vrbs, a citie ſtandynge on vaultes.
                  
                     Pentaphillon, ſeu pentepatalon, an herbe called cinkefoyle, whiche hath fyue leaues,
                  
                     Pentapolis, a countray betwene Paleſtina and Arabia, wherin were the cities of Sodom and Gomor, bourned by the vengeance of god for ſynne agaynſt nature.
                  
                     Pentacontarchus, a captayne of fyfty men.
                  
                     Pentarchus, he that is captayn of fyue men.
                  
                     Pentateuchus, the volume of the fyue bookes of Moyſes, that is to ſaye, Geneſis, Exodi, Numeri, Leuiticum, Deuteronomium.
                  
                  
                     Pentathlus, he that exercyſeth any of theſe fyue games, caſtynge of the ball, or tryndell, runnynge, leapynge, wraſtlyng, and throwynge the darte.
                  
                     Pentecoſte, whytſontyde.
                  
                     Penteſiléa, a queene of Amazon, whyche was ſlayne at the ſyege of Troye.
                  
                     Pentimimeris, is a parte of a verſe, where a ſentence is fynyſſhed in the fyrſte ſyllable of the thyrde foote.
                  
                     Pentorbon, an herbe callyd alſo peony.
                  
                     Penula, a Cloke, worne whanne hit raynethe.
                  
                     Penularium, a cloke bagge.
                  
                     Penulatus, cloked.
                  
                     Penuria, extreme neceſſitie, penurie.
                  
                     Penus, penoris, & penum, & penu, & penuarium, a ſtorehouſe. Sometyme ſtoore or prouyſion of vytayles.
                  
                     Plautus in A
                           •
                        lularia.
                     Penuſsime, vtterly.
                  
                     Peonia, an herbe callyd Pyonie, whyche beareth a redde floure, and great rounde ſede, wherin is meruailous vertue againſt the fallyng euylle.
                  
                     Peplus, uel peplum, a kerchiefe or other lyke couerynge of the heed.
                  
                     Peperci, I haue ſpared, or forborne, or pardoned.
                  
                     Pepigi, & pupugi, the preter tence of pungo. Alſo pepigi is the preter tence of pango. Pepigit foedus, He made a league or alyaunce.
                  
                     Pepo, onis, a Melon.
                  
                     Per, ſygnifyeth by, ioyned with an nother worde it ſygnyfyeth perfection. Perpulchrum, Verye fayre. Pergraue, Veraye greuouſe. Peraetatem, for or by reaſone of his age.
                  
                     Peptica, medycines, whiche do make good concoction in a man, that the meate caten, maye digeſte welle. Alſo ſalues and oyntementes, whyche doo make impoſtumes rype.
                  
                     Pera, a ſcryppe or bagge.
                  
                     Perago, egi, agere, to perfourme, to make perfyte, to conſyder, to drawe or cauſe to be drawen with force.
                  
                     Peragere reum, to accuſe one, and to ſewe hym to a condemnation.
                  
                     Peragro, are, to walke or go about a place.
                  
                     Peramo, are, to loue well.
                  
                     Peranno, annare, to contynewe or lyue ouer yere.
                  
                     Perardeo, dere, to bourne out or throughe.
                  
                     Perareo, ere, to drie vp, to be very drye.
                  
                     Peraro, rare, to tylle all through.
                  
                     Perbellè, very well, ryght well.
                  
                     Perbibo, bibere, to quafte or drynke all out.Plautus in Pom. Feſt. Cicer. ibi.
                  
                  
                     
                        Perbitere, for praeire,
                      to go before.
                  
                     Per cauſam, for a cauſe.
                  
                     Percedere, to departe.
                  
                     Percello, li, ere, to ſtryke and ouerthrowe.
                  
                     Percino, nere, to ſynge ſtylle, to contynewe ſyngynge.
                  
                     Perclam, verye priuyly.
                  
                     
                        Perduaxo, for perdo.
                     
                  
                  
                     Peredia, a meale, where men eate hūgrely.
                  
                     Percipio, caepi, cipere, to perceyue, to take, or receyue.
                  
                     Percitus, ſtyrred.
                  
                     Percoarcto, are, to bryng into a lytel roume.
                  
                     Percolo, ui, ere, to worſhyp moche.
                  
                     Percontor, aris, ari, to ferche.
                  
                     Percudo, di, dere, to breake.
                  
                     Perculſus, & percuſſus, ſtryken.
                  
                     Percunctor, aris, ari, to inquire, to demande.
                  
                     Percuro, are, to heale perfytely.
                  
                     Percurro, rere, to runne apace, to runne by.
                  
                     Percutio, cuſsi, tere, to ſtryke, or ſmyte.
                  
                     Perdité, extremely.
                  
                     Perditus, ta, tum, loſte, peryſſhed, withoute recouerie, out of hope.
                  
                     Perdius, abydynge all the day, or watching

all the day, or he whiche doth any thynge in the daye tyme.
                  
                     Perdix, dicis, a partryche.
                  
                     Perdo, didi, dere, to loſe, to ſlee.
                  
                     Perduco, duxi, ducere, to bryng to an ende, to brynge or leade by force.
                  
                     Perduellio, onis, treaſon agaynſt the king, or the countrey. Alſo a traytour.
                  
                     Perduellis, an ennemye.
                  
                     Peredo, edi, edere, to eate moche.
                  
                     Peregre, out of a mannes propre countrey. Peregre uado, I go out of the countreye, or on pylgremage. Peregre uenio, I come out of ſtraunge countrayes, or from pylgremage.
                  
                     Peregrinor, aris, ari, to go into ſtrange countreys, or on pylgremage.
                  
                     Peregrinus, a ſtraunger or alyen.
                  
                     Perendie, the daye nexte after to morowe.
                  
                     Perendinus dies, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Perennis fluuius, a courſe of water that cometh with rayne, or a brooke that is only made with rayne.
                  
                     Perenniter, contynually.
                  
                     Perennis, ne, perpetuall, euer durynge.
                  
                     Perennitas, tatis, contynuaunce, longe abydynge.
                  
                     Perenno, are, to dure or contynue.
                  
                     
                        Pereo, iui, uei, 
                              •
                           i, ire,
                      to be loſte or conſumed, alſo to dye.
                  
                     Peretro, are, to go or ryde al aboute.
                  
                     Perfacul, the auncient wryters vſed for facile, lyghtly.
                  
                     Perfas & nefas, by ryght or wronge, by one waye and other.
                  
                     Perfecte, perfitely.
                  
                     Perfectus, a, um, perfytte, accomplyſſhed, optayned.
                  
                     Terent. in 
                           ••
                        nucho.
                     Perfector, toris, he that bryngeth a thynge to paſſe, or to a poynte.
                  
                     Perfero, tuli, ferre, to brynge in concluſion. Alſo to brynge or telle tidinges. ſomtime to ſuffre or endure.
                  
                     Perficio, cere, to accomplyſhe, to brynge to a poynte, to optayne.
                  
                     Perfidioſus, a, um, full of diſloyaltie.
                  
                     Perfidioſé, diſloyally, trayterouſely.
                  
                     Perfido, dere, to truſte moche.
                  
                     Perfidus, falſe of promyſe, he that dothe any thynge againſt the truſt that is put in him, diſloyall.
                  
                     Perfidia, falſehode againſt promyſe or truſt, diſloyaltie.
                  
                     Perfidus, very truſtye.
                  
                     
                        Perfines, for perſtringas,
                      ſtrayne thou hard.
                  
                     Pom. Feſt.
                     Perflatus, a great blaſte of wynde.
                  
                     Perflo, are, to blow vehemently or ſtrongly.
                  
                     Perfluo, xi, fluere, to rūne out as water both out of a broken veſſell.
                  
                     Perfodio, dere, to dore or perce through, 
                        ••
                      ſtryke through, to dygge through, or to the dottome or depeſt of any thynge.
                  
                     Perfore, to come well to paſſe.
                  
                     Perforare, to perce, or to make an hoole throughe.
                  
                     Perfortiter, myghtily.
                  
                     Perfoſſus, a, um, perced through, ſtryken or dygged through.
                  
                     Perfracté, obſtynately.
                  
                     
                        Perfrigefacio, perfrigefacere,
                        Ci. o
                              •••
                           e. 
                              •
                           
                        
                      to make very colde.
                  
                     Perfrico, care, to rubbe moche.
                  
                     Perfricuit faciem, aut frontem, aut or, Is in a prouerbe as mohe to ſaye, as he hath layde aparte ſhame, or he is ſhameles, or without abaſhement.
                  
                     Perfrictè frontis, withoute ſhaame or honeſtye.
                  
                     Perfructus eſt, he hathe taken the fruite or pleaſure of a thynge, he hath vſed or exercyſed a thynge, or hathe lefte the vſe or exerciſe therof.
                  
                     Perfruor, perfructus, perfretus, aut perfruitus, perfrui, to take all the profyte or cō
                     moditie, to take pleaſure or recreation in any thynge.
                  
                     Perfuga, he that fleeth to the contrary part in battayle, or forſaketh his capitayne.
                  
                     Perfugio, gere, to rounne vnto oone for ſuccour.
                  
                     Perfugium, a place, wherevnto a manne runneth to haue ſuccoure, or to be kept frome daunger: It is alſo taken for anye thynge, whereby a manne maye be ſuccoured.
                  
                     Perfunctoriè, paſſynge ouer lyghtely.
                  
                     Perfunctorius, a, um, that whyche paſſethe lyghtly away, or tarieth not longe.
                  
                     Perfunctus, he that hath doone diligently his offyce or duetie.
                  
                     Perfundo, perfudi, fundere, to poure out, or droppe out, or ſtylle oute. Perfundit
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         genas lachrimis,
                     
                        
                           •
                        uidi
                           ••
                        . The teares dropped downe on his chekes.
                  
                     Perga, a towne in Pamphilia, wherof Diana was called Pergaea.
                  
                  
                     Pergama, orum, the towers of Troy.
                  
                     Pergamena charta, parchement.
                  
                     Pergamum, ſiue Pergamus, a Cytie in Aſya, the countrey of Galene, the famous Phiſycion.
                  
                     Perge, go to, paſſe forthe.
                  
                     Perge in virum, playe the man, goo to lyke a man, go to hardily.
                  
                     Pergin? wylte thou not leaue? wylte thou not be gone.
                  
                     Pergrandis, de, very great.
                  
                     
                        Pergo, per
                              •
                           exi, pergere,
                      to go, to procede▪
                     
to endeuour to do a thyng, to continue, to make haaſte, to aſſaye▪ 
                     
                        〈…〉
                      deuoured to go.Terent. in Phor
                           ••
                        . 
                     Suſpen
                           •
                        o g
                           •
                        adu 
                           〈…〉
                         perrexi, I aſſayed with a 
                        •
                     yght paſs to go ſoftely.
                  
                     Pergraecor, aris, ari, to 
                        ••
                      ryottous, in eatynge, drynkynge, and hauntynge harlottes.
                  
                     Pergrauè, very greuouſely,
                  
                     Pergula, a galerye, proprely. where it is open on bothe ſydes, It is alſo the place in a ſhyppe, wherein menne doo, walke. Alſo a vyne rayſed in the fourme of an herber▪ Sommetyme the companye of warkemenne, obeyenge to the chyefe warkeman.
                  
                     Perhibeo, ere, to ſay, to gyue, to ſet a price. Praetium perhibere.
                  
                  
                     Perhibere teſtimonium, to beare wytneſſe.
                  
                     Perhibere uerba, to ſaye.
                  
                     Perhorreo, rere, to be ſoore aforde.
                  
                     Perhorreſco, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Perhumane, & perhumaniter, right gentilly.
                  
                     Periander, oone of the ſeuen wyſe menne of Grecia.
                  
                     Periclimenon, an herbe callyd woodbynde.
                  
                     Pericles, a noble man of Athenes, in whom was a naturall eloquence incomparable.
                  
                     Periclitor, aris, ari, to be in peryl, alſo to experyence or proue a thynge.
                  
                     Periculoſus, a, um, daungerous.
                  
                     Periculum, peryll or daunger. ſomtyme experience or profe.
                  
                     Periculum facere, to proue.
                  
                     Perhiodus, a clauſe, a circute in wordes, or contynuance in ſpeakynge.
                  
                     Perhiodicae febres, feuers, whyche come by courſes or fyttes.
                  
                     Perillus, was an artifycer, which made a bul of br
                        •
                     ſſe wherinto (being glowing hotte) men ſhuld be put, that in tourmentynge of them, by they
                        •
                      crienge, a noyſe ſhulde iſſue out lyke the mowynge or belowynge of a bulle, the whiche engine whanne Perillus hadde gyuen to Phalaris, the cruell tyraunt, he cauſed the craftes manne to be fyrſte putte into it, to proue his owne experience.
                  
                     Perimo, emi, imere, to kylle.
                  
                     Peremptus, ta, tum, kylled.
                  
                     Peridoneus, a, um, very meete.
                  
                     
                        Periege
                              •
                           i
                              •
                           ,
                      a compaſſe or 
                        •
                     y
                        •
                     cuy
                        •
                     e.
                  
                     Perii. I am loſte or diſtroyed.
                  
                     Perii animo, my harte or courage is gone.
                  
                     Perire mulierem, to loue a womanne feruentely.
                  
                     Perinde, ſoo, in lyke wiſe, euen ly
                        •
                     e, verye moche, euen as, in this facion.
                  
                     Perinthus, a cytie of Thra
                        •••
                     , which
                        •
                      nowe is called Heracl
                           •
                        a.
                  
                  
                     Periodicus, ca, cum, th
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                     ethe and commeth by courſes.
                  
                     Periodica febris, a 
                        〈…〉
                      commeth by courſes, 
                        〈◊〉
                      tercians and 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
                  
                     
                        Peri
                              •
                           ci,
                      companions or dwellers togyther in one houſe.
                  
                     
                        Periparaſi
                              •
                           a,
                      the hangyng of a houſe, with tapiſrye or other lyke thynge.
                  
                     Peripateticus, a philoſopher of Ariſtotels ſecte▪ or opinion.
                  
                     Peripheria, a cyrcumference.
                  
                     
                        Periphra
                              •••
                           ,
                      circumlocution, one word expreſſed by many.
                  
                     Periplorema, a fygure, whanne a part of a ſentence nothynge neceſſary, is added vnto a verſe.
                  
                     Peripneumonia, ſyckeneſſe of the lounges with the coughe.
                  
                     Peripneumonicus, he whyche hathe that▪ diſeaſe.
                  
                     Peripſema, matis, the powder or duſt that commeth of fylynge or ſhauynge of mettalle or wodde.
                  
                     Periſcelis, idis, ſloppes, whyche womenne were wont to weare.
                  
                     Periſſologia, a ſuperfluous ſpeakynge.
                  
                     Periſterae, houſe culuers or douues.
                  
                     
                        Periſter
                              •
                           on,
                      a cu
                        •
                     uerhouſe.
                  
                     Periſtetrotrophium, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     
                        Periſtr
                              •
                           ma,
                      tapeſry, or couerlyds of Aras or Verdure.
                  
                     
                        Periſtyl
                              •
                           um,
                      a place ſet about with pyllers.
                  
                     Perito, tare, to peryſhe or be loſte.
                  
                     
                        Perith
                              •
                           us,
                      the companyon of Theſeus.
                  
                     Peritia, cunnynge in any ſcience.
                  
                     Peritus, cunnynge, perfyte in a ſcience.
                  
                     Periuro, rare, to ſweare vntrewely,Plautus in Bacch. Plautus in truculen. to be periured.
                  
                     Periurioſus, a manne whiche is often forſworne.
                  
                     Periurus, forſworne, periurid.
                  
                     Periurium, periurie.
                  
                     
                        Peri
                              •
                           oma, matis,
                      a breeche.
                  
                     
                        Peri
                              ••
                           nium,
                      a corſe or brode gyrth, wherwith maydens were wont to be gyrte vnder their pappes.
                  
                     Perlego, legere, to 
                        •
                     ede ouer all.
                  
                     
                        Pe
                              ••
                           ecebra,
                      a thynge whiche pleaſauntlye draweth a man to fauoure it.
                  
                     Perlepidus, perlepida, perlepidum, veray fayre.
                  
                     
                        Perlibera
                              ••
                           s,
                      very lyberall.
                  
                     Perlibro, to waye diligentely.
                  
                     Perligo, gare, to 
                        •
                     ynde harde or faſte.Colum. 4.
                  
                  
                     
                        Perli
                              ••
                           s▪ ta, tum,
                      anoynted harde.
                  
                     Perloquor, qui, to ſpeake out all to an ende, to ſpeake perf
                        •
                     tely.
                  
                     Perlucidum, & pellucidum, cleere, that 
                        •
                     
                     
manne may ſee through, as water, glaſſe, horne.
                  
                     Perluo, luere, to waſhe ouer or all.
                  
                     Perluſtro, ſtrare, to beholde all aboute.
                  
                     Permadeſco, to be moche wette, or to be made very moyſte.
                  
                     Permadefacio, cere, to make verye moyſte, or to wette moche.
                  
                     Permagnus, a, um, verye greatte.
                  
                     Permano, & permaneſco, are, & neſcere, to be diſcloſed, knowen, or diuulgate.
                  
                     Plautus.
                     Permaneo, manſi, nere, to abyde.
                  
                     Permano, are, to runne all ouer, or to fall into, to be declared openly.
                  
                     Ti. Liuius.
                     Permanus traditum, that whyche is lefte from one to an other, or is taught by one to an other: As the father telleth or leaueth to his ſonne, and he to his ſonne, and ſo contynually by lyne.
                  
                     Permatureſco, ſcere, to be through rype.
                  
                     Permerdo, to defyle ouer all.
                  
                     Perme, aut te, aut illum, aut aliquid aliud ſtare, whanne we, or anye other thynge is the cauſe,Plinius. that a thynge is not doone. Omnia iam parata erant, niſi per eum ſtetiſſet, Nowe al thynges were redy, if by his occaſyon it had not be lette▪
                  
                  
                     Permeſſus, aut permeſsis, ſsidos, a Ryuer in Grece, dedicate to the Muſes.
                  
                     Permiſceo, permiſcui, miſcere, to myxte all togyther.
                  
                     Permiſsio, a ſuffraunce.
                  
                     Permitto, miſi, mittere, to ſuffre, to yelde, or delyuer, to thraſte in, to throwe downe, to cōmytte, to ſende forthe, to let downe, us to lette downe one by a rope, or other lyke thynge.
                  
                     Permulceo, cere, to appeaſe, addoulce, or mytigate a mans diſpleaſure.
                  
                     Permulti, very many.
                  
                     Permuto, mutare, to chaunge oone thynge for an nother.
                  
                     Permutatio, an exchaunge.
                  
                     Permutator, he that exchaungeth.
                  
                     Perna, the peſtyll and alſo the gammonde of bakon.
                  
                     Perniciabilis, pernicialis, & pernicioſus, cauſynge deathe, mortall.
                  
                     Pernicies, deathe.
                  
                     Pernicitas, ſwyfteneſſe.
                  
                     Pernitior, tius, wars, more dangerous, more full of myſchiefe.
                  
                     Perniciſsimus, ciſsima, mum, warſte, mooſte daungerouſe.
                  
                     Perniciter, dangerouſly, myſcheuouſly.
                  
                     Pernio, onis, a kybe on the heele.
                  
                     Perniunculus, a lyttell kybe.
                  
                     Pernix, cis, ſwyfte, flyghty, ſometyme ſtubborne, alſo deedly.
                  
                     Pernocto, noctare, to tarye all the nyghte, to watche, to praye, to reſte, to walke, to ſtande, to dwelle, to ſlepe, to lye oute of his owne houſe.
                  
                     Pernoſco, ſcere, to knowe perfectly.
                  
                     Pernumero, are, to telle oute money.
                  
                     Pernox, all nyghte.
                  
                     Pero, onis, a ſhowe of rawe lether, Alſo a ſacke.
                  
                     Perogiganus, perogita, he that puttethe a ſtalyon to the mare, to ſeaſon her.
                  
                     Peroleo, to ſauour or ſtynke moche.
                  
                     Peronatus, he that weareth rawe lether ſhoen, boteux or cokers lyke a plough mā.
                  
                     Perorior, iris, re, to begyn, ſpryng, or growe by the occaſion of ſome thynge.
                  
                     Peroro, are, to ſpeake or raiſon to an ende,Qui
                           ••
                        . to reaſon perfectly, ſomtyme to moue the herers to indignation.
                  
                     Peroratio, the laſt part of an oration, wherin the affectes of the herers are chiefelye ſtyrred.
                  
                     Perrori, a people of Aethiopia.
                  
                     Peroſus, ſa, ſum, extremely hated.
                  
                     Perpaco, care, to ſette all thynge in peace.
                  
                     Perparum, very lyttell.
                  
                     Perparce, very ſcarſely, verye nyghely, or nygardely.
                  
                     Perpaſco, perpaui, perpaſcere, to feede to the vttermooſte.
                  
                     Perparuus, a, um, a very lyttell one.
                  
                     Perpaucus, ca, cum, very fewe.
                  
                     Perpauxillus, a, um, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Perpauefacio, pauefeci, facere, to make ſore affrayde.
                  
                     Perpello, perpuli, perpellere, to conſtrayne, to moue or induce one to do a thynge.
                  
                     Perpendicularis, are, that is directly downe ryghte.
                  
                     Perpendiculum, a plumlyne, ſuch as maſons and carpenters haue, with leadde at the ende, whereby they doo proue the euenneſſe of their ſquares.
                  
                     Perpendo, dere, to examin, alſo to conſyder.
                  
                     Perpenſé, aduiſedly, with a conſideration.
                  
                     Perperam, amyſſe, ouerthwartely, vnhappily, wrongefully.
                  
                     Perperi, fooles, idiotes, ſhrewes, lyers.
                  
                     Perperitudo, ſhrewdenes, foolyſhenes.
                  
                     Perpero, are, to marre a thynge.
                  
                     Perpes, perpetis, perpetuall.
                  
                     Perpeſſus, he that ſuffreth with moch peyn.
                  
                     Perpetim, perpetually.
                  
                     Perpetro, trare, proprely to doo or to committe an acte good or vlle.
                  
                     Perpetuo, are, to continue without ceaſſing.
                  
                     Perpetuus, petua, petuum, perpetuall euerlaſtynge, contynualle, holl, not in porcyens or dyuyded.
                  
                     
                     Perpetior, perpeti, to ſuffre pacientely, to endure.
                  
                     Perpeto, perpetere, to aſke importunately without ceſſynge, to perfourme.
                  
                     Perpetratio, an acte good or badde.
                  
                     Perpetuitas, eternitie, an euerlaſtyng contynuaunce.
                  
                     Perpetuum, & perpetuo, aduerbes, ſygnifienge continually, alway, for euer.
                  
                     Perplaceo, perplacui, perplacere, to content very moche.
                  
                     Perplector, perplecteris, plecti, to bynde or twyſte harde or faſte, to meddle ſo togyther, that a manne can not know what the thynge meaneth.
                  
                     Perplexé loqui, to ſpeake nowe one thyng, nowe an other, that a manne wotteth not what he meaneth.
                  
                     Perplexim, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Perplexor, aris, ari, to ſpeake doubtefullye, as wordes, wherin are two intendementes.Plautus in Aulularia. 
                     At ſcio, quo vos pacto ſoleatis, perplexarier, pactum, non pactum eſt, Non pactum, pactum, eſt, quod vobis lubet, well, I knowe wel ynough, in what facion you are wonte to ſpeake, that a manne canne not telle howe to take you: It was promyſed, It was not promyſed, It was not promyſed, It was promyſed, euen as hit lyſteth you.
                  
                     Perplexabile, a worde ſpoken, whych hath twoo dyuers vnderſtandynges, or that whyche is one thynge in herynge, an nother in vnderſtandynge.
                  
                     Perplexabiliter, doubtefullye.
                  
                     Perplexus, plexa, plexum, perplexed, twyſted togyther, or harde to be lowſed, intrycate, doubtefull.
                  
                     Perpluir, perpluere, to rayne in the myddell of a howſe.
                  
                     Perplus, moche more.
                  
                     Perpol, an othe, ſygnyfyenge by Pollux. Sommetyme the worde Per, dothe pertayne to the wordes folowynge. Perpol quam paucos reperias meretricibus fideles euenire amatores,
                     Terent. in Hecyra. By God thou fyndeſte verye fewe trewe louers happen to commune womenne. Where per belongethe to quam paucos, and not to Pol.
                  
                  
                     Perpoto, perpotare, to drynke all day, or to drynke ſtylle, or contynually, or vntyl one be drunke.
                  
                     Perpotatio, a contynuaunce in drynkynge, drunkerye.
                  
                     Perpulcher, perpulchra, perpulchrum, verye fayre.
                  
                     
                        Plautus in Stich.
                        Perpulchre,
                      verye well done.
                  
                     Perpruriſco, perpruriſcere, to haue a greate ytche, or deſyre to clawe or ſcratche.
                  
                     Perpurgo, gare, to make all thynge cleane, or nette.
                  
                     Perpuro, perputare, to declare al.Plautus in Ciſtel. 
                     Nunc operam date, ut ego argumentum hoc uobis plane perputem, Nowe take ye hede, that I maye playnly declare al this matter vnto you.
                  
                     Perquàm, added to any nowne adiectiue, augmentethe his power. Perquàm doctus, Verye well lerned. Perquàm ſtolidus, very foolyſhe.
                  
                     Perquiro, quiſiui, quirere, to make dilygente ſerche, to examyne.
                  
                     Perraro, very ſelde.
                  
                     Perrepto, tare, to goo ſoftely, or with moche peyne.
                  
                     Perrideo, perriſi, perridere, to lawgh hartylye.
                  
                     Perriſio, ſere, to ſcorne, to laugh at one,Perottus. or to make an nother to laugh.
                  
                     Perrogo, gare, to deſyre hartily.
                  
                     Perrumpo, rupi, rumpere, to breake on ſender, or in the myddes.
                  
                     Perſa, a manne or woman of the countrey of Perſia.
                  
                     Perſaepe, verye often.
                  
                     Perſancté, veraye deuoutelye, or ſolempnely.
                  
                     Perſcribo, perſcribere, to wryte a thynge throughe, or to an ende, to regyſter or inrolle a thynge.
                  
                     Perſcriptio, a deede of a mans owne wrytynge.
                  
                     Perſcrutor, ſcrutari, to ſerche or inquyre dilygentely.
                  
                     Perſefacul, the olde and auncyente writers vſyd for perfacile, verye lyghtely,Pom. Feſ
                           •
                        . or verye eaſyly.
                  
                     Perſenex, perſenis, verye olde.
                  
                     Perſentiſco, ſcere, to perceyue well.
                  
                     Perſephone, the Surname of Proſerpina, and ſygnyfyeth the vertue of ſeedes in ſpryngynge.
                  
                     Perſepolis, a Cytie in the countreye of Perſya.
                  
                     Perſequor, eris, qui, to purſewe, to contynue in that, whiche is begonne, to perſecute, to be auenged.
                  
                     Perſero, perſeui, perſcrere, to ſowe aboute, or abrode.
                  
                     Perſeuerantia, a ſtable abyding in any thing reaſonable.
                  
                     Perſeueranter, conſtantely.
                  
                     Perſeuero, rare, to contynewe with a ſtedfaſte mynde.
                  
                     Perſeus, a noble knyghte, whyche delyuered a fayre lady callyd Andromeds frō a whale, and alſo ſlewe Meduſa, whyche

tourned men into ſtones. Alſo it is a ſigne amonge the ſterres.
                  
                     Perſia, a countreye in the eaſte parte of the worlde, where nowe Sophy reigneth.
                  
                     Perſica poma, a fruite callyd peaches.
                  
                     Perſicus, ca, cum, of Perſia.
                  
                     Perſideo, dere, to ſytte by.
                  
                     Perſiſto, ſtere, to abyde.
                  
                     Perſoluo, uere, to pay truely, to paye all, to accomplyſhe.
                  
                     
                        Perſoluc
                              •
                           e grates,
                      to gyue thankes.
                  
                     Perſolus, alone, without companye.
                  
                     Perſona, a vyſour lyke to a mans face. alſo perſon or perſonage, amonge dyuynes and late philoſophers: ſomtyme the qualitie of a man.
                  
                     Perſonatus, a maſker, or he that weareth a viſour.
                  
                     Seneca
                     Perſonata foelicitas, a counterfayte felicitie.
                  
                     Perſonata uulnera, hydden woundes.
                  
                     Perſonata, an herbe, whyche groweth by the water ſyde, hauynge great brode leaues lyke gourdes, but that they be greatter & harder: I ſuppoſe it to be the herbe, which in ſome countrey is called Donye.
                  
                     Perſonatus, tus, a maſke.
                  
                     Perſono, perſonare, to ſowne oute, or ſowne perfectely.
                  
                     P
                           •••
                        tus in 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                     Perſpecto, tare, to loke well aboute.
                  
                     
                        Perſpicaci
                              •
                           as, tatis,
                      quyckeneſſe of ſyghte, conſyderation.
                  
                     Perſpicace, aduyſedly, with good conſyderation.
                  
                     Perſpicaciter, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           〈1 paragraph〉
                        
                     
                     Perſpicientia, per
                        •
                     yte knowlege.
                  
                     Perſpicue, cleerely, openly.
                  
                     Perſpicax, acis, he that ſeeth quyckely, and doth all thynges with conſyderation.
                  
                     Perſpiceo, ſpexi, ſpicere, to ſe or vnderſtand playnely.
                  
                     Perſpicuitas, tatis, clereneſſe, proprelye in wordes or ſentences, eaſyneſſe.
                  
                     Perſpicuus, a, um, clere, playne, eaſye.
                  
                     Perſpiſſó, an aduerbe, very late.
                  
                     Plautus.
                     Perſtino, are, to ſette a pryce on a thynge.
                  
                     Perſto, as, ſtiti, ſtare, to abyde fyrmely.
                  
                     Perſtrepo, pui, ere, to make a great noyſe.
                  
                     Perſtrictores, tugglers.
                  
                     Perſtringo, perſtringere, to wrynge harde, to towche a thynge ſhortely in ſpeakynge or wrytynge, to dull or darke with to moche lyght. Perſtringere aures, to fylle the eares with noyſe. Perſtringere nomen aut famam, to gyue a man an ylle name.
                  
                     Horatius.
                     Perſuadeo, perſuaſi, perſuadere, to induce one to beleue or truſte, to aduyſe, to ſtyre vehementely.
                  
                     
                        Perſuaſibile, & perſuaſibili
                              •
                           er,
                      in ſuche wyſe as it may perſwade.
                  
                     Perſuaſor, oris, a perſwader or inducer to do a thynge.
                  
                     Perſuaſtrix, a woman,Plautus in Bacch. whiche inducethe or moueth one to do an acte.
                  
                     Perſuo, ere, to ſowe vp all.
                  
                     Pertaedeo, dere, & pertaedeſcere, to be verye weerye.
                  
                     Pertego, tegere, to couer all.
                  
                     Pertempus, in tyme conuenyent, in ſeaſon.
                  
                     Pertendo, dere, to extende.
                  
                     Pertento, tare, to tempte, to aſſay or proue moche.
                  
                     Pertero, triui, terere, to rubbe or frotte a thynge.
                  
                     Perterreo, rui, perterrere, to make aferde.
                  
                     Perterrefacio, cere, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Perteſus, diſpleaſed, annoyed. Sermonis perteſus, werye of the communication.Plaut. in Moſtell. Suetonius in Caeſar.
                  
                  
                     Perteſus ignauiam ſuam, diſpleaſed for his ſlouthefulneſſe.
                  
                     Pertexo, texi, texere, to make an ende, to cō
                     clude, proprely to wayue out, or to weaue perfectely.
                  
                     Pertica, a ſtaffe, a cogell, a perche or polle, wherwith grounde is mette.
                  
                     Pertimeo, & pertimeſco, pertimeſcere, to feare moche.
                  
                     Pertinatia, obſtinacye, perſeuerance.
                  
                     Pertinaciter, obſtynately.
                  
                     Pertinatius, more obſtynatelye.
                  
                     Pertinax, acis, obſtinate, he that holdith faſt.
                  
                     Pertinatior, pertinaciſsimus, more and moſte obſtynate.
                  
                     Pertingo, tingere, to touche moche, to ioyn harde vnto a thynge.
                  
                     Pertiſum, olde writers vſed for perteſum.
                  
                     Pertolero, rare, to indure to the ende, to ſuſtayne valyantely.
                  
                     Pertondeo, dere, to clyppe or ſheare all.
                  
                     Pertraho, xi, here, to drawe to with force.
                  
                     Pertranſeo, ſiui, & ſii, ire, to paſſe throughe.
                  
                     Pertranſennam inſpicere, to loke on a thing ferre of, or on parte, and not all.
                  
                     Pertundo, tudi, tundere, to ſtryke harde, or breake a thynge in ſtrykynge.
                  
                     Pertundo, pertuſi, pertundere, to beate with hammers.
                  
                     
                        Pertineo, nui, n
                              •
                           re,
                      to pertayne or belonge, to be ioyned to.
                  
                     Perturbo, are, to trouble moche.
                  
                     Perturbatio, a trouble of mynde.
                  
                     Perturbaté, with trouble of mynde.
                  
                     Pertuſa uaſa, veſſelles cracked or broken in ſomme parte.
                  
                     Peruadè,
                  
                  
                     Peruado, peruaſi, uadere, to go ouer all.
                  
                     Peruagor, ari, to wander aboute.
                  
                     Peruello, elli, ellere, to plucke, ſometyme to pricke.
                  
                     
                     Peruenor, ari, to hunt ouer all.
                  
                     Peruenio, uenire, to come to a place or to an ende.
                  
                     Peruerſus, a, um, frowarde.
                  
                     Peruerſé, maliciouſely, myſcheuouſly, ouerthwartly.
                  
                     Plautus in Merca.
                     Peruerſe vides, thou ſeeſt naughtyly.
                  
                     Peruerto, to make yll, to peruerte, or depraue.
                  
                     Perueſtigo, gare, to fynde in ſekynge.
                  
                     Perueſtigator, oris, he that ſeketh or loketh for a thinge.
                  
                     Peruicax, cacis, harde ouerthwart, yll to intreate, ſtubbourne, obſtinate, ſometyme conſtaunt.
                  
                     Non
                           •
                        .
                     Peruicatia, obſtinacy: but ſometyme it is vſed in a good part, and taken for a perſeueraunce and conſtancy in a good act. Pertinacia allwaye in an yll part.
                  
                     Peruicatior, oris, more obſtynate, more ſtubbourne: ſometyme more conſtaunt.
                  
                     Peruicaciter, obſtinatly, ſtubbournly, conſtauntly.
                  
                     Actius in No. Mar.
                     
                        Peruico, for Peruicaci.
                     
                  
                  
                     Peruigil, lis, he that watcheth. alſoo diligent and induſtriouſe.
                  
                     Peruigilium, moche watche: alſoo watchinges▪ or vigiles before ſolemne dayes.
                  
                     Peruigilo, are, to watche all nyght.
                  
                     Peruinco, uici, uincere, to ſurmounte.
                  
                     Pacuuiꝰ in No. Mar.
                     Peruitere, the olde wrytars vſed, for perire, to be loſt, to peryſhe.
                  
                     Peruiuo, nixi, uiuere, to lyue longe, or vntyll the vttermoſte.Plautus in Cap. 
                     Et ſi peruiuo vſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         ad ſummā aetatem, tamen breue ſpacium eſt perferundi, quae minitas mihi: Althoughe I lyue yet to the vttermooſte age, yet is the tyme lytle to ſuffre all: wherewith thou thretteſte me.
                  
                     Peruius, uia, uium, that maye be gone in, penetrable.
                  
                     Peruolo, are, to flee oute, or to the ende.
                  
                     Peruoco, care, to call them all.
                  
                     Peruro, uſsi, urere, to burne all, or euery where.
                  
                     Peruolo, peruelle, to deſyre.
                  
                     Perula, a lytell bagge or ſcrippe.
                  
                     Peruſia, a citie in Italy.
                  
                     Peruulgatus, ta, tum, commonly vſed or knowen.
                  
                     Pes, pedis, a foote, whiche now contayneth xii. ynches, the olde foote contayned .xvi. fyngres bredeth.
                  
                     Peſsinus, nuntis, a towne in Phrigia.
                  
                     Qu. Curti.
                     Pedes, & Pedibus, put for an aduerbe, ſignifieth on foote. Pedes agmen circuibat, the hoſte went about on foote. In agmine non nunquam equo,
                     Suetonius in Caeſ. 
                     ſaepius pedibus ante
                           •
                        bar, In the hooſte, he wente allwaye afore, ſometyme on horſebacke, but moore often on foote.
                  
                     Pedibus ſtipendia facere, to be a foote man in warres.
                  
                     Pes, a louſe: allſoo a corde, wherewith the ſayle in a ſhyp is bent.
                  
                     Peſnas, olde wrytars vſed for pennas.Pom. Feſt.
                  
                  
                     Peſeſtas, in olde tyme vſyd for Peſtis,
                     Pom. Feſt. Peſtilence.
                  
                     Peſſum eo, ire, to go backewarde, to be loſt or deſtroyed, to be nowght ſet by.
                  
                     Peſtifer, & Peſtiferus, a, um, that which bringeth in Peſtilence.
                  
                     Peſtilens, tis, peſtilent, vnholſome.
                  
                     Peſſulus, a barre or bolt, wherewith doores or gates be made faſt.
                  
                     Peſſum, an aduerbe, which ſignifieth backewarde, downewarde, vnder foote.
                  
                     Peſſundo, dedi, dare, to caſt vnder foote, to put to the warie.
                  
                     Peſtis, Peſtilentia, & Peſtilitas, a peſtilence, a mortalitie of men.
                  
                     Petalum, a leafe.
                  
                     Petaſatus, he that weareth a hatte.
                  
                     Petaſo, onis, a flitche of bakon.
                  
                     Petaſus, a hatte, a rounde kouerynge of a houſe.
                  
                     Petauriſta, a propre daunſer.
                  
                     Petaurum, a corde, or a ſtaffe, or a bourde,Iu
                           •
                        . pol▪
                      or other lyke thinge, whereon lyghte perſonages do daunce and proue maiſtryes. it is alſo a rouſte, where pultry doeth ſyt in the nyght.
                  
                     Peteſſo, ſere, to aſke or require.
                  
                     Petigo, tiginis, a tettar that runneth ouer all a mannes face.
                  
                     Petilanſura, the howfe of a whyte horſe.Pom. Feſt.
                  
                  
                     Petilara, thinges that are drye.
                  
                     Petilus, la, lum, ſmalle.
                  
                     Petilius, a floure whyche groweth amonge brembilles, in the later ende of ſomer,Plinius. and is lyke a wylde roſe in coloure, and hath fyue ſmall leues, the budde of dyuerſe colours, hauynge within it yelowe ſedes.
                  
                     Petimen, a ſore in the ſhoulders of beaſtes,Pom. Feſt. which I ſuppoſe is a faſſion.
                  
                     Petitia, a certayne kynde of appulles.
                  
                     Petiſſo, ſere, olde wrytars vſed for Peto,
                     Pe
                           •
                        ot. to aſke or demaunde.
                  
                     Petitor, toris, he that aſketh or demaundeth: amonge lawyers he is called the demaundaunt: alſo it is a beggar, which aſketh allmes from doore to doore.
                  
                     Petoritum, a chariot or wagon.
                  
                     Petiolus, a lytle foote: alſo a perche whereon frutes or onyons be hanged.
                  
                     Petitio, onis, a petition.
                  
                     Peto, petij, petete, to aſke, to gette or attayn, to deſyre, to laye awayt, to abide, to ſtrike,

to go to a place, to ſeke. Petere gladio, to ſtryke with a ſworde. Petere veneno, to poyſon. Petere blandicijs, to 
                        •
                     later. Petere tactu, to feele. Petere mutuum, to borowe: alſo to remembre. Petere iugulum, to kill, to folowe. Petere auribus, to heere. Petere naribus, to ſmelle. Petere oculis, to behold. Petere oſculis, to kiſſe. Petere vi, to inforce. Petere, is alſo to aſſayle or make aſſault on one.
                  
                     Petra, a ſtone.
                  
                     Pom. Feſt.
                     Petrones, Carles of the countraye: alſo a wether ſhepe.
                  
                     Petroſelinum, an herbe called Perſely.
                  
                     Petulans, tis, want on diſhoneſt, reprocheful, prowde, viciouſe, redy to do wronge.
                  
                     Valla in Rauden.
                     Petulantia, wantonneſſe, viciouſneſſe, pryde.
                  
                     Petrens, a, um, of a ſtone.
                  
                     Petreleon, an oyle, which naturally runneth out of a ſtone.
                  
                     Petroſus, a, um, ſtony or full of ſtones.
                  
                     Petulanter, wantonly, proudly.
                  
                     Petus, he that hath one eye laſſe than the other.
                  
                     Petulcus, wanton.
                  
                     Pexo, are, to kembe.
                  
                     Pexae velles, Some men in expoundynge Pliny, do ſuppoſe Pexas veſtes, to be of ſuche thynge, as is ſhorne, as ſyne woullen clothe, or veluet.
                  
                     Pexati, they which do weare ſuche maner of cloth, or ſylke.
                  
                     Pezitae, mouſſherons, growynge at the rootes of trees.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶ P, ANTE H.
                  
                     PHaeaces, people of the Ile of Corcira.
                  
                     Phaecaſius, a ſhoo.
                  
                     Phaedra, the wyfe of Theſeus, & ſtepmother to Hypolytus.
                  
                     Phaeton, the ſunne.
                  
                     Phagedaena a, runnyng cancre or pock, whiche ſhortly eateth the fleſh vnto the bones.
                  
                     Phagones, greate eaters.
                  
                     Phalacron, bolde.
                  
                     Phalacrocorax, acis, a water crowe, it maye ſignifie a coote.
                  
                     Affranius.
                     Phalango, gare, to moue or dryue a thynge vppon rollers.
                  
                     Phalaris, a cruell tyraunt, which raigned in the citie of Agrigentum.
                  
                     Phagus, a beeche tree.
                  
                     Phagineus, a, um, of beeche.
                  
                     Phalangae, ſtaues, whereon men doo carye packes, playne ſtaues, alſo leauars, to lifte thinges that be heuy.
                  
                     Phalangarij, portars, whyche doo carye packes.
                  
                     Phalangium, a ſpyder.
                  
                     Phalanx, angis, an hooſte of footemen, ſette in ſuche order, that they maye incountre with their ennemyes, foote to foote, man to man, ſhylde to ſhylde. It is alſo the beame of a balaunce.
                  
                     Phalanges, are the ioyntes or ſpaces in the fyngars: they be alſo rollers, whereon ſhippes or greate pieces of tymber be remoued.
                  
                     Phalarica, an inſtrument of warre, wherein wylde fyre is incloſed, that whan it is by ſhot faſtened to tymber, it burneth all ſhortly.
                  
                     Phalerae, a traper or bardes for a horſe.
                  
                     Phaleratus, trapyd, or bardyd.Do
                           ••
                        . in Teren. Phor
                           ••
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Phalerata dicta, gaye wordes, pleaſaunte ſpeche.
                  
                     Phalerij, a citie in Tuſcane.
                  
                     Phaliſti, people in Italy.
                  
                     Phanaticus, frenetyke, he that hath vayne vyſions.
                  
                     Phaneta, one of the names of Bacchus.Orpheus.
                  
                  
                     Phanni, fantaſyes, which happen to men in dremes.
                  
                     Phantaſia, fantaſy.
                  
                     Phantaſma, matis, a viſyon.
                  
                     Phanum, a temple.
                  
                     Pharetra, a quyuar for arowes.
                  
                     Pharetratus, he that beareth a quyuar.
                  
                     Phariſeus, a Pharyze, whych was of a ſecte of Iewes, which lyued in a more ſtrayghter fourme than the commun people dyd.
                  
                     Pharias, phariae, a ſerpent, whiche maketh a furrowe in the grounde with his tayle, as he creapeth, and ſo lyfteth hym ſelf vppe.
                  
                     Pharmacentice, that part of phyſike, which healeth with medicynes.
                  
                     Pharmacopola, a Potycary.
                  
                     Pharmacum, a medycyne: ſometyme it ſignifieth poyſon.
                  
                     Pharos, an Ile in Egypte.
                  
                     Pharſalia, a countraye in Theſſalya, where the batayle was betwene Iulius Caeſar and Pompey.
                  
                     Phaſae, a worde of Hebrue, which ſignifieth a departynge.
                  
                     Phaſeolus, a kynde of poulſe corne. I ſuppoſe it be that, which is called Tares.
                  
                     Phaſianus, a feſaunt.
                  
                     Phaſis, a greate ryuer in the countraye of Colchos.
                  
                     Phaſma, atis, an horrible viſion or ſight.
                  
                     Pherecydes, a famouſe Phyloſopher and wrytar of Tragoedies, which dyed of the louſy ſickeneſſe.
                  
                     Pheretra, thinges borne at great feaſtis or triumphes, as pageantes or iewels of gold or ſiluer, images, and ſuche lyke thinges.
                  
                     
                     Pheretrius, Iupiter.
                  
                     Pheretrum, a thinge, wheron pageantes are borne: alſo deed corpſis.
                  
                     Phia, the generall name to all plate, whiche ſerueth for wyne.
                  
                     Phiala, a potte or cuppe of golde or ſiluer, which ſerueth for wyne.
                  
                     Phidias, an excellent w
                        •
                     rkman, in makinge great images of golde or yuory.
                  
                     Phidiacus, ca, cum, of Phidias.
                  
                  
                     Phiditia, the ſoupers, whiche the Lacedemonians vſed, whyche were openly kepte with a meruaylouſe temperaunce, euery man bringynge his meaſurable porcion of meate and wyne.
                  
                     Philadelphia, a citie in Aſia.
                  
                     Philagathus, he that loueth goodneſſe.
                  
                     Philanthropos, a louer of mankynde: alſo gē
                     tyll and kynde.
                  
                     Philargyria, couaytouſneſſe, auaryce.
                  
                     Philargyrus, couaytouſe.
                  
                     Philema, a kiſſe.
                  
                     Philetes, a kiſſar.
                  
                     Philodolus, he that loueth his ſeruauntes.
                  
                     Philenus, he that loueth wyne.
                  
                     Philippei, a certayne coyne of golde.
                  
                     Philippi, a citie in Thracia.
                  
                     Philippenſes, men of that citie.
                  
                     Philocalus, a good man, a clenly man, or elegaunt.
                  
                     Philomela, a nightingale: alſo a fayre mayden, whyche was defloured by Thereus, huſbonde to her ſiſter, whome poetes do fayne was tranſfourmed to a nightingale.
                  
                     Philologus, a louer of wordes.
                  
                     Philonicus, a brawler: ſometyme a louer of victory.
                  
                     Philoſophia, philoſophy, the loue or fauorynge of wyſedome.
                  
                     Philoginos, he that doteth on women.
                  
                     Philopaes, he that loueth children.
                  
                     Philoponus, laboriouſe, paynefull.
                  
                     Philoſophaſter, he that wolde be lyke a philoſopher.
                  
                     Philoſophice, lyke a phyloſopher.
                  
                     Philotheſia, a ſolemne feaſte amonge the Grekes.
                  
                     Philoſophicus, ca, cum, philoſophicall.
                  
                     Philoſophor, aris, ari, to ſtudy wyſedome.
                  
                     Philoſophus, a philoſopher.
                  
                     Philoxenia, hoſpitalitie.
                  
                     Philoxenus, he that kepeth good hoſpitalytye.
                  
                     Philtrum, a drinke charmed, whiche cauſeth a man to be madde for loue.
                  
                     Philura, ſeu Philyra, ſmalle thynges hangynge downe of trees or herbes, like vnto heares.
                  
                     Phyma, matis, a ſore on the fynger, whyche maye be called a whytblowe.
                  
                     Phlebes, veynes.
                  
                     Phlebotomia, bloodeletinge.
                  
                     Phlebotomum, the inſtrument, wherewith bloode is leten, a fleme.
                  
                     Phlegethon, ontis, a ryuer of hell, which allwaye burneth.
                  
                     Phlegias, the ſon of Mars, a kynge in Theſſaly, and father of Ixion.
                  
                     Phlegrae, a people in Theſſaly.
                  
                     Phlius, a place in Grecia.
                  
                     Phlox, a yelowe floure lyke a violet.
                  
                     Phlegma, maris, flewme.
                  
                     Phlegmon, onis, & Phlegmone, nes, an inflammacion of bloode, which groweth into an impoſtume.
                  
                     Phoca, a ſe calf, it maye be ſuppoſed to be a Seale, whych is fiſſhe, and breedith on the lande.
                  
                     Phocenſis, of the countraye called Phocis.
                  
                     Phocion, a noble counſaylour of Athenes, whoſe lyfe is a myrroure to all counſayllours, which let theym rede in the warke of Plutarchus, intytled the lyues of noble men.
                  
                     Phocis, cidis, a countraye in Grece.
                  
                     Phoebus, the Sunne.
                  
                     Phoenices, people in Syria.
                  
                     Phoeniceus, a, um, right Crymſon.
                  
                     Phoenicia, a regyon in Syria.
                  
                     Phoenicopterus, a great byrde, hauing redde fethers.
                  
                     Phoeniſſa, a woman of Phenicia.
                  
                     Phoenix, nicis, a byrde, whiche lyueth aboue ſyx hundred yeres, and finally caryenge ſwete ſpices vppe to a hyghe mountayne, by the heate of the ſunne, and labour of hir wyngis, kyndleth fyre, whereby ſhe being all burned, of her axen ryſeth another like byrde: it is alſo a date tree, or palme, alſo a lytell ryuer in Grecia: it was alſo the brother of Cadmus, which raygned in Phoenicia.
                  
                     Pholoe, a mountayne in Archadia, full of woode.
                  
                     Phonaſtus, he that techeth one to pronoūce and moderate his voyce.
                  
                     Phorbas, a ſhepeharde that founde Oedippum, after that he was hanged vpp by the feete.
                  
                     Phorcus, one of the ſonnes of Neptunus, whyche was taken for a god of the ſee.
                  
                     Phoroneus, the mooſte auncient kynge of Grecia.
                  
                     Phoſphorus, the 
                        ••
                     ye ſterre.
                  
                     Phraſis, The propre fourme, or maner of ſpeache, which in one countraye is oftentymes dyuer 
                        •
                     e
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                     s Southerne, Northerne, Deuenyſſhe, Kentyſhe, Frenche, Picard,

Gaſcoyne, walon: ſome do ſet the negatife before the affirmatife, ſome contrary, ſome ſpeache is quicke, ſome graue, ſome flouryſhynge, ſome temperate.
                  
                     Phrene, the mydryfe, whyche dyuideth the vmbles of a man or beaſte, frome the bowelles.
                  
                     Phreneticus, he that is vexed with a freneſy.
                  
                     Phrenitis, ſeu Phreniſis, a ſyckeneſſe called freneſy.
                  
                     Phrine, a famouſe harlotte at Athenes.
                  
                     Phrigia, a countraye in Aſia the laſſe.
                  
                     Phrygio, onis, a brawdrour.
                  
                     Phrynos, a lyzarde.
                  
                     Phryx, gis, a man of Phrigia.
                  
                     Phthia, a citie in Theſſalia.
                  
                     Phthiriaſis, a ſyckeneſſe, in the which lyſe do growe in ſuche multitudes, that they deuoure the body.
                  
                     Phthirophagi, people dwelling nyghe to the greke ſee, which lyued onely by fiſſhe.
                  
                     Phthiſicos, he that hath the conſumpcion of the lunges.
                  
                     Phyſeter, a great fyſhe in the Frenche Occean ſee, whyche ryſeth lyke to a pylar aboue ſhippes.
                  
                     Phthiſis, a conſumption of the body by a diſtillation frome the heed into the lunges, whereby the lunges are exulcerate.
                  
                     Phu, a plante or herbe, which ſome call Valeriane.
                  
                     Phygeton, a lytle ſwellyng or botche, harde and redde, burnynge and prickinge.
                  
                     Phylira, a tree called alſo Tylia.
                  
                     Phyllis, a woman, doughter of Lycurgus, kynge of Thrace, which hynge her ſelfe, deſpayriuge of the commyng of Demoophon, whome ſhe loued, whome poetes fayne to be turned into an Almonde tree.
                  
                     Phyſica, warkes treatynge of the nature of thinges, or the operacion of nature.
                  
                     Phiſicus, a naturall philoſopher.
                  
                     Phyſiologus, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Phyſionomia, ſeu Phiſiognomia, a rule to knowe a mannes naturall affections by his vyſage or fourme of his membres.
                  
                     Phyton, one of the names of Apollo.
                  
                     Phitonicus, & Phitonica, he or ſhe, whyche hath a ſpirite within theym, that gyueth aunſwere of thinges to come.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶P, ANTE I.
                  
                     PIabile, for the whych ſatiſfaction maye be made, and god pleaſed.
                  
                     Piacularis, re, that whiche is gyuen or offred to god for ſatiſfaction.
                  
                     Piabilis, that which maye be pourged or ſatiſfyed.
                  
                     Piacularia auſpicia, tokēs in ſacrifice of ſome heuy chaunce to come.
                  
                     Piaculum, any thinge done for ſatiſfactiō of ſome greuouſe ſynne: ſometyme a greate & haynouſe offence.
                  
                     Piamen, ſeu Piamentum, that which was gyuen or occupyed aboute ſatiſfaction.
                  
                     Pica, a byrde called a py
                        •
                     .
                  
                     Picatus, cata, catum, pytched or raſyd with pitche.
                  
                     Picea, a piche tree.
                  
                     Picenum, a countraye in Italy.
                  
                     Picens, tis, a man of that countraye.
                  
                     Picentus, ta, tum, of the countraye of Picenum.
                  
                     Piceus, a, um, of pyche.
                  
                     Pico, care, to dreſſe with pyche.
                  
                     Pictatium, a table, pertaynynge to Iuges or byſſhoppes: it is ſometyme a playſter for the ſtomake or heed.
                  
                     Pictes, a wraſtler.
                  
                     Pictor, toris, a peyntar.
                  
                     Pictura, an image peynted.
                  
                     Picturatae veſtes, imbroudred apparayle, or rather of bawdekyn.
                  
                     Picturo, are, to make ſondry pictures.
                  
                     Picus, a lytle byrde, which maketh a hole in trees, wherein he breedeth: it was alſo the name of an olde kynge of Latines.
                  
                     Picunnus, a pye.No. N
                           ••
                        .
                  
                  
                     Pieria, a mountayne in Grece, dedicate to the Muſis.
                  
                     Pie, & Pienter, mercyfully, deuoutely, louyngly.
                  
                     Piens, tis, mercyfull, &c.
                  
                     Pientior, Pientiſsimus, more and mooſt mercyfull, moſt louynge towarde his parētes or countraye.
                  
                     Pierides, the Muſes.
                  
                     Pietas, etatis, the reuerend loue towarde a mannes propre countraye and parentes, of dyuines it is taken for the loue and honour due vnto god. Lactantius calleth it iuſtice,Lact. lib. 
                           •
                        . and deuoute worſhyppynge and knowlege of god.
                  
                     Piger, gri, ſlowe.
                  
                     Pigere, to be ſory.
                  
                     Pigritia, Pigrities, Pigredo, Pigritas, Pigritudo, ſlowneſſe, ydelneſſe.
                  
                     Piget, piguit, pigere, it greueth, it dulleth, it lyketh or contenteth not▪ 
                     Facti piget, he is ſory for that, that he hath done: ſometyme, I am ſory.
                  
                     Pigmentum, payntinge: alſo falſe colour in ſpeakynge, diſſeytefull wordes, pleaſaunt lyes.
                  
                     Pigmentarius, a maker or ſellar of payntynge.
                  
                     Pigue, ſlouth.No. 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Pigneratio, a pledgynge or gagynge.
                  
                     Pigneratitius, a, um, that which is layde in pledge.
                  
                     Pignora capere, to take a diſtreſſe.
                  
                     Ci. de ora.
                     Pignora, is ſometyme taken for children.
                  
                     Pignero, Pignerare, & Pigneror, pignerari, to laye to pledge or gage, ſometyme to take pledge.
                  
                     Pignus, noris, a pledge or gage, or pawne.
                  
                     Pigreſco, ſcere, to be or waxe ſlowe.
                  
                     Pigre, ſlowly.
                  
                     Pigredo, ſlouthfulneſſe.
                  
                     Pigrefio, fieri, to be made ſlowe.
                  
                     Pigriria, ſlowneſſe.
                  
                     Pigritudo, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Pigror, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Pigro, are, to holde backe, or tary one.
                  
                     Pila, a mortar, wherein any thinge is beten with a peſtill: alſo a pilar, a ball, or any thinge rounde as a ball.
                  
                     Pilani, they which fyght with dartes.
                  
                     Pilates, a certayne ſtone that is whyte.
                  
                     Pilatim, one pilar by another.
                  
                     Pilatus, armed with dartes.
                  
                     Pileatus ſeruus, a ſlaue that is ſolde with his cap on his heed.
                  
                     Pilentum, a wagan.
                  
                     Pileolus, a lytle bonet.
                  
                     Pileus, a cappe, ſometyme lybertie, for aſmoche as bondmen, whan they were infraunchyſed, ware copped cappes.
                  
                     Pilo, are, to begynne to be heary, or growe in heare.
                  
                     Piloſus, a, um, heary.
                  
                     Pilula, a lytell ball: alſo pilles made for purgations.
                  
                     Pilum, a barbours knyfe or raſour, alſo a dart of fyue foote longe and a halfe.
                  
                     Pilumnus, a man which founde the maner to dunge lande, and to grynde corne.
                  
                     Pilus, a heare.
                  
                     Pilus, idem quod Pilum: it is alſo a peſtell to braye or breke any thynge withall in a mortar.
                  
                     Pinaſter, a wylde pyne tree.
                  
                     Pina, a fyſſhe that hath twoo grete ſhelles.
                  
                     Pinachidia, tables made in bookes.
                  
                     Pinachtheca, a caſe or place wherein tables are put or ſet.
                  
                     Pinarij, an auncient houſe or famyly in Italy, of the which were the preeſtes that ſacrifiſed to Hercules.
                  
                     Pindo, dis, ſi, ſere: to braye or grynde.
                  
                     Pindus, a mountayne in Theſſalia: alſo a cytye there.
                  
                     Pinea nux, a pyne apull.
                  
                     Pinetum, a woode of pynetrees.
                  
                     Pineus, a, um, of a pyne tree.
                  
                     Pingo, xi, pingere, to paynte.
                  
                     Pinguedo, & Pinguitudo, inis, fatte or fatteneſſe.
                  
                     Pingué, inconuenient, ſometyme frutefull,Vergilius. commodiouſe.
                  
                     Pingires horti, gardens that brynge forth good herbes.
                  
                     Pinguefacio, cere, to make fatte.
                  
                     Pingueſco, ſcere, to be fatte.
                  
                     Pinguiarius, he that loueth that thinge, whiche is fatte.
                  
                     Pinguitudo, fatneſſe.
                  
                     
                        Pingu
                              •
                           s, gue,
                      fatte, he that is fatte, corſy, vnweldy.
                  
                     Pingue, greaſe.
                  
                     Pinna, a quyll, or penne, the harder part of a fether.
                  
                     Pinnae, imbatelmentes of a walle, a muſkle, which is founden in muddy waters.
                  
                     Pinnae, the fynnes of a fyſhe.
                  
                     Pinnaculum, a pynnacle of a tower.
                  
                     Pinnula, the ouer part of the eare, a lytle quyll.
                  
                     Pinſito, tare, to braye in a mortar.
                  
                     Pinſo, ſui, ſere, to braye or grynde.
                  
                     Pinſo, are, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Pinſor, he that gryndeth in a qwerne: alſo a baker.
                  
                     Pinus, pinus, a pyneappull.Plautus.
                  
                  
                     Pio, ij, ere, to honour god.
                  
                     Pipatio, a clockinge of a henne.
                  
                     Pinus, ſeu Pinea, a pyne tree.
                  
                     Pipare, to clocke lyke a henne.
                  
                     Piper, eris, peper.
                  
                     Pipio, iui, ire, to peepe lyke a chicke.
                  
                     Pipio, onis, a pigeon.
                  
                     Pipleides, the muſis.
                  
                     Pipleus, an hill in Grecia.
                  
                     Pipulum, a rebuke.Plaut.
                  
                  
                     Pirum, a peare.
                  
                     Pirata, a rouer or robber on the ſe, a pyrate.
                  
                     Piratica, the practiſe of pirates or robbers on the ſee.
                  
                     Pirrhica, a daunſynge in harneys.
                  
                     Piſa, a citie in Grece betwene the two moū
                     taynes of Olympus and Oſſa: alſo a citie in Arcadia.
                  
                     Piſae, arum, a citie in Italy, called Piſe.
                  
                     Piſani, people of the citie of Piſe.
                  
                     Piſarurus, a ryuer in Italy.
                  
                     Piſaurum, a citie in Italy.
                  
                     Piſcor, caris, ari, to fiſſhe.
                  
                     Piſcaria, the fyſſhe markat.
                  
                     Piſcarius, a, um, pertayninge to fyſſhynge,
                  
                     Piſcarius, a fyſſhe mongar.
                  
                     Piſcatorius, a, um, pertayninge to a fyſher.
                  
                     Piſcator, toris, a fiſſhar.
                  
                     Piſcatus, tus, & Piſcatio, the acte of fiſſhinge.
                  
                     Piſcina, a fyſſhe ponder: it is alſo generally euery ponde, allthoughe therin be no fiſh.
                  
                     
                     Piſcinalis, le, pertayninge to fiſſhe.
                  
                     Piſcinarius, he that nouryſheth fyſſhe.
                  
                     Piſsis, a fyſſhe.
                  
                     Piſces, alſo one of the .xii. ſygnes.
                  
                     Piſcoſus, a, um, that may be fyſſhed, or is full of fyſſhe.
                  
                     Piſculentus, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Piſciculus, a lytell fyſſhe.
                  
                     Piſci, people of the citie Piſa in Gretia.
                  
                     Piſidae, people in Aſia.
                  
                     Piſtacia, a certayne kynde of nuttes.
                  
                     Piſiſtratus, a noble man of Athenes, whiche chaunged the commune weale of that cytie from the rule of the people, to the rule of one gouernour: and therfore he was called a tyraunt, notwithſtandinge that (as he wrate vnto Solon, which mayntayned the populer aſtate) he rulyd by their owne lawes, and was rightwyſe and gentyll vnto the people.
                  
                     
                        Piſo,
                        Varro. 
                        ſere,
                      is proprely to braye, for in the old tyme men vſed to braye or breake corne in mortars: but after that they had quernes to grynde with the hande, they vſed Piſere to grynde, and Piſor for a gryndar.
                  
                     Piſo, ſonis, the name of a noble famyly or houſe in Rome.
                  
                     Piſtillum, a peſtell.
                  
                     Piſtor, oris, a baker.
                  
                     Piſtoria, a citie in Italy.
                  
                     Piſtoricus, ca, cum, & Piſtorius, a, um, pertaynynge to bakynge.
                  
                     Piſtrilla, a mille.
                  
                     Piſtrinum, & Piſtrina, a bakehouſe, or grynding houſe: ſomtyme it ſignifieth for paynfull ſeruice.
                  
                     Piſtris, a ſhyppe.
                  
                     Piſtrix, cis, a woman baker: alſo a monſtruouſe fyſſhe in the Indiane ſee.
                  
                     Piſtura, the craft of bakynge.
                  
                     Piſtus, ta, tum, grounden or brayed.
                  
                     Piſum, a peaſe.
                  
                     Pithacuſae, Iles in the ſe agaynſt Campania.
                  
                  
                     Pythacua, a certayne tyle, ſometyme made in Spayne, which beinge caſt into the water, wolde not ſynke.
                  
                     Pithagoras, he which firſt brought vppe the name of a phyloſopher: who was borne in Samia, and was a beautyfull man, and of excellent wytte, and therewith of a pure and cleane lyuynge, abſteyninge from the eatynge of any thinge that lyued: whoſe Phyloſophy was myſticall and ſecrete, & declared by numbres and proporcions.
                  
                     Pitheta, a Comete or impreſſion in the firmament, which is lyke a turine, and doeth appiere as it were through a myſte.
                  
                     Plautus in Milite.
                     Pithecium, a defourmed or yll fauoured woman.
                  
                     Pithonoſcomes, a place in Aſia, where after the Idus of Auguſt, great flockes of Storkes do aſſemble togither.
                  
                     Pitpit, in the olde tunge of Oſkes ſygnified quicquid, whatſoeuer.
                  
                     Pittacus, one of the ſeuen ſages of Grecia, and was of the cytie of Mytelene.
                  
                     Pityocampe, a worme which is in a pyneappull tree, whoſe bytinge is venymouſe.
                  
                     Pityſma, ſpettyll.
                  
                     Pitho, the lady and preſydent of eloquence to perſuade.
                  
                     Pitiſſo, are, to ſyppe, or drynke lytle.
                  
                     Pituita, flewme, or rowme, deſcending from the heed: alſoo the pyppe, whiche chykens haue.
                  
                     Pituitoſus, flewmatike.
                  
                     Pityliſma, matis, an exerciſe, where a man goeth faſt on his toes, and moueth his armes forewarde and backwarde.
                  
                     Pityliſſo, are, to exercyſe in that fourme.
                  
                     Pityuſa, an Ile, called alſo Myletus.
                  
                     Pius, a, um, religiouſe, deuoute, pitiouſe, gē
                     tyll, chaſte: he that loueth his parentes or countraye.
                  
                     Pix, picis, Pytche.
                  
                     Pix liquida, Tarre.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶ P, ANTE L.
                  
                     PLacabilis, eaſy to be pleaſed.
                  
                     Placabiliter, thankefully, contentfully.
                  
                     Placator, toris, a pacyfyer of debate.
                  
                     Placae, plates of golde or ſiluer.
                  
                     Placendus, da, dum, that whyche ought to content.
                  
                     Placenta, a tarte.
                  
                     Placentia, a citie in Liguria.
                  
                     Placentini, people of the citie of Placentia.
                  
                     Placeo, cui, cere, to pleaſe, to lyke, to glory.
                  
                     Placidé, quietly, paciently, peaſybly.
                  
                     Placidus, da, dum, gentyll, meeke, pacient.Cor. Ta
                           •
                         lib. 14.
                  
                  
                     Placita, ſtudyes or exerciſes. Ipſe placita maiorum colebat habitu ſeuaero: He in a ſage garment, haunted the ſtudyes of the auncient fathers.
                  
                     Placitum, a firme conſent in an opinyon, an ordinaunce.
                  
                     Placitus, ta, tum, that whyche lyketh or contenteth.
                  
                     Placo, care, to pacyfye, to appeaſe.
                  
                     Pladarotes, a diſeaſe, whereby the eye lyddes waxe feble, and wyll vneth be plucked vppe.
                  
                     Plaga, a wounde, alſo a nett to take beaſtis▪ ſometyme the armyng cordes: alſo a great ſpace in the erthe, called a Cooſter alſoo a ſhete for a bedde: moreouer a great ſpace on the erthe, called alſo Clima.
                  
                     
                     Plagae, & plagulae, blankettes.
                  
                     Plagiaria lex, a lawe made agaynſt theym, whiche were called Plagiarn, whyche for theyr offence were whypped.
                  
                     Plagiarius, he that whyppeth men. Alſoo he that byeth a man for a ſlaue, knowinge hym to be free. Alſoo he that intyſeth a mans ſeruant to go from his maſter: alſo a ſtealer of bokes.
                  
                     Plagiger, he that is borne to be whypped.
                  
                     Plagioſus, a ſchoole mayſter, whyche is a greatte beater.
                  
                     Plagium, the offence, for the whiche oone is whypped.
                  
                     Plagoſus, fulle of ſtrypes, or he that beateth moche.
                  
                     Planaratrum, the culter of a ploughe.
                  
                     Plancae, plankes.
                  
                     Planci, they whyche be ſplaye footed.
                  
                     Planctus, tus, waylynge, ſorowynge.
                  
                     Plancus, a noble man of Rome.
                  
                     Planè, truely.
                  
                     Planeta, a planette.
                  
                     Plango, xi, gere, to wepe or wayle, to ſtrike or hytte.
                  
                     Catullus.
                     Plangor, plangoris, a noyſe made with the mouthe, as in lawghynge, or weepynge.
                  
                     Planidus, playne.
                  
                     Planidior, more playne.
                  
                     Planities, a playne or leuell grounde.
                  
                     Planior, playner, euenner.
                  
                     Diomedes
                     Planipes, he that gothe withoute ſhowes. Alſo a player in an enterlude.
                  
                     Planta, the foote with the toes. Sommetyme onely the ſoole of the foote. Alſoo a plant or tre newely ſette: ſometyme an herbe that groweth lowe.
                  
                     Plantago, ginis, an herbe callyd Plantayne.
                  
                     Plantaria, ſettes or plantes, or the places, where plantes be ſette.
                  
                     Plantaris, re, pertaynynge to the foote.
                  
                     Plantarius, a, um, mete or redy to ſette.
                  
                     Plantigerae arbores, trees whyche brynge forthe ſettes.
                  
                     Planto, tare, to ſette or plante.
                  
                     Planula, a playne, a ioyners inſtrument.
                  
                     Planum facere, to declare or expounde.
                  
                     Plaut. in 
                           •
                        ilite & in 
                           •
                        erſa.
                     Planus, na, num, playne, euen, cleare, apparaunt.
                  
                     Planus, ni, a deceyuour or mocker, Alſo a Iugglar, whyche makethe thynges to ſeeme in apparaunce, where in deede noo ſuche thynge is: As water to come into the howſe, or trees to growe, or money of leaues or ſtones.
                  
                     Plaſma, plaſmatis, the w
                        •
                     rke of a potter, or of hym, whyche worketh in erthe. Alſo a playſter.
                  
                     Plaſmo, are, to make pottes, or any other thynge of erthe.
                  
                     Plaſtes, a warker of ymages or other lyke thynge in erthe.
                  
                     Plaſticé, the crafte of warkynge in erthe.
                  
                     
                        Pla
                              •
                           anus,
                      a plane tree.
                  
                     
                        Platane
                              •
                           um,
                      a place where plane trees doo growe.
                  
                     Platanodes, a promontory or hyll in Italy.
                  
                     Platanonis, ne, of plane tree.
                  
                     Platêa, a high waye or ſtrete, Alſo a court in great places. Moreouer a ſee gull.
                  
                     Plateae, a cytie in Boeotia, not farre from Thebes.
                  
                     Plateenſes, people of the citie of Plat
                        •
                     e in Greece.
                  
                     Plato, tonis, the Prynce and chiefe of all philoſophers, as welle in wyſedome and counnynge, as in good lyuynge and eloquence.
                  
                     Plaudi, they whyche haue great hangynge eares.
                  
                     Plaudo, plauſi, plaudere, to reioyce with countenaunce
                  
                     Plauſibilis, plauſibile, that whiche the people doeth receyue with ioye, and clapping of their handes.
                  
                     Plautus, a wryter of comedies.
                  
                     Plauſtrum, ſeu ploſtrum, a carte.
                  
                     Plauſus, ſus, a reioycynge with voyce and geſture, clapping of hādes togither for ioy
                  
                     Plebecula, the poore people.
                  
                     Plebeius, a, um, of the people.
                  
                     Plebeius, plebeius, one of the comminaltie,Plautus is penulo. not beinge a gentylman.
                  
                     Plebeus, idem.
                  
                     Plebicola, a fauourer of the comminaltie.
                  
                     Plebiſcitum, a lawe, whiche ſometyme was made by the onely conſent of the common people of Rome, without the autoritie of the Senate.
                  
                     Plebs, bis, ſeu plebes, plebei, the commune people.
                  
                     Plecto, plexi, plectere, to puniſhe, to ſtryke.
                  
                     Plectrum, an inſtrument, wherwith menne played on the harpe or doulcymers, for hurtynge of their fyngers. Alſo a ſpurre ſette on a fyghtynge cocke, whan he lacked naturall ſpurres.
                  
                     Pleiades, the ſeuen ſterres, whyche marynours do vſe in tryenge of coſtes.
                  
                     Plemmyrium, a citie in Sicili
                        •
                     .
                  
                     Plenê, largely, abundantly.
                  
                     Plenilunium, full moone.
                  
                     Plenitudo, dinis, fulneſſe.
                  
                     Plenus, na, num, fulle.
                  
                     Plerus, plera, plerum, of old tyme was v
                        •
                     d for more. Plera pars, the more parte.Pom. Fe
                           •
                        t▪
                     
                  
                  
                     Plaeri
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , plerae
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , plera
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , many, a great ſorte.
                  
                     
                     Pleruſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , plera
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , plerun
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , the more parte of any thynge.
                  
                     Pleri
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , ſygnifyeth ſome.
                  
                     Pleri
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         omnes, for the more parte.
                  
                     Terent in H
                           ••
                        vra. in Andria.
                     Plerun
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , oftentymes, ſometyme.
                  
                     Pleonaſmos, a fygure, wherin is ſuperfluitie of wordes.
                  
                     Plethtum, a meaſure of lande, contaynyng a hundred fete.
                  
                     Pleuritis, tidis, & pleureſis, a ſycknes in the ſyde, callyd the Pleurilye.
                  
                     Pleuriticus, emitica, he or ſhe, whiche hath the Pleureſy.
                  
                     Pleuitas, vnnobilitie, baſeneſſe of bloudde.
                  
                     Cato in No. Mar.
                     Plexus, a, um, wounden or bounden.
                  
                     Plico, caui, uel plicui, care, to folde.
                  
                     Plicatilis, le, that whiche may be folden.
                  
                     Plintus, the name of two noble lerned men, the one wrate the mooſt excellent warke, callyd the hyſtorie of Nature, the other wrate eloquente Epiſtles, and an oration to Tratane in his commendation, whiche oration is called Panegyricus. There is alſo a warke of the practiſe of phiſyke in the name of Plinius, but whither it were of the fyrſte Plinie or no, it is not verye certayne.
                  
                     Plocum, a ſmalle reede.
                  
                     Plodo, ſi, dere, to make noyſe with handes or feete.
                  
                     Ploro, are, to weepe.
                  
                     Ploratus, tus, weepynge.
                  
                     Plorabundus, he that weepeth moche.
                  
                     Cato.
                     
                        Ploſtrum, for plauſtrum,
                      a wayne or cart.
                  
                     Ploſtrarius, a, um, that whiche belongethe to a wayne or carte.
                  
                     Ploſtellum, a lyttell wayne.
                  
                     Plota, a lampray.
                  
                     Ploti, they whiche haue playne feete without holownes in the ſoles of the feete.
                  
                     Ploxinum, a coffer or cheſte.
                  
                     Plumo, mare, to be in fethers. Alſo to enbrowder.Vopiſcus.
                  
                  
                     Pluma, a fether.
                  
                     Plumarius, ria, rium, of fethers, a warker with fethers.
                  
                     Plumatilis, le, made of fethers.
                  
                     Plumbago, aginis, a vayne of mettalle or oore, wherin is bothe ſyluer and leade, it is alſo an herbe, whiche hath leaues lyke ſorrell, and a great rote and rough.
                  
                     Plautus in P
                           •
                        nulo.
                     Plumbea ira, wrathe whyche longe contyneweth.
                  
                     Plumbatura, ſowlder.
                  
                     Plumbata, a pellette of leadde.
                  
                     Plumbatio, ſowlderynge.
                  
                     Plumbatius, a plummer or worker in leade.
                  
                     Plumbatae, balles or clubbes of leade, wherwith men faught.
                  
                     Plumbeus, plumbea, beum, of the colour of leadde, leedye.
                  
                     Plumbeus homo, a lumpyſhe man withoute courage or ſpirite.
                  
                     Plumbo, are, to leadde, to ſowlder or ioyn mettalle.
                  
                     Plumbum, leadde.
                  
                     Plumeſco, ſcere, to be or waxe penned.
                  
                     Plumeus, a, um, of fethers.
                  
                     Plumiger, that beareth fethers.
                  
                     Plumo, are, to be fetherid, or haue fethers.
                  
                     Plumula, a lyttell fether or plume.
                  
                     Pluo, plui, pluere, to rayne.
                  
                     Plura, many. Pluria, idem.
                  
                  
                     Plurifarius, a, um, of dyuers facions.
                  
                     Plurifariam, many wayes, in many places.
                  
                     Plurimifacio, cere, to ſette moche by.
                  
                     Plurimum, very moche.
                  
                     Plurimus, very moche, many, longe.Ci. in Ver.
                  
                  
                     Plurisfacio, cere, to make more of.
                  
                     Plus, more. Pluris uendo, I ſelle for more or deerer.
                  
                     Pluſculus, a, um, a lyttell more.
                  
                     Plutealis, le, that whiche is ſette in a table or caſe.
                  
                     Plutealia ſigilla, ſmalle Images in tables or caſes.
                  
                     Pluteum, a ſpace or diſtaunce, whereby the lower pyllers were dyuided frome the higher in the fronte or foreparte.
                  
                     Pluteus, an engyne of warre, to conuaye men to the ſcalynge of walles, kepynge theym frome ordynaunce. Alſo hutches or greatte coffers, or other lyke places, wherin bokes, tables, or ſuche thynges are kepte.
                  
                     Pluto, tonis, callyd god of helle.
                  
                     Puuia, rayne.
                  
                     Pluuialis, pluuiatilis, & pluuius, a, um, rayny, or of rayne.
                  
                     Pluuia aqua, rayne water.
                  
                     Pluuioſus, full of rayne.
                  
                     Plyſsima, auncient writers vſed for plurima, very many.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶P, ANTE, N.
                  
                     PNeuma, atis, ſpirite or wynd or breth.
                  
                     Pneumaticus, ca, cum, wherein wynde or breathe is vſed.
                  
                     Pneumonici, they whiche be ſycke of the longes.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶P ANTE O.
                  
                     POcillator, pocillatoris, He that bryngeth cuppes to the table, or a cuppe bearer.
                  
                     Pocillum, a lyttell cuppe.
                  
                     
                     Poculum, a cuppe. ſometyme a draught.
                  
                     Podagricus, & podagroſus, ſa, ſum, fulle of goute.
                  
                     Podagra, the goute, peyne in the feete.
                  
                     Podalirius, one of the ſonnes of Eſculapius a greatte ſurgeon.
                  
                     Podaris, a longe gowne to the feete.
                  
                     Poderis, a ſtraite garment of lynnen cloth: It maye nowe be callyd the Albe, whiche prieſtes doo weare whan they ſaye maſſe.
                  
                     Podex, dicis, the arſe.
                  
                     Podia, the corde, wherwith the ſayle is ſpredde.
                  
                     Podium, a place made without a walle, for men to ſtande and beholde thynges, Alſo a ſtage, wheron is ſet candelles or bokes.
                  
                     Poema, matis, & poeſis, a poetes warke.
                  
                     Poena, peyne, tourment, execution.
                  
                     Poenalis, le, penall, peynefull.
                  
                     Poenam pendere, to ſuffre punyſhement.
                  
                     Poenas petere, to be aduenged, to puniſhe.
                  
                     Saluſtius in lugurt.
                     Poenas reddere, to be punyſhed.
                  
                     Poenas luere, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Poenio, auncient writers vſed for punio.
                  
                     Poenitens, tis, penitent, repentant.
                  
                     Poenitendus, da, dum, to be aſſhamed of, to be lyttell eſtemed.
                  
                     Poenitentia, repentance, penaunce.
                  
                     Perottus.
                     Poeniteor, I am in payne, I am greued.
                  
                     Poenitudo, repentaunce.
                  
                     Poeniturus, to be ſorye.
                  
                     Poenula, a cloke.
                  
                     Poeon, a man, whom Homer calleth excellently lerned in phiſike.
                  
                     Poeonia, an herbe callid Pyonie. Alſo a region or countrey in Macedonia.
                  
                     Poenicus, poenica, cum, of Affrike.
                  
                     Poeninſula, a place, whyche for the more parte is incloſed with water.
                  
                     Poeniter, tuit, tére, to repent, to forthynke, to be ſorie for a thynge.
                  
                     Poenus, a manne of the cytie of Carthage.
                  
                     Poéta, a poete.
                  
                     Poeticé, ces, poetrie.
                  
                     Poeticus, ca, cum, poeticall.
                  
                     Poetor, aris, ari, to exercyſe poetrie.
                  
                     Poetria, & poetris, idis, a woman poete.
                  
                     Pogonia, a blaſing ſterre, with a long beam afore lyke a berde.
                  
                     Pol, an aduerbe of ſwearynge, as it were by Pollux.
                  
                     Polenta, was barley ordered in this forme. They ſtepyd barley in water one night, and dryed it, and the next day they fried it, and than grounde it, And ſoo kepte it longe, whyche theyr ſlaues and pultrye dydde eate.
                  
                     Polentarius, a, um, pertaynynge to barleye grounde, as is aforeſayde.
                  
                     Polite, freſhely, gayly, klenly.
                  
                     Politia, ciuilitie, politike gouernance.
                  
                     Poliricus, politica, liticum, ciuile, or pertaynynge to a citie.
                  
                     Politiones, they whyche are dylygente in huſbandrye.
                  
                     Politius, more cleane or trymme.
                  
                     Pollen, linis, wheate floure.
                  
                     Pollens, tis, puiſſaunt.
                  
                     Polliceor, polliceri, & polliceo, pollicere, to promyſe.
                  
                     Pollicitario, a promeſſe.
                  
                     Pollinaria cribra, a rangynge ſyue, wherewith the floure is ſyfted from the branne, it may be called alſo a boulter.
                  
                     Pollinarius, pollinaria, narium, pertaynyng to flowre.
                  
                     
                        Pollit for pila ludit.
                     
                  
                  
                     Polimenta, the ſtones of boore pigges.
                  
                     Polio, poliui, polire, to polyſhe, to garnyſhe or decke.
                  
                     Politus, polita, politum, polyſſhed, decked, trymmed.
                  
                     Polities, cleanlyneſſe.
                  
                     Pollentia, power, alſo a citie.
                  
                     Polleo, êre, to may, to haue power, to ſhine.
                  
                     Pollex, licis, a thumbe of the hande, It is alſo an ynche, whiche is a ſynger bredthe and a halfe.
                  
                     Pollicaris, re, of a thumbe.
                  
                     Pollincere, to miniſter aboute funerals, alſo to boulte meale.
                  
                     Pollinctor, toris, the adminiſtratour or officer in ordaynyng of funeralles.
                  
                     Pollinctura, the miniſtration of funeralles.
                  
                     Pollintor, toris, a daker that ſyfteth meale.
                  
                     Pollis, linis, & pollen, inis, meale.
                  
                     Pollubrum, a baſon.
                  
                     Polluceo, cere, to mynyſter ſacrifyce, ſpecially to Hercules.
                  
                     Pollucibilis coena, a coſtely ſupper.
                  
                     Pollucibiliter, coſtely, gorgiouſely.
                  
                     Polluctum, a coſtely ſupper.
                  
                     Polluo, luere, to pollute or defyle.
                  
                     Pollutus, ta, tum, polluted, defyled.Pom. Feſ
                           •
                        
                        ▪
                     
                  
                  
                     Polus, the pole. There be imagyned to be twoo certayne poyntes in heuen, as hit were the endes of Extree, where aboute heuen is meuyd, the oone is in the Northe, and is callydde Polus arcticus. The other in the Southe, callydde Polus antarcticus.
                  
                     Pollux, lucis, was brother to Caſtor, bothe being borne at one bourdeyn, whych Poetes doo fayne to come of one egge, layd or brought forthe by a woman, called Leda, with whom Iupiter companied in likenes of a ſwanne.
                  
                     Polyama, he that hath many lambes.
                  
                     
                     Polybotes, a gyaunte, whome Neptunus ſlewe.
                  
                     Polycarpus, he that hath many flowres.
                  
                     Polycrates, a tyraunt, whyche was ſoo fortunate, that he neuer ſuffered any aduerſytie, or griefe. Wherfore he at the laſte dredynge the chaunge of the fauoure of fortune, hauynge a rynge with a ſtone of an excellent valewe, dydde caſte the ſame rynge into the ſee, to the intente that he wolde ſuffre ſomme diſpleaſure, and ſoo ſatisfie fortune: but a fyſſhe deuourynge the rynge, was the ſame daye taken of a fyſſher, and gyuen to the kynge, for the greatneſſe of the fyſſhe, whyche beynge opened, there was the ſayde ryng founde and brought to the kynge: wherat as wel he, as all other aboute hym meruayled. Sone after the ſame kyng was oppreſſed by his people, and hanged.
                  
                     Polydamas, a Troyane, oone of theym, whyche betrayed the cytie with Eneas and Anthenor.
                  
                     Polygonum, an herbe, whyche is alſo callye Sanguinaria, and hath leaues lyke to Rewe, but it runneth on the grounde as graſſe, the iuyce therof put into the noſe, ſtoppeth bledynge. It is ſuppoſed to be ſwynes graſſe, or knotte graſſe.
                  
                     Polyhiſtor, oris, he that knoweth moche, or of many thynges done.
                  
                     Polilogus, he that hath many wordes.
                  
                     Polymirus, mita, tum, of twyne or twyſted thredes.
                  
                     Polymita, a garmēt made of twiſted threde or ſylke.
                  
                     Polymnia, one of the Muſes, which word ſygnifieth moche memorie.
                  
                     Polymorphus, of many formes or facions.
                  
                     Polymyxos, a candelſtycke, whiche bereth many lyghtes.
                  
                     Polyphagus, a greatte eater.
                  
                     Polyphemus, was a gyaunt, that had oone eye in his foreheed, whiche was put oute by Vlyxes.
                  
                     Polypodium, an herbe lyke to ferne, growynge on trees.
                  
                     Polypoſus, he that hath a ſoore in the noſe.
                  
                     Polypus, a fyſhe, hauyng many feete, whiche chaungeth his coloure often: Alſo a piece of fleſhe, growyng in the ouermoſt parte of the noſe, whiche cauſeth a ſtynkynge ayre out of the noſe.
                  
                     Polyrizon, that whiche hath many rootes.
                  
                     Polyſyntheton, a fygure, where manye artycles comme into a ſentence, as Ille trahebat, Hic vociferabatur, He drewe, and he cried out.
                  
                     Polytes, one of kynge Priamus ſonnes.
                  
                     Polytrichon, an herbe callyd Maydenheer.
                  
                     Polyxena, the daughter of kynge Priamus whom cruell Pirrhus ſlewe on the tombe of Achilles.
                  
                     Pomarium, an orcharde, ſometyme a place wherin fruites be kepte.
                  
                     Pomeridianus, & poſtmeridianus, a, um, any thynge done after noone.
                  
                     Pomiferus, a, um, bearynge appuls.
                  
                     Pomilius, & pumilio, onis, a lyttelle perſonage, a dwarfe.
                  
                     Pomoerium, the grounde without the walles of the citie, whiche moughte neyther be ploughed, nor inhabyted, the territory.
                  
                     Pompa, a pompe, or ſolemne ſyght.
                  
                     Pompeius, the name of a noble Romayne.
                  
                     Pompeianus, of Pompeius parte, or a fauourer of Pompeius.
                  
                     Pomum, the generall name of all fruites. It is moſte vſed for an appull.
                  
                     Ponderitas, hefte, poyſe.
                  
                     Pondero, raui, rare, to waye, to ponder, to conſyder, to eſteme.
                  
                     Pondo, a pounde weight, ſommetyme .xii. pounde. It was amonge the Romaynes the pounde of moneye, as Mina, & mna, was in Athenes, whyche was of the value of a hundred old poyſe grotes, wherof .viii. went to an ounce: ſo that in thoſe grotes after our rate, it contayned a poūd and a marke of newe grotes tenne to the ounce .ii. pounde and fyue grotes.
                  
                     Pondus, deris, weight.Varro. ſometyme it ſignifieth numbre, alſo auctoritie.
                  
                     Ponderoſus, a, um, wayghty.
                  
                     Ponere ſpem, to hope.
                  
                     Pone, after, or behynde.Plautus in capt.
                  
                  
                     Pone eum eſſe victum, Putte the caſe that he be vanquyſhed.
                  
                     Pono, poſui, ponere, to putte, to ſet, to ceſſe, to buylde, to laye a parte.
                  
                     Pons, pontis, a brydge.
                  
                     Pontica nux, a kynde of fylberdes, whiche came from the countreye called Pontus in Aſia.
                  
                     Ponticum, is a taſte, whiche hath no ſente to be diſcerned.
                  
                     Ponticulus, a lyttell brydge.
                  
                     Pontifex, ficis, an archebyſhoppe.
                  
                     Pontificatus, tus, the dignitie of a byſſhop.
                  
                     Pontificius, a, um, of a byſhoppe.
                  
                     Pontones, whyry botes.
                  
                     Pontus, the ſee, whyche is from the great fenne, callydde Maeotis, vnto Tenedum, It is ſommetyme vſyd for all the ſee. It is alſo a prouynce in Aſie the leſſe.
                  
                     Popa, fatte, greace.
                  
                     Popana, fatte oyntementes.
                  
                     Popanum, a cake of breadde.
                  
                     
                     Popellus, the lyttell or poore people.
                  
                     Popina, a couern
                        •
                      or vyttaylynge howſe, where meate is eaten out of due tyme.
                  
                     Popinatio, ryotte.
                  
                     Popinalis, le, pertaynynge to ryot, or places of ryotte.
                  
                     Popinor, aris, ari, to eate oute of due tyme, to be ryottous.
                  
                     Popiniones, haunters of tauernes.
                  
                     Poples, poplitis, the hamme of a mās legge behynde the knee.
                  
                     Poppiſma, oratis, the noyſe made with the mouthe and the hande, in ryding, or wanton dalyaunce.
                  
                     Populabundus, waſtynge the countreye, or he that gothe in forragynge or robbynge of countreyes.
                  
                     Popularis, re, pertayning to the people, accepted or fauoured of the people. Alſo it ſygnifyeth a familiar frende, or as we vſe to call countrey man.
                  
                     Populariter, & populare, homely, lyke the people.
                  
                     Populatus, ta, tum, waſted, diſtroyd.
                  
                     Populeus, a, um, of a popler tre.
                  
                     Populnus, & populneus, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Popularitas, the coniunction or amytie of people of one countrey. alſo affabilitie, humanitie, towarde the people.
                  
                     Populatia, boyes playes.
                  
                     Liberius ī No. Mar.
                     Populatim, of al the peple. alſo euerich one.
                  
                     Populatio, a waſtynge of the countreye, a fourragynge.
                  
                     Populator, a forrageour or waſter of countreyes.
                  
                     Populifugia, was a daye in the moneth of Iune, at the whiche daye by reaſon of a rumour, the people fledde.
                  
                     Populor, aris, to waſt or diſtroy a coūtrey.
                  
                     Populoſus, a, um, full of people, populous.
                  
                     Populus, people. Alſo a poplar tree.
                  
                     Porca, a ſowe, a rydge of lande, a balke.
                  
                     Porcarius, a, um, of a ſwyne.
                  
                     Porcarius, a ſwyneherde.
                  
                     Porceo, cere, to prohibyte.
                  
                     Pom. Feſt.
                     Porcetra, a yonge ſowe, or yelte.
                  
                     Porcinus, na, num, of a hogge.
                  
                     Porculatio, bryngynge vppe of ſwyne.
                  
                     Porculator, a fatter of ſwyne.
                  
                     Porcus, a hogge.
                  
                     Porcellus, a pygge.
                  
                     Porculus, a ſhoote, a porcatte.
                  
                     Porcus troianus, a hogge rooſted with manye other beaſtes and fowles within his bealye.
                  
                     Porgam, vſed of the auncyent wryters for porrigam, I wyll delyuer or take to one.
                  
                     Pori, poores in the bodye, out of the whiche iſſueth ſweate.
                  
                     
                        Porphyr
                              •
                           tes,
                      a redde marble.
                  
                     Porphyreticus, ca, cum, of redde marble.
                  
                     Porphyriacus, ca, cum, of purple colour.
                  
                     Porphyrio, a byrde, whiche drinketh as yf he dyd byte the water, he hath longe red legges and bylle.
                  
                     Porraceus, a, um, of the colours of leeke blades.
                  
                     Porrectus, ta, tum, ſtretched.
                  
                     Porrecte, ſtreyght out.
                  
                     Porriginoſus, a, um, lyke to lekes.
                  
                     Porrigo, portexi, rigere, to ſprede oute, to offre, to ouerthrowe.
                  
                     Porrigo, ginis, ſkales whiche do falle from a mannes heed or berde, lyke branne.
                  
                     Porro, ſurely. alſo longe before, farre of, after, in tyme commynge, beyonde, forſoth.
                  
                     Porrum, potri, in the plu
                        •
                     ell numbre leeke.
                  
                     Porraceus, a, um, of a leeke.
                  
                     Porſena, the name of a kynge, that beſyeged Rome.
                  
                     Porta, a yate.
                  
                     Portendo, dere, to ſygnifie before a thynge happeneth.
                  
                     Portentiferus, a, um, that whiche ſignifieth ſtrange or monſtruous thinges comming.
                  
                     Portentificus, ca, cum, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Portentoſus, a, um, monſtruouſe, ſygnifieng ſome thynge to come.
                  
                     Portentum, a thynge monſtruous or verye ſeldome ſene, whiche may ſygnifie ſomme what to come.
                  
                     Porticus, cus, a porche.
                  
                     Portio, a porcion. portiuncula, a litle porciō.
                  
                     Portiuſculus, the pylate of a ſhyppe, whyche ruleth the maryners.
                  
                     Portitor, oris, the cuſtomer of a hauen. Alſo a porter, that dothe beare thynges that be bought, whither as the byer wyll haue hym. Alſo he that beareth men fro the hauen to the ſhyppe.
                  
                     Porto, tare, to beare, to brynge.
                  
                     Portorium, the frayte payde for paſſage or caryage of merchaundyſe.
                  
                     Portulaca, an herbe callyd Purſelan.Saluſtius in iugur.
                  
                  
                     Portuoſus, full of hauens.
                  
                     Portus, tus, an hauen.
                  
                     Poſca, a ſawce made with vyneygre and water.
                  
                     Poſcinumius, mia, um, that whiche requyreth money.
                  
                     Poſco, popoſci, poſcere, to aſke, to requyre, to prouoke, to aſſayle.
                  
                     Pos, a brydge.Varr
                           •
                        .
                  
                  
                     Poſitio, a ſettyng of a thyng.
                  
                     Poſitura, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Poſitus, ta, tum, putte or ſette.
                  
                     Poſitura, & poſitus, tus, a ſetting or putting.
                  
                     Poſſeſsio, onis, poſſeſſion.
                  
                     
                     Poſſeſſor, oris, he that hath the poſſeſſion, the owner.
                  
                     Poſsideo, ſedi, ſidêre, to poſſede.
                  
                     Poſſum, potui, poſſe, to maye.
                  
                     Caeſar.
                     Poſt, after, afterwarde, behynde.
                  
                     Poſtea, afterwarde.
                  
                     Poſtergo, are, to leaue behynd, to caſt back.
                  
                     Poſteritas, tatis, the worlde to come.
                  
                     Poſterius, later, ſlower, 
                        •
                     yler.
                  
                     Poſterus, ra, rum, that whiche commeth after. Poſtera dies, the day after Poſteri pedes, the hynder 
                        •
                     ete.
                  
                     Poſt fero, to ſette after or behynde, to ſet leſſe by. Poſt habere, idem.
                  
                  
                     Poſthac, from hensforthe.
                  
                     Poſthumus, ma, a chylde borne after that the father is deade.
                  
                     Poſthumus, ma, mum, folowing, or to come.
                  
                     Poſticum, & poſticus, a backe doore.
                  
                     Poſtica, all that is behynde vs, lyke as Antica is all that is before vs. It is alſo a line whiche diuideth the feldes from the caſte to the weſte.
                  
                     Poſtilena, a crouper.
                  
                     Poſtis, a poſte.
                  
                     Poſtlimineum redire, is whan any man happeth to go from vs to oure ennemies, and after retourneth home.
                  
                     Poſtmitto, tere, to leaue behinde, to forget.
                  
                     Poſtmodum, afterwarde.
                  
                     Poſtquam, after. Poſtremo, at the laſte.
                  
                     Poſtridie, the day after to morowe, the day folowyng the day before expreſſed.
                  
                     Poſtomis, a braake, wherewith a horſes mouthe is broken, and is made to beare his heed eaſyly.
                  
                     Poſtulo, are, to require, to demande a thing whiche is dewe to the aſker. Alſo to accuſe or ſewe oone in the lawe, or to complayne on one. ſometyme to deſyre.
                  
                     Poſtulatio, a ſupplication made to a prince.
                  
                     Pl
                           •
                        . in epiſ.
                     Potens, tis, myghty, puiſſant, hable.
                  
                     Potentia, power, puiſſāce, habilite, gret rule.
                  
                     Potenter, myghtily, puiſſantly.
                  
                     Caeſ. lib. 1. belli galli.
                     Potentatus, tus, power.
                  
                     Poteſtas, tatis, power, auctoritie, counſayle, and reaſon.
                  
                     Poteſtatem ſui facere, to ſuffre men to come to hym, or to ſpeake with hym.
                  
                     Potiono, are, to gyue a medicyne.
                  
                     Potior, potius, better.
                  
                     
                        Potior, poti
                              •
                           us ſum, potiri,
                      to haue in poſſeſſyon, to optayne, to take pleaſure of.
                  
                     
                        Poteſtur, for poteſt,
                      he maye.
                  
                     Potis ſum▪
                      I maye, potis eſt, it is poſſyble.
                  
                     Potitius, Hercules prieſte.
                  
                     Potito, tare, to vſe to drynke.
                  
                     Poto, tare, to drynke: Alſo to gyue drynke to one.
                  
                     Potorium, a cuppe.
                  
                     Potus, ta, tum, that which hath drunke, and that whiche is dronken.
                  
                     Potus, tus, drynke.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶ P, ANTE, R.
                  
                     PRae, before, in regarde, or in comparyſon, for. Prae amore, for loue. Alſo of. Prae ſtudio, of ſtudy. Praeut, ſygnyfieth than. Modeſtior nunc quidem eſt de uerbis, praeut dudum fuit, He is more ſofte or gentyll of wordes, than he was wonte to be, or than he was late.
                  
                     Praebitere, to paſſe by, or paſſe forthe in iorney. ſometyme perire, to leſe, to caſt away.Plautus. Pom. Feſt▪
                     
                  
                  
                     Praebeo, bui, bere, to gyue, to ſhewe.
                  
                     Praebia, orum, thynges gyuen to ſicke men.
                  
                     Praecaluus, balde before.
                  
                     Praecarus, ra, rum, very deere.
                  
                     Praecedo, ceſsi, dere, to goo before.
                  
                     Praecello, lui, lere, to excelle.
                  
                     Praecentio, that whiche is ſongen or playde at the beginning of a ſonge or balade.
                  
                     Praecentor, toris, he that firſt ſingeth. it may be taken for the chaunter in a quyre.
                  
                     Praeſultor, toris, he that leadeth the daunſe.
                  
                     Praeceps, pitis, a high place ſtepe downe.
                  
                     Praeceps homo, he that is to haſlye in his buſyneſſe, and doth thynges vnaduiſedly.
                  
                     Praeceps, heedlynge.
                  
                     Praeceptum, a precepte, a rule gyuen, a cō
                     maundement.
                  
                     Praecidanea porca, a ſwine, which the Paynims dydde ſacrifice before they dyd cut downe their corne.
                  
                     Praecidaneus, a, ū, that which is fyrſt kylled.Cice. in Achad. que
                           ••
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Praecido, dere, to ſpeake or tell preciſely, or certainly, to ſtrike, to cut of, to beate, to denye ſtyffely.Ci. ad A
                           •
                        . lib. 8. 
                     Plane ſine ulla exceptione praecidit, Truely he ſtyffly denied it without exception.
                  
                     Praecino, nui, nere, to ſynge before or fyrſt, alſo to tell a thynge before it hapneth.
                  
                     Praecipio, coepi, cipere, to preuēt or take firſt▪ to forſee: alſo to commaunde.
                  
                     Praecipitium, a downe right place or ſteppe, whiche maye not be gone on.
                  
                     Praecipito, tare, to throwe downe heedling.
                  
                     Praecipitanter, heedlynge, vnaduyſedly.
                  
                     Praecipuus, a, ū, chiefe, ſpeciall, principall.
                  
                     Praecipuè, chiefly, ſpecially, principally.
                  
                     Praeciſè, preciſely, determinately.
                  
                     Praeciſum, harde, intractable, cutted, verye ſhorte,Quin
                           ••••
                        
                        ▪ lib. 
                           •
                        . 
                     Qui praeciſis concluſionibus obſcuri, Saluſtium at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         Thucydidē ſuperant. The whyche beinge harde to be vnderſtand in their cutted ſentences, doo excede bothe Saluſte and Thucydides.
                  
                     
                     Praeclamo, are, to crye before.
                  
                     Praeclare, very excellently, very nobly.
                  
                     Praeclarus, very noble: ſometyme it ſignifieth goode.
                  
                     Praecognitus, ta, tum, knowen before.
                  
                     Praeco, conis, a cryar, a publyſſhar of thynges.
                  
                     Praeconium, a ſolemne cry: ſometyme it ſignifieth prayſe or glory.
                  
                     Praecoquor, queris, qui, to be ſone rype.
                  
                     Praecordia, the ſkynne, whiche dyuideth the ouer part of the body from the nether: it is alſo taken for the place vnder the rybbes: ſometyme al the numbles, as the hart, the ſplene, the lunges, and lyuer.
                  
                     Praecox, cocis, & Praecoquus, a, um, ſone rype or tymely rype.
                  
                     Praeda, a proye, a thynge goten or taken in warres.
                  
                     Q
                           •
                        . Curt
                           •
                        .
                     Praedabundus, goynge on foragynge in the tyme of warre.
                  
                     Praedaceus, a, um, of a proye.
                  
                     
                        Praeda
                              •
                           iuus,
                      
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Praedator, a ſeekar for a proye.
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        a
                           ••
                        ſtiu
                           •
                        
                     
                     Praedator ex ſocijs, a robber of his company.
                  
                     Praedenſus, a, um, very thicke.
                  
                     Praedeſtino, are, to purpoſe before.
                  
                     Praediator, toris, a man of lawe expert in actions reall, or maters concerning landes.
                  
                     Praediatorius, a, um, pertayninge to landes.
                  
                     Praedicatio, a publyſſhynge, or open declaration.
                  
                     Praedico, care, to publyſſhe, to tell a thynge openly, to prayſe.
                  
                     Praedico, xi, dicere, to tell before.
                  
                     Praediolum, a lytle manour.
                  
                     Praediſco, didici, diſcere, to vnderſtande before.
                  
                     Praeditus, ta, um, adourned: alſo Praeditus moe rore, replenyſhed with heuyneſſe: Praeditus lachrymis, waſſhed with teares, or full of teares.
                  
                     Praedium, a manour.
                  
                     Praedonulus, a lytle robber.
                  
                     Praedo, donis, a robber of countrayes.
                  
                     Cato.
                     Praedor, aris, ari, to robbe a countraye, or to take prayes.
                  
                     Praedotiunt, they chiefly deſyre.
                  
                     Pom. Feſt.
                     Praeduro, are, to be harder than it was wōt.
                  
                     Praeeo, iui, ire, to go before.
                  
                     Praefacio, feci, facere, to ſet more by.
                  
                     Praefanda, not honeſte to be ſpoken or reherced.
                  
                     Praefari, to ſpeake or ſaye before.
                  
                     Praefatio, onis, a preface.
                  
                     Praefectus praetorij, was with Emperours the principall officer in his court: as nowe in Fraunce the great maſter.
                  
                     Praefero, tuli, ferre, to preferre.
                  
                     Praefericulum, a great baſon, which was caryed before hym that dyd ſacrifice.Pom. Feſt.
                  
                  
                     Praefeſtino, are, to make to moche ha
                        •
                     te.
                  
                     Praefica, a woman, which is hyred to lamēt at the buryenge of men or women.
                  
                     Praeficio, faeci, ficere, to put in auctoritie, or to gyue rule.
                  
                     Praefectura, an auctoritie or rule.
                  
                     Praefectus, a rular.
                  
                     Praefigo, xi, gere, to ſhut afore.
                  
                     Praefinio, niui, ire, to determyne before, to aſſigne or appoynte.
                  
                     Praefinitus, ta, tum, prefixed.
                  
                     Praefoco, care, to ſtrangle, or choke.
                  
                     Praefractus, cta, etum, harde and vnflexible, whyche wyll rather breke than bowe: alſo that which was before broken.
                  
                     Praefracté, obſtinately.
                  
                     Praefrigidus, da, dum, very colde.
                  
                     Praefulcio, cire, to fortifye.Plautus in Pſeudolo.
                  
                  
                     Praefulgeo, fulſi, gere, to ſhyne moche.
                  
                     
                        Praefu
                              ••
                           ium,
                      the mouth of an ouen or fournayſe.
                  
                     Praegelidus, da, dum, excedynge colde.
                  
                     Praegigno, nere, to begyn, to brynge in firſt. Nolebam ex me morem praegigni malum, I wolde not that an yll cuſtome ſhoulde be brought vp by me.
                  
                     Praegeſtio, ire, to reioyce moche.
                  
                     Praegnans, tis, a woman with childe.
                  
                     Praegrandis, de, very greate.
                  
                     Praegrauatio, a great griefe.
                  
                     Praegredior, gredi, to go before.
                  
                     Praegrauo, are, to greue moche.
                  
                     Praehendo, di, dere, to take.Cic. in P
                           •••
                        . & ad Atti. Ti. Liuius. 
                     Manum praehendere, to take by the hande.
                  
                     Praehenſatio, a ſolicitinge or laboringe for the attayninge of ſome greate office.
                  
                     Praehenſo, are, to imbrace or ſet honde on one, to ſolicite.
                  
                     
                        Praeiacio, praeieci, praeiacere,
                        Colum. 9.
                      to caſt before a thinge.
                  
                     Praeiacio, cui, cere, to lye before.
                  
                     Praeire iuramentum, to miniſtre or gyue an othe.
                  
                     Praeiuditium, a thinge which being ones decyded and determyned, maketh a rule or example to men that do folowe, to diſcuſſe ſemblably in a lyke mater. As thoſe which we do cal rulyd caſes or maters in the law, which be as examples to iuges.
                  
                     Praeiudico, to iuge before: ſometyme to condemne, alſo to let.
                  
                     Praeiuro, rare, to ſweare before other.
                  
                     Praeiuratio, the othe that is taken by hym that firſt ſweareth.
                  
                     Praeiurator, toris: he whiche firſte taketh an othe, as the fore man of a Iury, or the firſt witneſſe, or any other, after whome other

men do ſweare, accordynge to the othe gyuen vnto him.
                  
                     Praelabor, beris, bi, to fall firſt.
                  
                     Praeliaris, are, pertayninge to batayle.
                  
                     Praeliator, toris, a warriour.
                  
                     Praelicenter, very wantonly.
                  
                     Praelior, aris, ari, to fyght in batayle.
                  
                     Cato
                     Praeliganeum vinum, a praeligando, which I ſuppoſe to be ſo called, eyther bycauſe it is fyrſt runned or put into veſſelles, or els bycauſe it is put into a ſacke, which is faſt knytte afore.
                  
                     Praeligo, gare, to bynde afore.
                  
                     Praelium, batayle alſo the fyght in batayle: ſometyme the acte of generation.
                  
                     Praelongus, a, um, very longe.
                  
                     Praeloquium, the begynninge of a communication, or thinge ſpoken, as that which in thetorike is named exordium.
                  
                  
                     Praeloquor, queris, qui, to ſpeake or telle before.
                  
                     Praeluceo, cere, to beare lyght before one, as a torche or candel: alſo to gyue more light than another.
                  
                     Praelucere alijs virtute, to ſhyne in vertues before other.
                  
                     Praeludium, a proheme, or that which Muſicians and Mynſtrelles doo playe at the begynnynge, er they come to the ſonge▪ which they purpoſe to playe.
                  
                     Praeludo, ſi, dere, to playe before.
                  
                     Praelum, a preſſe.
                  
                     Praelumbo, are, to breake ones loynes.
                  
                     Praeluo, luere, to pourge or waſſhe cleane afore.
                  
                     Praemando, daui, to ſende before.
                  
                     Praemanibus, redy at hande.
                  
                     Pla
                           •
                        t in Mo
                           ••
                        e
                           ••
                        .
                     Praemature, to ſoone, or before the iuſt tyme. Praemature vita careo, I dye afore my tyme.
                  
                     Praemeditor, taris, tari, to aduyſe before a man do a thinge.
                  
                     Prae me ſero, prae me tuli, prae me ferre, to declare by deede, worde, or geſture. Prae te fers iracundiam, thou ſhewyſte thy ſelfe to be angry: alſo to confeſſe: alſo to haue before him a thynge (as it were) in remembraunce.
                  
                     Praemercor, caris, cari, to bye aforehande.
                  
                     Praemeſſum, a ſacrifyce or offrynge to Ceres, of the cares of corne that was fyrſte repyd.
                  
                     Praemetium, the fyrſtcroppe.
                  
                     Praemiatores, theues which ſteale by nyght, as we mought ſaye, whyche commytte burglary.
                  
                     Praemiator, is a rewardar.
                  
                     Praemineo, nui, ere, to be better than another or excel aboue another in aſtate or vertue.
                  
                     Praemior, aris, ari, to gyue rewardes.
                  
                     Praemioſus, ryche of money.
                  
                     Praemiſsio, a ſendinge afore.
                  
                     Praemitto, miſi, tere, to ſende afore.
                  
                     Praemium, a rewarde, gyuen to hym which hath done any notable and laudable thing.Cellius.
                  
                  
                     Praemoderor, aris, ari, to playe before on an inſtrument.
                  
                     Praemodum, aboue meaſure.
                  
                     Praemoleſtia, feare of a thinge to come.Ci. Tuſ. 
                           •
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Praemollis, le, very tender or delicate.
                  
                     Praemoneo, nui, nere, to forewarne.
                  
                     Praemonſtrator, toris, he that telleth or ſheweth a thynge before that it happeneth.Terent. in Heau.
                  
                  
                     Praemonſtro, are, to ſhewe before.
                  
                     Praemordeo, dere, to byte or rebuke before.
                  
                     Praemorior, riris, ri, to dye er the tyme come.
                  
                     Praemunio, iui, ire, to prepare.
                  
                     Praenarro, rare, to tell before.
                  
                     Praenato, tare, to ſwymme afore.
                  
                     Praeneſté, a citie in Italy.
                  
                     Praeneſtini, people of the citie of Preneſte in Italy.
                  
                     Praeneſtinus, a, um, of Preneſte.
                  
                     Praenomen, the firſte name: as Marcus. Quintus, Lucius: and as we now haue the name at baptyſme.
                  
                     Praenoſco, noui, noſcere, to knowe afore.
                  
                     Praenoto, tare, to make annotations or inſcriptions.
                  
                     Praenuncio, are, to ſhewe afore.
                  
                     Praenuncius, the firſt meſſenger, he that fyrſt bryngeth tydinges.
                  
                     Praeoccupatio, a fygure in Rhetorike, whan we will ſaye that we will not tell a thinge, and yet therby couertly we wil declare the matter, or make it ſuſpected.
                  
                     Praeoccupo, pare, to take or poſſede a thinge by preuencion.
                  
                     Praeopto, tare, rather to deſire.
                  
                     Praeordinatio, the fyrſt ordinaunce.
                  
                     Praeordinator, he that made the fyrſt ordynaunce.
                  
                     Praeordino, are, to ordayne afore.
                  
                     Praeparcus, ca, cum, very ſcarce or nygarde.
                  
                     Praeparo, are, to prepare, to make redy.
                  
                     Praepedimentum, a let before.
                  
                     Praepedio, diui, to let moche.
                  
                     Praependo, dere, to hange afore.
                  
                     Praepes, praepetis, ſwyft.
                  
                     Praepetes aues, were the byrdes, which ſhewed them ſelfes firſt to the diuinours called Augures, whereby they ſuppoſed to knowe what ſhulde enſue.
                  
                     Praepeto, tere, to begynne firſt.
                  
                     Praepilatus, ta, tum, hedded with yron, as a Iauelyn or dart: alſo ſharp afore lyke the heed of a dart, thoughe it hath none yron▪ as the hornes of a lopſter, wherewith he

ſwymmeth.
                  
                     Praepinguis, very fat.
                  
                     Praepondero, are, to waye more, to be more worth.
                  
                     Praepolleo, lere, to excede other.
                  
                     Praepono, ſui ponere, to put or ſet before.
                  
                     Praepoſitus, ta, tum, ſet or aduaunced aboue other, ſet in autoritie.
                  
                     Praepoſitus, ti, he that is in autoritie, or chief in any office.
                  
                     Praepotens, very puiſſant or mighty.
                  
                     Praepoto, tare, to drynke afore, to brynge good lucke in drinkinge.
                  
                     Praepoſterus, ra, rum, ouerthwart, oute of ordre.
                  
                     Saluſtius 
                           〈◊〉
                         Iug.
                     Praepoſteri homines, they that do that thing laſt, whiche they ſhulde haue done firſt.
                  
                     Praepoſteré fieri, to be done againſt all good ordre. As whan the ſeruaunt commaundeth his maſter, the peple their rulars, or a foole a wyſe man.
                  
                     Praeproperus, ra, rum, very quicke or haſty.
                  
                     Praeputium, the ſkynne which couereth the heed of a mans priuey membre.
                  
                     Praeripio, pui, pere, to preuent, to catche.
                  
                     Praerideo, dere, to lawghe before.
                  
                     Praeriſor, oris, he that laugheth a fore one.
                  
                     Praerodo, ſi, dere, to gnawe or eate very moche.
                  
                     Praerogata beneficia, benefytes afore employed.
                  
                     Praerogo, gare, to employe or gyue afore.
                  
                     Praerogatiua, & praerogariuum, a prerogati
                        •
                     e, where one is preferred afore another.
                  
                     Praerumpo, pere, to breake aſonder.
                  
                     Praeruptus, ta, tum, all to broken. it is ſometyme taken, where a hyll is broken by the ſydes, and harde to go on.
                  
                     Praerupta loca, places broken here & there, that no man maye paſſe.
                  
                     Praeſagio, gire, & praeſagior, to perceyue or knowe a thinge before that it happen.
                  
                     Praeſagus, a pronoſticatour, or perceyuer of thinges er they happe.
                  
                     Praeſagium, & praeſagatio, amonge the auncient writars, a perceyuing of a thinge before that it happeneth, ſometyme a coniecture.
                  
                     Praeſcientia, an vnderſtandinge and perfyte knowlege of all that ſhall happen.
                  
                     Praeſcius, he that knoweth perfytely thinges er they happen.
                  
                     Praeſcio, ſcire, to knowe afore.
                  
                     Praeſcribo, pſi, bere, to aſſigne, to note or intitle, to put, to laye before, to telle before, to appoint or determyne.
                  
                     Praeſcriptio, & praeſcriptum, a rule, a lawe, an ordre, a fourme.
                  
                     Praeſcriptum, a precepte, a fourme, a rule.
                  
                     Praeſeco, care, to cut before, ſometyme to cut on ſonder.
                  
                     Praeſegmina, the parynges of a mannes nayles.
                  
                     Praeſens, tis, preſent. In praeſentia, & in praeſentiarum, at this preſent tyme.
                  
                     Praeſentius, better.
                  
                     Praeſentiſsimus, a, um, the beſt, the ſureſt.
                  
                     Praeſentiſsimum venenum, the greateſt and mooſt feruent poyſon: alſo ſtronge.
                  
                     Preſens animus, a ſtronge or good courage, alſo fauorable. Deum praeſentem haber, he hath god fauorable vnto hym.
                  
                     Praeſentaneum remedium, a ſhort or ſodayne remedy.
                  
                     Praeſentia, preſence.
                  
                     Praeſentio, & praeſentiſco, cere, to fele or perceyue before.
                  
                     Praeſento, tare, to haue redy.
                  
                     Praeſepe, & praeſepium, & preſepes, a ſtable, a ſtall, a ſhepehouſe.
                  
                     
                        Praeſepi
                              •
                           , pire,
                      to hedge afore a thinge.
                  
                     Praeſertim, ſpecially.
                  
                     Praeſeruatio, a preſeruation.
                  
                     Praeſeruare, to preſerue.
                  
                     
                        Praeſes, ſidis,
                        Plautus in Caſina.
                      he that hath autoritie in a prouince next vnder the prince: ſometyme it ſignifieth a defendour, alſoo ſure. Locum praeſidem, a ſure place.
                  
                     Praeſideo, dere, to be in more autoritye, or of a more dignitie: alſo to haue authoritye or rule.
                  
                     Praeſideratio, tempeſt, whiche commeth at the begynnynge of wynter, ſooner than it is loked for, or is accuſtomed to happen.
                  
                     Praeſidero, are, where tempeſt commeth very ſoone, and before the tyme accuſtomed.
                  
                     Praeſicco, care, to drye afore.
                  
                     Praeſidiarius, a, um, that which is ordayned to be ayde to another thinge.
                  
                     Praeſidium, a garyſon of men with a capytayne, ſet by the chief capitayne, to defend a fortreſſe: ſometyme it is taken generally for all maner of ayde or defence: alſo for a fortification of a thinge.
                  
                     Praeſilio, ſilire, to lepe before, to ſterte oute.
                  
                     Praeſiſto, tere, to ſtande or be ſet afore.
                  
                     Praeſpeculor, ari, to loke afore.
                  
                     Praeſpicio, ſpexi, ſpicere, to ſee afore.
                  
                     Praeſtabilis, le, excellent.
                  
                     Praeſtabilius, bettar.
                  
                     Praeſtantia, excellency.
                  
                     Praeſtat, it is bettar.
                  
                     Praeſtans, tis, excellent.
                  
                     Praeſtanter, excellently.
                  
                     Praeſtare culpam, to take the blame on hym.
                  
                     Praeſtare officium, to do his deuoyre.Cicer. T
                           •
                        .
                  
                  
                     Praeſtare iuſiurandum, to take an othe.
                  
                     Praeſtega, a place open afore, and keuered

behynde lyke a porche, where men do ſyt for recreacion after their buſyneſſe.
                  
                     Praeſter, a venymouſe ſerpent, of whome he that is ſtryken, dyeth for thurſt.
                  
                     Praeſtigiator, toris, a iuggler.
                  
                     Pom. Feſt.
                     Praeſies, titis, of the auncient wrytars called a prelate.
                  
                     Praeſtigium, a iugglynge caſte, an inchauntment, a deluſyon.
                  
                     Praeſtino, are, to prepare in byenge a thinge.
                  
                     Praeſtituo, ere, to determine before, to preſcribe or appoynt before, what ſhal be done. Iſtam enim culpam, quam vereris, ego praeſtabo,
                     Ci. de ora. for the blame, which thou feareſt, I will take vppon me.
                  
                     Praeſto, ſtiti, ſtate, to be better than another thinge, wherewith it is comparyd, to excell: alſo to vndertake, to waraunt, ſometyme to graunte, alſo to do, to be beneficiall, to beware, to exchue, to feare, to do or perfourme,Ci ad Q. 
                           〈◊〉
                        . to gyue, to exhibite, to repreſent or ſhewe, to lende, to aſſigne or appoynt, to do a thinge.
                  
                     Praeſto, an aduerbe, redy, at hande. Praeſtoſis, helpe me. Praeſto eſſe, to appiere, as mē do in places of iugementes.
                  
                     Praeſtolor, aris, ari, to tary, to be at hande, or redy to do ſeruice.
                  
                     
                        Praeſ
                              •
                           tingo, xi, gere,
                      to bynde faſt, to ſhut, to daſell the eyen, to touche quickly, or ſhortly, to ſhaue, to greue ſomewhat.
                  
                     Praeſtruo, ſtruxi, ſtruere, to ordayne firſte, to buylde.
                  
                     Praeſul, lis, a prelate.
                  
                     Praeſulatus, tus, the dignitie of a prelate.
                  
                     Praeſulto, are, to leape or daunſe afore.
                  
                     Praeſultor, praeſultoris, he that leadeth a daunſe.
                  
                     Praeſum, fui, praeſſe, to be afore or aboue an other, to be of more dignitye, to be in autorytye.
                  
                     Praeeſſe negotio, to be chief in the buſyneſſe.
                  
                     Praeſumere animo, to coniecte.
                  
                     Praeſumo, ſumpſi, ſumere, to take fyrſte, to preuente.
                  
                     Praeſumptio, a takinge or receyuynge before: it is alſo that, which is called preoccupation, whan we declare firſt what our aduerſary will ſaye, or what is the iuges opynyon: and againſt that we do argue, to diſſolue it with reaſon.
                  
                     Praeſuo, ere, to ſowe afore.
                  
                     Praeſurgo, gere, to ryſe afore or firſt.
                  
                     Praetego, gere, to hyde or couer chiefly.
                  
                     Praetendo, ere, to laye for a thing er it come: alſo to cary or beare afore, alſo to ſhew or pretende, to allege, to ſet a thinge aboute for an incloſure. Praetendere ſepem, to make a hedge aboute.
                  
                     Praetento, tare, to tempte or aſſaye afore.
                  
                     Praeteriue, very ſklenderly.
                  
                     Praeterduco, cere, to leade afore, to leade forth.
                  
                     Praetergredior, di, to paſſe by, to go beyond.
                  
                     Praeteritus, ta, tum, paſſyd.
                  
                     Praeteriti, deed, departed, deceſſyd: alſo they which in ſuynge for an office, dyd ſuffre repulſe, or were put backe.
                  
                     Praeter propter, for an other cauſe than that which is reherced.
                  
                     Praeter, except, alſo beſyde, ouer and aboue, before. Praeter oculos, before the eyen, Againſt or contrary. Praeter morem, againſte the cuſtome or facion. Praeter ſpem, vnloked for. Praeter opinionem, otherwyſe thā I thought. Praeter caetera, more than the other. Praeter aequum, againſt raiſon.
                  
                     Praeterbito, tare, to go by.
                  
                     Praeterea, moreouer, beſyde, none els. Mihi credis praeterea nemini, Thou beleueſt me, and none els. alſo it ſignifieth afterwarde.
                  
                     Praetereo, iui, ire, to go ouer or paſſe, to leue oute a thynge, which ſhulde be ſpoken of.
                  
                     Praetermitto, miſi, tere, to leue vntouched, to forgete, to leue oute.
                  
                     Praetermiſsio, forgetynge, or leuinge out of a thynge.
                  
                     Praeterquàm, but onely, otherwyſe than, moreouer.
                  
                     Praeter
                           
                              
                           
                           quam
                         quod, but.
                  
                     Praeterueho, here, to carye throughe.
                  
                     Praeteruolo, are, to paſſe throughe quickly.
                  
                     Praetexo, ui, ere, to make or ordayne firſte, to couer or hyde.
                  
                     Praetexta, a longe garment myxte with purple ſilke, whiche was the veſture of noble mennes ſonnes, vntyll they came vnto .xvii yeres of age: and therfore ſuche children were called Praetextati, but they had alſoo aboute their neckes, a lytell round iewell of golde, facyoned like a hart, wherin was incloſed ſome thinge of great vertue.
                  
                     Praetexta, was alſo the robe of aſtate, whiche the kynge of Romaynes, or the other chief officers dyd weare, whan they ſate in their maieſtie.
                  
                     Praetexta comaedia, an enterlude, wherin are perſonages of highe dignitie.
                  
                     Praetextatus, ta, tum, diſhoneſt,Suetonius Gellius, Macro. or vnclene in ſpeche or actes. Feſtus taketh it in the contrary ſence.
                  
                     Praetextum, a pretence or coloure.
                  
                     Praetiamitatores, officers which went before the prelates called Flamines, proclayming openly, that all men ſhulde ceaſſe of theyr warke, bycauſe it was not lefull to thoſe prelates to beholde any man warkynge.
                  
                     Praetimeo, ere, to be ſore aferde.
                  
                     
                     Praetingo, gere, to touche afore.
                  
                     Praetondeo, to ſheere or klyppe, or rounde before.
                  
                     
                        Praetoritius, a, um, for Praetorius.
                     
                  
                  
                     Praetorium ius, lawe made by the Praetor.
                  
                     Praetor, toris, a chief capitayne in warres, in a citie or contraye.
                  
                     Praetor is he, whiche hath autoritye to ſit in iugemente, and to gyue ſentence in cauſis.
                  
                     Praetorianus, he that is attendant to him that is Praetor.
                  
                  
                     Praetorium, the houſe or pauylyon of hym that is Praetor. it is alſoo a princes palayce or manoure: it is ſomtyme the place, where iugementes are gyuen, ſometyme the coū
                     ſayle, wherevnto Praetores are aſſembled.
                  
                     Praetorius, he that hath bene Praetor.
                  
                  
                     Praetorius, a, um, belonginge to the office of Praetor.
                  
                  
                     Praetura, the dignitie and miniſtration, of him that is Praetor.
                  
                  
                     Praeualeo, lere, to preuayle, to be better or of more value.
                  
                     Praeualidus, a, dum, very ſtronge or myghty, ſometyme very greate.
                  
                     Praeuaricario, is a colluſion: alſoo it is where one toucheth a thing lytely, which ought to be inculked with a more playn declaracyon, or els repeted, as makynge moche to the purpoſe.
                  
                     Praeuaricor, aris, ari, to ſwarne from truthe, to go out of the right waye, to leue vnſayd that, which ſhulde be ſpoken, to touche a thinge ſhortely in ſpekynge, to warke by colluſion, in ſuffringe his aduerſary to optayne, to hurte another perſon.
                  
                     Praeuaricator, toris, he that leueth the ryght waye, or ſpeketh not that whych ought to be ſpoken: alſo he that in ſpekinge for him ſelfe aydeth the cauſe of his aduerſary, or doeth any thinge by colluſion.
                  
                     Praeuelio, here, to brynge firſt.
                  
                     Praelo, are, to couer or hyde afore.
                  
                     Praeuello, lere, to pull or plucke afore.
                  
                     Praeuenio, nire, to come before or preuent.
                  
                     Ti. Liuius. de bell. pu. Ci. de Di.
                     Praeuentio, a preuention.
                  
                     Praeuideo, dere, to foreſee, to beware.
                  
                     Praeuius, he that leadeth the waye.
                  
                     Praeuerto, uertere, to ſet more by, or to care more for.Plautus in Amphi. 
                     Nec me vxorem praeuortiſſe dicant, prae repub. Nor let them not ſaye, that I ſet more by my wyfe, than by the weale publyke.Plautus in milite. Alſo to tourne or ſet a ſyde. Ne
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         praeripio pulpamentum, ne
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         praeuorto pocu lum, Nor I take awaye thy meate, nor ſet or tourne aſyde thy drynke.
                  
                     Plautus in. capt.
                     Praeuertor, deponens, idem quod praeuerto: alſo to go afore. Inde illico praeuertor domum, from thenſe I went home afore. alſo to be tourned furth. Foreis enim clauſit,
                     Plautus in Amph. 
                     ne praeuorteretur foras, he hath ſhyr faſt the doore, leeſt he ſhulde be turned forth. Alſo to do any thinge firſte or before any other thinge. Praeuorti hoc certum eſt rebus alijs omnibus, Surely this ſhall be done before any other thinge.
                  
                     Praeuertere ſerio, to turne it to erneſt.Plautus in amph. 
                     Si quid dictum eſt perſocum, non aequum eſt id te ſerio praeuortier. If any thinge be ſpoken in iape, it is not rayſon to tourne it to erneſte.
                  
                     
                        Praeuerti pigritiae,
                        Plautus in Merc.
                      to be taken with ſlouth Caue pigritiae praeuortier, beware that thou be not taken with ſlouthe.
                  
                     Praeuerſus, a, um, that which is done or ſped firſt, or before any other.
                  
                     
                        Praeuerſum fulgur,
                        Pom. Feſt.
                      lyghtenynge whyche is not knowen, whyther it be by daye or by nyghte.
                  
                     Praeuolo, are, to flee before.
                  
                     Pragmaticus, a practiſer in the lawe.
                  
                     Pragma in greke, is in latyne negociatio, an acte or buſyneſſe: alſoo an exerciſe of marchaundyſe.
                  
                     Pragmatica ſanctio, a determination of practiſians of the lawe.
                  
                     Prandeo, prandi, & pranſus ſum, prandere, to dyne.
                  
                     Prandiculum, a brekefaſt.
                  
                     Prandiolum, a lyter dynar.
                  
                     Prandium, a dynar.
                  
                     Pranſito, tare, to dyne or eate often.
                  
                     Pranſor, oris, he that is at dynar, or he that is boden to dynar.
                  
                     Praſinus, na, num, greene lyke leekis.
                  
                     Praſius, a greene ſtone.
                  
                     Praſoides, a ſtone of the coloure of leekes.
                  
                     Pratenſis, ſe, of the medowes.
                  
                     Pratenſe foenum, medowe haye.
                  
                     Pratulum, a lytle medowe.
                  
                     Praué, ſhrewedly, noughtyly, vnhappely, ouerthwartly.
                  
                     Prauitas, ſhrewdeneſſe, vnhappyneſſe, ouerthwartneſſe.
                  
                     Pratum, medowe.
                  
                     Prauus, a, um, croked.
                  
                     Praxiteles, an excellent caruar in ſtone.
                  
                     Precarius, a, um, that whiche is borowed, as the wyll of the lender, that which is occupyed, at another mans pleaſure.
                  
                     Precario, by deſyre at another mans will.
                  
                     Preces, prayer.
                  
                     Precium, pryce, value.
                  
                     Precioſus, a, um, deere, preciouſe.
                  
                     Precor, aris, ari, to praye.
                  
                     Prehendo, prehendi, dere, to take. Et manuta prehendi, & oſculum detuli tibi, I toke you by the hande, and alſo gaue you a kyſſe.
                  
                     
                     Premo, preſsi, premere, to preſſe: ſometyme to vexe, to dygge, to preſe on, to thruſte, to deſtroye, to thruſt downe, to conſtrayne, to reſtrayne.
                  
                     Vergilius.
                     Premere dolorem, to hyde heuyneſſe or ſorowe. Premit alto corde dolorem, he hyd his ſorowe in the ſecrete parte of his harte.
                  
                     Varro.
                     Premere, to dryue or put oute.
                  
                     Premere, to ſhyt or cloſe. Preſsi
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         oculos, ac vulnera laui,
                     Verg. I cloſed his eyes, and waſſhed his woundes.
                  
                     Premere, to cut awaye. Et ruris opaci, falſe premes vmbram,
                     Ver geo. 1 and with a ſythe thou ſhalt cut awaye the ſhadowe of the darke feldes.
                  
                     Premere, to trede doune. Veluti qui ſentibus anguem,
                     Vergili. 2. 
                     preſsit humini tens, lyke as he, which thraſlyng his fote to the grounde, tredeth doune the ſnake, that lyeth in the brembles.
                  
                     Premere teſtimonio, to conuicte a man by witneſſe.
                  
                     Preſa porca, a ſwyne which was offred in ſacrifice to Ceres, in ſatiſfaction for a hole houſholde, for as moche as a part of that ſacrifice was made in the preſence of the corps, which than was to be buryed.
                  
                     Preſſatus, ta, tum, oppreſſed, charged troden downe.
                  
                     Pres, predis, he that vndertaketh, if any incommoditie do happen,C
                           •
                        o
                           •
                         Nep. A
                           ••
                         
                        
                           •
                        ian. that he ſhall make ſufficient recompence: it is alſo he that is bounden for ſuche money as is borowyd of a commune treaſure or ſtocke.
                  
                     Presbiter, biteri, an auncient, or father in yeres or dygnytye. It is vſed for a preeſt.
                  
                     Preſso, are, to preſſe or thruſt togither.
                  
                     Preſſus, ſſa, ſſum, ſubtyll, compacte, heuy, preſſed.
                  
                     Preſſus, ſſus, & preſſura, preſſinge, alſo oppreſſion.
                  
                     Pretioſus, a, um, preciouſe, deere, of grete eſtimacion.
                  
                     Pretioſior, pretioſius, more preciouſe or deere.
                  
                     Pretium, the pryce or value: alſoo the rewarde: ſometyme peryll or daunger. Pretio emptas meo,
                     Terent. in ptol. Hec. bought with my peryll or daunger.
                  
                     Pri, of olde tyme was vſed for Prae.
                  
                  
                     Priamus, the noble kynge of Troye, whoſe hiſtory is to no man vnknowen.
                  
                     Priapiſmus, a ſickeneſſe, wherein the pryuy membre of a man allway ſtandeth, without hauinge any appetite to lechery.
                  
                     Priapus, an ydolle, vnto whome the Paynymes, commytted their gardynes to kepe.
                  
                     Pridem, lare.
                  
                     Pridianus, a, um, that which is done the days before.
                  
                     Pridie, the daye before.
                  
                     Primas tenere, to haue the preeminence, to be chief, to holde the bettar part.
                  
                     Primas dare, to eſteme aboue other.
                  
                     Primaeuus, a, um, the elder.
                  
                     Primarius, a, um, chief.
                  
                     Primas, atis, in chief autoritie.
                  
                     Primanus Tribunus, he that aſſigned tribute to the firſt legion.
                  
                     Prima lux, the ſprynge of daye.
                  
                     Prima veſpera, the euenynge.Ci. de 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Primae, the chief prayſes. Cui primae ſine cō
                        trouerſia deferebantur, to whome the chief prayſes were gyuen withoute any controuerſye.
                  
                     Primitus, firſt.
                  
                     Primetium, ſacrifice of the eares of corne▪ which were firſt gathered after that they were repyd.
                  
                     Primores, the toppes of any thynge.Plautus. 
                     Digitulis primoribꝰ, with the fingar toppes. Labris primoribus, with the fore part of the lyppes.
                  
                     Primotibus labris guſtare, to touche a thing ſkantely, to ſmater of a thinge, and not to knowe it ſubſtancially or perfitely.
                  
                     Primicerius, chief ruler.
                  
                     Primigenus, gena, genum, fyrſte borne or growen.
                  
                     Primigenius, a, um, that commeth naturally of it ſelfe, and is vnmixt.
                  
                     Primigenia, the tytle of the eldeſt childe in inheritaunce.
                  
                     Primipara, ſhe that hath her fyrſt childe.
                  
                     Primipes, he that in batayle fyghteth fyrſte with a ſworde, and after chaungynge his fourme of fyghtynge, vſeth a Iauelyne or darte.
                  
                     Primipilaris, is he that fyghteth nexte to the ſtandarde. It is mooſte proprely the Capytayne of a companye in the fowewarde.
                  
                     Primitium, the principall or chief.
                  
                     
                        Primipilus,
                        Vege
                              •
                           i. 
                              •
                           .
                      a capytayne of a company in the forewarde or vauntgarde, whiche hadde vnder hym fower hundred Souldiours.
                  
                     Primiter, & Primitus, firſt.
                  
                     Primitiae, the firſt frutes.
                  
                     Primitius, a, um, the fyrſt or foremooſt.
                  
                     Primitiuus, a, um, that whiche hath none other begynnynge.
                  
                     Primeſius, a ſtake, whereto a cabell or rope of a ſhyppe is tyed.
                  
                     Primò, an aduerbe, ſignifyeth fyrſt.
                  
                     
                        Primodum, for Primo.
                     
                  
                  
                     Primogenia verba, wordes whyche be not

dyed from any other.
                  
                     Primogenitus, ta, tum, fyrſte begotten.
                  
                     Primordium, the fyrſte begynnynge.
                  
                     Primores, the fyrſte, the chiefe. Primores uiri au
                           •
                         feminae, Noble men or womenne, or gentyll men and gentyll women.
                  
                     Primulus, the diminutiue of Primus.
                  
                  
                     Primum, an aduerbe, whyche ſygnifyethe fyrſte, or euer.
                  
                     Primus, a, um, fyrſte, beſte, the chiefe. Primo quoque tempore, arre the fyrſte tyme. Prima qua
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         occaſione, at the fyrſte occaſyon that ſhall happen.
                  
                     Princeps, cipis, a prince, the fyrſte or chief.
                  
                     Principalis, le, principall, alſo, pertaynynge to a prynce.
                  
                     Principaliter, pryncipallye.
                  
                     Principio, an aduerbe, fyrſte, or at the begynnynge.
                  
                     Liuius Terent. ſuetonius
                     Principia, the place in a Campe, where as are pyghte the pauilions of the heed capitaynes: but the more propre ſygnification therof is, that it is the ſeconde warde in battayle, where in olde tyme were the princis and noble men. Alſo it was taken for the order of ray of noble men.
                  
                     Principior, piari, to begynne.
                  
                     Principor, pari, to rule.
                  
                     Principium, the begynnynge.
                  
                     Prior, the fyrſte.
                  
                     Priora tempora, the olde tyme.
                  
                     Priſcus, a, um, auncient, or of the old time.
                  
                     Priſtinus, na, mim, that whyche was many yeres paſſed. Sometyme it ſygnifyeth the fyrſte, auncient.
                  
                     Priſtis, a fyſh, of wonderful length, & ſclender, whyche cuttethe the wawes, as he ſwymmeth.
                  
                     Priuatus, he that is in none auctorytie or dygnitie.
                  
                     Priuatus, ta, tum, that is proprely a mannes owne, that whyche pertayneth to oone man or fewe, alſo particular. Sometyme it ſignifieth depriued.
                  
                     Priuatim, & priuate, priuyly, aparte.
                  
                     Priuernum, a towne in Campania.
                  
                     Priuignus, na, the chylde by an nother huſbande, or other wyfe, whiche is deed, ſon or doughter in law to the huſband or wife.
                  
                     Priuilegium, a lawe concernynge pryuate perſones▪ alſo a priuate or ſpeciall lawe.
                  
                     Priuo, are, to take awaye, to depriue.
                  
                     Prius, an aduerbe, ſygnifyeth before.
                  
                     Priuſquam, before that.
                  
                     Priuus, ua, uum, pryuate, ſynguler, euerye mans owne or propre.
                  
                     Pro, for, before. Pro roſtris, at the barre or place of pleding. Pro tribunali, in the place of iugement. alſo after or accordyng. Pro Platonis ſententia, accordynge to the ſentence of Plato. Pro opere, in the warke.
                  
                     Pro merito, accordynge to his deſerning.Saluſt. in Iugurt.
                  
                  
                     Pro curia, before the courte. Pro uirili, to my power.
                  
                     Pro ſancte Iupiter, O bleſſed Iupiter.Vide com.
                  
                  
                     Pro deum at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         hominum fidem, O the faith of god and man.
                  
                     Proanus, my greatte grandfather.
                  
                     Proauia, my great grandame.
                  
                     Probabile, that whiche may be proued.
                  
                     Probatica piſcina, a ponde, where ſheepe are waſſhed.
                  
                     Probatio, a proufe.
                  
                     Probatus, ta, tum, proued.
                  
                     Probe, honeſtely, well, wyſely.
                  
                     Probiter, 
                     idem.
                     Vide com.
                  
                  
                     Probus, a vertuous man, a good man.
                  
                     Probitas, goodnes.
                  
                     Problema, tis, a ſentence purpoſed, hauing a demaunde therto annexed.
                  
                     Probo, are, to proue, to prayſe, to approue.
                  
                     Proboſcis, dis, a longe ſnowre, as an Olyphant or ſwyne hath.
                  
                     Probro, are, to reproche or rebuke.
                  
                     Probroſus, a, um, reprochefull.
                  
                     Probrum, a reprocheful act. Alſo a reproch or rebuke, an infamie.
                  
                     Procax, procacis, malaperte in aſkynge, or deſyrynge, ſhameles, wanton in crauing, yll tounged.
                  
                     Procacitas, malapertnes, or wantonneſſe in aſkynge or crauynge.
                  
                     Procare, to wowe, to craue, to be ymportunate.
                  
                     Procapis, a progenie, whyche commeth of one heade.
                  
                     Procaciter, malapertely, wantonly, without ſhame.
                  
                     Procalo, are, to calle one to.
                  
                     Procatum, & procitū, void, or of none effect.
                  
                     Procedo, ceſsi, cedere, to go forthe, to procede, to proſper.
                  
                     Procella, a ſtorme.
                  
                     Proceleumaticus, a foote in meter of foure feete ſhorte.
                  
                     Procello, ere, to ſtreeke, to turn vp ſo downe
                  
                     Procelloſus, a, um, ſtormye.
                  
                     Procenſu, the company or felowſhyppe of yonge men in the cytie, as we beholde in London the Bachelers togyther, whan the Mayre taketh his othe.
                  
                     Proceres, the heed men of a towne.
                  
                     Procerus, a, um, longe, talle.
                  
                     Proceritas, lengthe, talneſſe.
                  
                     Proceriter, an aduerbe, whyche ſygnifyeth longe, or of lengthe.
                  
                     Proceritus, rita, tum, incenſed or prouoked with an yll ſpiryte, madde or woode.
                  
                     
                     Plautus in Penulo.
                     Proceriti lapides, vengeable.
                  
                     Procertó, ſurely.
                  
                     
                        Procet, for prouocet,
                      let hym prouoke, let hym appeale.
                  
                     Proceſſus, us, proceſſe or ſucceſſe.
                  
                     Proceſtrium, a galerye to goo frome oone chambre to an other. Alſo the ouermoſte parte of the walles within the imbattylmentes, where men maye go: ſome doo calle it a trenche before the campe, in defence therof from artyllery.
                  
                     Prochyta, an Ile in the ſee, in the gulfe or rode of Puteolis, a citie in Campania.
                  
                     Procidentia ani, whan the bone of the fundement appereth oute.
                  
                     Procido, dere, to fall downe proſtrate.
                  
                     Perottus.
                     Procico, ere, to prouoke or cal from far of.
                  
                     Procicta claſsis, a nauy p̄parid redy to fight
                  
                     Procinctus, tus, the prouyſyon before that any thynge is done.
                  
                     Procingo, xi, gere, to prepare, to make redy.
                  
                     Procinctus, ta, tum, redy, prepared.
                  
                     Procino, cinui, nere, to pronoūce in ſinging, to ſynge out.
                  
                     Procio, ciui, ire, to aſke.
                  
                     Procito, tare, to prouoke.
                  
                     Proclamo, are, to crie out, to proclayme.
                  
                     Procliué, redily, eaſily in doinge.
                  
                     Procliuis, ue, redy to falle, inclyned. Alſoo redy or eaſy to be done.
                  
                     Procliuitas, tatis, inclynation to euyll.
                  
                     Proclus, a noble phyloſopher of the ſecte of Plato.
                  
                     Proco, & procor, ari, to aſke malapertely. Alſo to dalye with wanton language, to eye or beholde a woman wantonly.
                  
                     Proconſul, lis, he that was ſent with an extra ordinarie power of Conſul into a prouynce of the Romayns.
                  
                     Procraſtinatio, a delaye.
                  
                     Procraſtino, nare, to prolonge the tyme, to deferre.
                  
                     Procreo, are, to bygette chylderne.
                  
                     Procreatus, ta, tum, begotten.
                  
                     Procubitor, toris, he that kepethe watche and warde without the campe.
                  
                     Procubo, bare, to watche.
                  
                     Procudo, dere, to ſtryke or beate a thynge. to make it leſſe or thynner.
                  
                     Qu. Curti. Ti. Liuius.
                     Procul, farre of, from farre.
                  
                     Procul urbem, farre from the cytie.
                  
                     Procul muros, farre from the walles.
                  
                     Proculco, care, to treade downe.
                  
                     Proculdubio, out of doubte, doubtleſſe.
                  
                     Perottus.
                     Proculeio, ere, to extende, to promyſe.
                  
                     Proculiunt, old writers vſed for promittunt, they promyſe.Pom. Feſt.
                  
                  
                     Proculus, he that is borne whan his father is farre out of the countrey.
                  
                     Procumbo, cubui, cumbere, to lye flatte or proſtrate, to come narowe togyther.
                  
                     Procuro, rare, to do or ſolicite an other mannes buſyneſſe, to inſerche dylygentely, to helpe or ſuſtayne, or ſuccour.
                  
                     Procuratorius, ia, um, pertaynyng to a proctour or factour.
                  
                     
                        Procurator, to
                              •
                           is,
                      a proctour, a factour.
                  
                     Procuratio, mynyſtration of thynges concernynge an other man.
                  
                     Procurro, rere, to runne farre, or beyonde.
                  
                     Procuruus, ua, um, very croked.
                  
                     Procus, a wower, to haue a womanne in mariage, but moſte proprely where there be two, whyche woweth euery oone for hym ſelfe.
                  
                     Procyon, a ſterre called the Doggeſterre, whyche appereth in the canycular days.
                  
                     Prodeo, diui, uel dij, to goo forthe or oute of a houſe, to come before one.
                  
                     Prodigium, a thynge ſeldome ſeene, whiche ſygnifyeth, that ſomme thynge ſhall happen veraye good or veraye ylle, as blaſynge ſterres, fyres, or fygures in the fyrmamente, thynges monſtruouſe or agaynſte nature.
                  
                     Prodigo, digere, to laſſhe oute moneye in vayne, or in thynges not neceſſary. ſomtyme to ſignifye ſomme ſtraunge thynge to happen.
                  
                     Prodigus, prodigall, waſtefull, an outragious expender.
                  
                     Prodo, didi, dere, to forſake, to differe, or putte of, to caſte forthe, to putte oute or farre of, to ſhewe or diſcloſe. alſo to differ, to ſpreade, to betraye.
                  
                     Prodere memoriae, to leue in remembrance. Alſo to wryte.
                  
                     Prodire obuiam, to go agaynſt one, or to go to mete with one, whiche is commynge.
                  
                     Prodire in publicum, to goo abrode, to go in the ſtretes.
                  
                     Prodico, dixi, dicere, to ſpeke more or prate. Quamobrem excutiemus omnes iſtorum delitias, omnes ineptias, ſi prodixerint,
                     Cicer. pro Caelio. Wherfore we wyll ſet forthe al theſe mennes pleaſures and fantaſyes, if they wylle prate any more.
                  
                     Prodigalitas, prodygalytie, or outragyouſe expenſes.
                  
                     Prodigé, exceſſyuely, outragiouſly, prodigally, waſtefully.
                  
                     Prodigialis, digiale, that whyche pertayneth to the procuryng of ſtrange tokens or ſygnes.
                  
                     Prodigiator, he that by ſtraunge tokens or ſygnes, tellethe before what ſhall afterwarde happen.
                  
                     Prodigioſus, ſa, ſum, that whyche makethe

ſtraunge ſignes or tokens.
                  
                     Prodigitas, prodygalitie.
                  
                     Prodimentum, a treaſon or betrayenge.
                  
                     
                        Prodinum, for prodiunt,
                      vſed of Ennius, to iſſue or come forthe.
                  
                     Prodius, further in.
                  
                     Proditio, treaſon.
                  
                     Proditor, toris, a traytour.
                  
                     Terent. in Hera
                           •
                        .
                     Prodere uitam, to put his lyfe in daunger.
                  
                     Prodromus, he that rounneth before, as a lackey, or he that brynge the tydynges of ones commynge. Prodromi, he alſo ſterres in heuen, the whyche doo ryſe in the Northe eaſte .viii. dayes afore the canicular dayes.
                  
                     Produco, duxi, ducere, to prolonge, to bryng forthe, to conſume or ſpende. Producere aliquem falſa ſpe,
                     Vergilius. to holde or kepe one in a fooles paradyſe, to put forewarde: alſo to folowe.
                  
                     Productilis, le, that whiche is made out at length with beatynge.
                  
                     Producere, to ſette forthe to hyre. Audientem dicto mater produxiſti filiam, Thou beinge hir mother,Pl
                           •
                        utus in A
                           ••
                        nar. and ſhe being obedient vnto the, thou haſte ſette hyr to hyre.
                  
                     Producere filios, to begette chylderne.
                  
                     Productio, the makynge of a thynge longe.
                  
                     Producté, an aduerbe, ſignifieth longe.
                  
                     Productus, ta, tum, made longe or ſette out at lengthe. alſo brought or put out.
                  
                     Proaedifico, care, to buylde.
                  
                     Proaedificatum, that whiche being a priuate place, is made commune or publyke.
                  
                     Profanatum templum, the churche ſuſpendyd, where any horrible cryme is therin commytted.
                  
                     Profano, are, to conuerte thynges beynge halowed to a temporall vſe.
                  
                     Varro.
                     Profanus, na, num, that whiche is not halowed, temporall, men vnlerned, and that do hate lerned men. Alſo that whiche is ioyned or annexed vnto the temple.
                  
                     Profari, to pronounce, to ſpeake abrode.
                  
                     Ci. de 
                           •
                        el in ciuili.
                     Profectio, a paſſage or. ſettynge forthe towarde a vyage, a departynge frome the place, where a man is.
                  
                     Profectò, in very dede, for ſothe.
                  
                     Pil. in epiſ.
                     Profectum facere, to profyte or goo forthe, proprely in ſtudy and lernynge.
                  
                     Profectus ſum, the pretertence of proficiſcor, I wente.
                  
                     Profectus, tus, profyte.
                  
                     Profero, tuli, ferre, to brynge forthe, to ſhew forthe, to pronounce, to inlarge, or dylate,Plautus in Ca
                           ••
                        na. or make greatter, to prolonge.
                  
                     Profere dolum, to put a diſceit in experiēce.
                  
                     Profere gradum, to make haſt in going.
                  
                     Profeſti dies, warkedays.
                  
                     Proficio, ſicere, to profyte, to procede.Ci. de ſen
                           •
                        
                        ctute, & de amicitia.
                  
                  
                     Proficiſcor, ciſci, to go and to come.
                  
                     Profireor, to promyſe openly, to tell frankly or boldly. Alſo to tell or declare, howe moche a man hath of money, cattal, corne,Plautus in capt. Ci. de am
                           •
                        . or any other thynge. Alſo to ſpeake or auaunt, Alſo to diſcouer or confeſſe a thing. Alſo to rede openly a leſſon.
                  
                     Profeſsio, an open confeſſion, an open redynge or lecture.
                  
                     Profeſſor, oris, a reder in open ſcholes.
                  
                     Profligo, gare, to ouerthrowe, to dryue awaye, to brynge to diſtruction, to putte to flyghte.
                  
                     Profligatus, ta, tum, ouerthrowen, dryuen away, put to flyght, diſtroyed. ſomtyme it ſignifieth finiſhed, brought to a poynte.
                  
                     Profligo, gis, gere, to ſtryue moche.
                  
                     Proflubeo, ui, ere, to runne out.
                  
                     Profluens, tis, a ryuer: being a participle, is ſignifieth flowynge.
                  
                     Profluo, xi, ere, to runne out of a thynge, to runne from farre.
                  
                     Profluuium, a flyre or laſke.
                  
                     Profluus, a, um, that whiche floweth.
                  
                     Profore, to profite. Quae nocuere ſequar,
                     Horatius. 
                     fugiam quae profore credam, That whyche hath done harme wyl I folowe: & eſchew wyll I thoſe thynges, whyche I beleue ſhulde profyte me.
                  
                     Profugio, gere, to flye farre.
                  
                     Profugium, a place, whereto a man flyethe for ſuccour.
                  
                     Profugus, he that gothe farre oute of his owne countrey.
                  
                     Profunda auaritia, inſaciable auaryce.Saluſt. in Iugur
                           •
                        . 
                     Profunda cupido, inſaciable couetyſe. Profunda libido, inſacyable lecherye.
                  
                     Profunditas, depeneſſe.
                  
                     Profundo, iudi, fundere, to poore out largely, to ſpende excedyngely.
                  
                     Profundus, da, dum, depe, ſometyme hyghe.
                  
                     Profuſus, excedynge lyberall.
                  
                     Progener, ri, the huſbande of my dowghters dowghter, or ſonnes dowghter.
                  
                     Progentes, progenie, ſuccceſſion in bloode.
                  
                     Progigno, nere, to gette a chylde.
                  
                     Prognaré, openly.
                  
                     Prognariter, hardyly.Feſtu
                           •
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Prognatus, ta, tum, begotten.Plautus in Penulo.
                  
                  
                     Prognoſis, preſcience, or knowledge afore that a thynge happeneth.
                  
                     Prognoſticon, a pronoſtication.
                  
                     Progredior, grederis, greſsus ſum, gredi, to go forthe.
                  
                     Progreſſus, ſa, ſum, paſſed ouer.
                  
                     Progreſſus, us, a marchynge forthe, or paſſynge forthe.
                  
                     Progreſsio, the ſame.
                  
                     
                     Progymnaſma, an aſſay or profe in exerciſe.
                  
                     Prohibeo, bui, bêre, to prohibite, to forbyd, to tourne awaye.
                  
                     Proiecta, the ouer partes of a howſe, which do leane outwarde from the neither part, as they be nowe in ſome rownes toward the ſtretes: ſome men do cal thē garrettis.
                  
                     Proiecta audatia, foole hardyneſſe.
                  
                     Proiectare aliquem probris, to rebuke one.
                  
                     Proiectitius, a, um, a chylde caſte forthe and nouryſhed of a ſtraunger.
                  
                     Proiectura, a penthowſe to conuaye rayne from the walles.
                  
                     Proiectus puer, a chylde whiche is layde abrode in the ſtrete, no man knowyng who is the father or mother.
                  
                     Proiectus, proiecta, iectum, throwen or caſt out afarre.
                  
                     Proiectus ad audendum, foolehardy.
                  
                     Proijcio, ieci, ijcere, to throwe or caſt, to ſet forth, to leaue, to extende or holde oute a thynge at length.
                  
                     Proin, therfore.
                  
                     Saluſtius in 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                     Proinde, therfore, wherfore, lyke as.
                  
                     Prolabor, beris, bi, to ſlyde or ſlyppe forth.
                  
                     Prolambo, bere, to lycke.
                  
                     Prolatio, an extendynge forthe. Alſo pronouncyng, or pronunciation, ſommetyme bringynge forthe or ſhewyng of a thynge.
                  
                     Prolatare, to deferre or purre of, vntylle a longer ryme.
                  
                     Prolatus, ta, tum, ſet forthe, brought forthe.
                  
                     Prolectibilis, le, that which tickleth or pleſantly moueth one.
                  
                     Prolepſis, a fygure in ſpeakyng, where we doo preuente, to diſſolue by reaſon that, whyche we thynke to be in the opinion of our aduerſary, or of the iudge.
                  
                     Proles, iſſue or fruite of a mannes bodye. Alſo of a beaſte.
                  
                     Proletarii, amonge the Romains were they whiche for pouertie were not able to goo to the warres: and therfore they were lefte at home to gette chylderne.
                  
                     Prolibo, are, to taſt, or to ſacrifice afore.
                  
                     Prolicio, prolexi, olicere, to induce or drawe. Eius amor cupidā huc me per tenebras prolicit,
                     Plautus in Curcul. The loue of hym hathe drawen me hyther in the darke, beynge deſyrous of his company.
                  
                     Prolixé, lyberally, abundantly, at length.
                  
                     Prolixo, lixare, to make a thynge ſharpe in lengthe. Quare magnopere mouendus putator eſt,
                     Colum. 5. 
                     ut prolixet aciē ferramenti, & quā
                        tum poſsit, nouaculae ſimilem reddat, wherfore the cutter of the vyne oughte to be warned, that he make ſharpe in lengthe the pointe of the inſtrument, and as moch as he may, that he make it lyke to a raſer.
                  
                     Prolixus, a, um, longe, large, ſometyme 
                        ••
                     
                     perfluous.
                  
                     Prolixitas, & prolixitudo, length, largenes.
                  
                     Prolocutio, the fyrſte ſpeche or fyrſt entree into communication.Plautus
                  
                  
                     Prologium, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Prologus, a prologue.
                  
                     Prolongo, are, to prolonge, to deferre.
                  
                     Proloquium, the begynnynge of an oration or ſentence.Feſt
                           •
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Proloquor, queris, qui, to ſpeake at length, to telle a longe tale. Alſo to ſpeke before, to ſpeake that whyche we thynke, to declare our opynyon.
                  
                     Proludo, dere, to flouryſſhe, as muſytians doo, before they come to the principalle mattier: and as fence men doo with the ſworde or the two handſtaffe.
                  
                     Prolugeo, xi, gêre, to mourne longer than hath ben accuſtomed.
                  
                     Proluo, ere, to waſſhe moche, to drowne or ſurrounde.
                  
                     Proluuies, the fylthe or ordure, whyche is waſhed of any thynge.
                  
                     Proluuium, idem. Alſo prodigalitie.
                  
                     Promellere, to promote or ſette forth ſuit
                        •
                      in the lawe.
                  
                     Promercalia, thynges ſet forth to be ſolde, ſpecially that whiche is ſolde by retaylle. Promercale aurum, golde ſolde in ſuche wyſe, that beſydes the iuſte value, ſo moche golde remayneth to the ſeller, as may ſerue to his propre vſe, as our nobles and royalles ſolde beyonde the ſee at a greatter price than they be valewed at here in this royalme.
                  
                     Promercor, caris, cari, to bie thynges good cheape, to the intent to ſell them deere, to bye at the fyrſt hand, to ſel them at retail.
                  
                     Promereo, rui, rere, to deſerue.
                  
                     Promereor, reri, idem, Alſo to bynde oone by his actes to do for hym. Alſo to helpe, to profytte.
                  
                     Promereri de aliquo, to doo a man a good tourne.
                  
                     Promerens, tis, he that dothe pleaſure or ſeruyce.Plautus in Aſ
                           •
                        ua
                           •
                        . 
                     Promerenti optime hoccine preth redditur? He that hathe done verye good ſeruyce, ſhall he haue this rewarde for his laboure?
                  
                     Promeritum, deſerte.
                  
                     Promeneruar, olde writers vſed for monet,Feſt
                           ••
                        . he exhorteth or warneth.
                  
                     Prometheus, he that fyrſt found and taught aſtronomie in Aſſiria, and alſo the craft to make ymages of erthe.
                  
                     Promieo, are, to extend or ſet out at length.
                  
                     Promiuenter, at lengthe.
                  
                     Prominentia, the extendynge or ſettynge

out at lengthe.
                  
                     Promineo, nui, nere, to appiere farre of.
                  
                     Feſtus.
                     Promiſcam, olde wryters dyd vſe for promiſcue.
                  
                     Promiſceo, cui, feére, to mengle togyther.
                  
                     Promiſcue, one with an other, myxte.
                  
                     Promiſcuus, ſcua, ſcuum, confuſed, myngled one with an nother.
                  
                     Promiſſa batha, a longe berde.
                  
                     Promiſſe, longe, in lengthe.
                  
                     Promiſsio, a promyſe.
                  
                     Promiſſor, he that promyſeth.
                  
                     Promiſſum, a promyſe.
                  
                     Vide cōp.
                     Promitio, miſt, mittere, to promyſe, to lette growe in lengthe. Alſo to thretten.
                  
                     Promo, prompſi, mere, to ſpeake out, to tel, to take out of a coffer or other lyke thyng.
                  
                     Promontorium, a mountayne or high place of a lande or countrey, whyche lyeth as it were an elbowe into the ſee warde.
                  
                     Promptaria cella, a priſon from whens men be brought to be whipped or hanged.
                  
                     Promptarius, a, um, that frome whens any thynge is brought or taken:
                  
                     Promptarium, & promptuarium, a ſtoorehowſe.
                  
                     Prompté, promptly, redylye.
                  
                     Promptior, more prompte or redy.
                  
                     Promptitudo, promptneſſe.
                  
                     Plautus in 
                           •
                        acch. & in Pſ
                           •
                        udolo.
                     Prompto, tare, to brynge often forthe.
                  
                     Promptus, ta, tum, prompte, redye to doo a thyng without tarſeng. alſo redy. Promptum ingenium, A redye wytte. Res eſt in promptu, The thynge is redy. alſo manyfeſte. In promptu res eſt, The thynge is manyfeſte.
                  
                     
                        Promul
                              •
                           o nauis agitur,
                      the ſhyppe is drawen with a bote.
                  
                     Promulgator, & ꝓmulgatrix, he or ſhe that dothe publyſhe a thynge.
                  
                     Promulgo, gare, to publyſhe.
                  
                     Promulgatio, a publycation.
                  
                     
                        Promul
                              •
                           is, idis, Mede,
                      made with water and hony.
                  
                     Promurale, a countermure, one wall without out an nother.
                  
                     Promus, he that hath the kepynge of the ſtoorehouſe or drie larder.
                  
                     Pronepos, poris, & proneptis, my ſonnes or daughters ſonne or daughter.
                  
                     Proné, redyly▪
                  
                  
                     Pronis, olde writers vſed for prona, proſtrate or on the grounde.
                  
                     Pronomen, a pronowne.
                  
                     Pronuba, ſhe that attendeth on the bryde, and is houſewyfe durynge the feaſte.
                  
                     Pronabo, nupſi, pronubere, to haue a rule in weddinges or ioynynge of couples.
                  
                     Pronubus, he that leadeth the bryde home to her huſbandes houſe, and hath the ſurueyenge of the houſe, durynge the tyme of the ſolemniſation.
                  
                     Pronubus, he that dothe celebrate the ſolemnitie in mariage, it may be nowe taken for the prieſte, whiche dothe myniſter the ſolemne wordes of matrimonye.
                  
                     
                        Pronuntiat
                              •
                           o,
                      a pronunciation or vtterance of ſpeeche.
                  
                     Pronuntiatum, a ſtatute.Plautus in Trin.
                  
                  
                     Pronuntio, are, to pronounce, to declare openly, to gyue ſentence, to ſaye.
                  
                     Pronuper, longe agone.
                  
                     Pronurus, the wyfe of my ſonnes ſonne, or daughters ſonne.
                  
                     Pronus, redy, inclyned, ſtowpinge downe, nygh hande.
                  
                     Prooemium, a proheme or begynnynge of a marrier.
                  
                     Propago, gare, to ſprede as a tree dothe on the toppe, to make to ſpreade, to ſende farre of.
                  
                     Propagatio, a ſpreadynge.
                  
                     Propages, a longe rewe.
                  
                     Propago, ginis, an olde vyne ſpred in many braunches. Sometyme it ſygnifyeth kynde or generation.
                  
                     Propalam, openly, clerely in the ſyghte of all menne.
                  
                     Propalo, lare, to telle abroode, to growe in lengthe.
                  
                     Propatruus, my gret grandfathers brother.
                  
                     Propatulum, wyde open.
                  
                     Prope, nygh, almooſte.
                  
                     Propediem, nowe euery day, ſhortly.
                  
                     Propello, propuli, pellere, to dryue or putte awaye, farre of.
                  
                     Propemodum, almoſte.
                  
                     Propendêre, to hange vp. Propēndere, to examyne or conſyder farre of.
                  
                     Propenſus, inclyned.
                  
                     Properè, quyckely, haſtily.
                  
                     Properatim, quyckely.
                  
                     Properanter, & properiter, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Properantia, & properatio, an approchyng.Catullus.
                  
                  
                     Properitas, the ſame amonge olde writers.
                  
                     Properus, a, um, quycke, ſodayne.
                  
                     Propero, rare, to go quyckely or haſtely, to ſay or do any thynge quyckely or haſtely.Feſtus.
                  
                  
                     Propetro, trare, to commande that a thyng be doone.
                  
                     Prophaſis, an excuſe.
                  
                     Proplieris, & prophetiſſa, a womanne prophete.
                  
                     Propheto, tare, to propheſye, to ſyng prayſes to god: ſomtyme it ſignifieth to preache or interprete.
                  
                     Propheta, a prophete, he that telleth thynges, whiche ſhall happen.
                  
                     
                     Prophetia, a prophecye.
                  
                     Propilo, are, to make ſharpe byfore.
                  
                     Propina, a place by the commune baynes, where after baynynge menne toke theyr refection.
                  
                     Propino, propinare, to drynke to an nother manne, to quafte, to brynge to, Sommetyme to gyue. Propino tibi ſalutem, I ſalute the.
                  
                     Propinator, a cuppe bearer.
                  
                     Propinquus, a neyghbour. Alſo a kynneſman, of alyaunce.
                  
                     Propinquitas, affynitie, alyaunce.
                  
                     Propinqué, nyghe.
                  
                     Propinquior, quius, nerer.
                  
                     Propitiabilis, le, that whiche is ſone bowed or inclyned to deſyres.
                  
                     Propitialis, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Propitiatio, ſacrifyce to appeaſe or pacyfye goddis diſpleaſure.
                  
                     Propitium, ſommetyme ſygnyfyeth veray deuoute or louynge.
                  
                     No. Mar.
                     
                        Propit
                              ••
                           ,
                      peaſyble men, or men ſoone appeaſed or ſatisfied.
                  
                     Propius, nerrer, or nerre.
                  
                     Proplaſtice, ces, the crafte to make mouldes, in the whiche any thynge is caſte or fourmed.
                  
                     Propingeon, the place in a bayne or hotte houſe, in the whyche fyre incloſed, ſendeth forth heate.
                  
                     Propitiatorium, a table ſette on the arke of the olde teſtament.
                  
                     Propitio, & propitior, ari, to appeaſe, or to make mercyfull, or fauourable.
                  
                     Propitius, pitia, tium, appeaſed, fauourable, mercyfulle.
                  
                     Propior, nerer.
                  
                     Propola, he that ſellyth any thynge at retayle, ſpecyally vyttayle, a hukſter.
                  
                     Propolis, a ſubburbes of a towne. It is alſo that whyche bees doo make at the entrie of the hyue, wherby colde and other annoyaunce is defended.
                  
                     Propono, propoſui, ponere, to purpoſe, to be aduyſed, to promyſe a pryce or reward for any notable acte, to ſette oute to the ſhewe.
                  
                     Propontis, a ſee betwene Grece and Aſie.
                  
                     Proportio, a proporcyon.
                  
                     Propoſitio, a matter pourpoſed to be dyſputed or reaſoned. It is alſo that, wherby we ſhewe generallye, whereof we wyll ſpeake.
                  
                     Propoſitum, a purpoſe.
                  
                     Propraetor, toris, he that was in the ſteede of Praetor, or Mayre.
                  
                     Proprié, proprely.
                  
                     Lucretius.
                     Propritim, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Proprietarius, a, um, whervnto the propretie of a thynge belongeth.
                  
                     Proprietas, propretie.
                  
                     Proprius, propria, prium, propre.
                  
                     Propter, for. Sommetyme nyghe. Alſoo at or in.
                  
                     Propterea, therfore.
                  
                     Proptoſis, a dyſeaſe, where the eyen meuyd with inflammation, doo falle oute of their places.
                  
                     Propudium, ſhame, diſhoneſtie. Alſoo the moſte abomynable vſe of lecherye, in an inconuenient fourme.
                  
                     Propugnaculum, a fortreſſe, a ſtrong hold.
                  
                     Propugnator, toris, a defendour.
                  
                     Propugno, are, to fyght farre of, to ſyghte valyauntly, to defende.
                  
                     Propulſator, he that reſyſteth a thynge, or dryueth any thynge away.
                  
                     Propulſo, are, to put of, to dryue away.
                  
                     Propyleum, a porche.
                  
                     Proquaeſtor, toris, he that exercyſeth the offyce of Queſtor in his abſence.
                  
                     Prora, the foreparte of a ſhyppe.
                  
                     Prorepo, prorepſi, prorepete, to creepe further.
                  
                     Proreta, he that hath the rule of the foreſhyppe or decke.
                  
                     Prorideo, ridere, to laugh afarre of.
                  
                     Proripio, pui, pere, to withdrawe or depart. ioyned with me or ſe, Domum ſe ex curia proripuit, He departed or withdrew hym homewarde from the courte.
                  
                     Prorito, tare, to prouoke.
                  
                     Prorogatio, a prolongynge or delayenge.
                  
                     Prorogo, gare, to prolonge.
                  
                     Prorſus, & prorſum, vtterly, alway, in any wyſe, ſtrayght towarde a place, ſurely.
                  
                     Prorſi, lymyttes in boundynge of landes directed into the eaſte.
                  
                     Prorumpo, rupi, rumpere, to breake forthe, to ſende forthe with vyolence, to leape or go out of a place with violēce, to braſt out
                  
                     Proruo, ruere, to dryue downe, or beate downe.
                  
                     Proſa, proſe, that whiche is not meter.
                  
                     Proſapia, a progenye, a dyſcente of blode, a petygree.
                  
                     Proſcenia, the place, wherein enterludes were played by the perſonages.
                  
                     Proſcindo, proſcidi, proſcindere, to cutte out or vnder, to infame, to rebuke ſhamefullye.
                  
                     Proſcribo, ſcripſi, ſcribere, to ſell openly, to proclayme any thynge to be ſolde, to banyſſhe, to condemne.
                  
                     Proſcriptio, a condemnation, an att
                        •
                     yndre.
                  
                     Proſcriptus, condemned, attaynted.
                  
                     Proſeco, care, to cut a ſonder.
                  
                     
                     Proſecta, bowelles cut in ſacrifice.
                  
                     Proſeda, a ſtrumpette or commune harlot.
                  
                     Proſedanum, a diſeaſe, which happeneth to Rammes at blyſomynge tyme.
                  
                     Proſelytus, a ſtraunger borne.
                  
                     Proſemino, are, to ſowe 
                        •
                     urth.
                  
                     Proſequium, an affection.
                  
                     Proſequor, qui, to folowe after, to purſue. Proſequor amore, I loue. Proſequor odio, I hat
                        •
                     . Proſequor honore, I honoure. Proſequor verbis, I 
                        •
                     ha
                        •
                     e him with wordes. Proſequor officijs, I ſhewe to hym great kyndneſſe, I do him many pleaſures. Proſequi praemio, to rewarde.
                  
                     Proſerpere, to creape or ſlyde furth lyke a ſerpent.
                  
                     Proſerpina, the wyfe of Pluto.
                  
                     Proſeuche, a prayer to God: alſoo a beggynge.Iuuen. No. Mar.
                  
                  
                     Proſeucha, a beggar.
                  
                     Prosferari, to be optayned.
                  
                     Proſicium, that whiche is cut of frome any thinge, and caſt awaye.
                  
                     Proſilio, lij, lire, to leape furth.
                  
                     Pl
                           •
                        
                        ▪ in epiſ. 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                     Proſocer, ceri, the father of my wyfes father.
                  
                     Proſitum, olde wrytars vſed for propoſitum purpoſed.
                  
                     Proſodia, the craft of accentinge.
                  
                     Proſonomaſia, the lykeneſſe of one worde or name to another: as locus and lucus, orator, and arator.
                  
                  
                     Proſopopoeia, where as perſonages are ſuppoſed or fayned to ſpeke, as one man to an other: a man to a beaſte: one beaſte to an other &c.
                  
                  
                     Proſpectus, ctus, a ſyght farre of, a proſpecte.
                  
                     Proſpectè, aduyſedly.
                  
                     Proſpecto, ſpectare, to beholde, proprely farre of.
                  
                     Proſperé, proſperouſly.
                  
                     Proſperiter, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Proſperitas, proſperitie.
                  
                     Proſpica, & Proſpicus, he that beholdeth a thinge farre of.
                  
                     
                        Proſpices, for proſpice,
                      beholde.
                  
                     Feſtus.
                     Proſpiro, are, to fetche breth or wynde.
                  
                     Proſper, & proſperus, proſperi, proſpero, that which geueth felycitye. Felix, he that receyueth it.
                  
                     Proſpicientia, prouydence, circumſpection.
                  
                     Proſpicio, ſpexi, ſpicere, to ſee farre, to foreſee, to prouyde, to beware.
                  
                     Proſpicuus, circumſpect.
                  
                     Proſtaſis, preeminence.
                  
                     Proſtheſis, an addicion of a lettre: as gnatus, for natus.
                  
                     Proſterno, ſtraul, ſternere, to ouerthrowe, or to vaynquyſſhe in batayle.
                  
                     Proſtibulum, a commune brothelhouſe: alſo a commune harlot.
                  
                     Proſtibula, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Proſtituo, tuere, to be a commune harlot. Proſtituere pudiciriam, to be commune to al men or women in the acte of lechery.
                  
                     Proſto, tare, to ſtande ferre of, or afore: alſo to ſtande to be folde or hyred.
                  
                     Proſubigo, gere, to dygge deepe.
                  
                     Proſum, fui, deſſe, to be profitable.
                  
                     Proſumia, a lytle barke.
                  
                     Proſumirium, a place withoute the walles of Rome, where the byſſhoppes of the gentyles made their diuinations, or toke their ſignifications of thinges to come.
                  
                     Proſupero, are, to excede, or haue more than ynoughe.
                  
                     Protaſis, a propoſicion.Donatus.
                  
                  
                     Protego, texi, tegere, to defende.
                  
                     Protectio, a defence.
                  
                     Protector, toris, a defendour.
                  
                     Protentus, ta, tum, ſtretched oute.
                  
                     Protela, lare, to differre, or tracte the tyme, to put oute, to dryue awaye, to vexe.
                  
                     Protendo, dere, to ſet forth, or put forth, to ſtretche forthe.
                  
                     Protermino, to incroche.
                  
                     
                        Protero, triui, ter
                              •
                           re,
                      to trede downe.
                  
                     Proterreo, rere, to make aferde farre of.
                  
                     Proteruia, wantonneſſe: it was alſo a ſacrifice, wherein the maner was, that as moch as was left vneaten, ſhulde be conſumed with fyre.
                  
                     Proteruiam fecit, he hath conſumed all that is lefte.
                  
                     Proteruio, ire, to playe the wanton.
                  
                     Proteruè, proudely, immoderatly,Plautus in Ruden. ſhamefully. Quis eſt, qui tam proteruè, foribus facit iniu
                           •
                        iam: who is he, that ſo proudely rappeth at the doore? Ecce au
                           •
                        em tu quo
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         proterue iracundus es, Lo and thou alſo arte ſhamefully angry.
                  
                     Proteruiter, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Proteruitas, tatis, pryde, foly.
                  
                     Proteus, the ſonne of Occanus, a iugglar, whyche coulde ſhewe hym ſelfe in ſondry fourmes.
                  
                     Proteſtor, ſtaris, ſtari, to declare manyfeſtly. what ſhulde be exchued and not done.
                  
                     Proteſtator, he that manifeſtly declareth, what is to be exchued and not done.
                  
                     Proteſtatio, a proteſtation.
                  
                     
                        Protina, for protinus,
                      furthwith.
                  
                     Proteruus, a, um, wanton, malaperte, ſhameleſſe, and (as I mought ſaye) knauyſſhe▪ or lewde.
                  
                     Protinus, a farre of▪ Alſo forthewith, without taryenge.
                  
                     
                     Prothymia, promptitude: alſo gentyll entertaynement.Plautus in Seye. 
                     Proh Di immortales quot ego voluptates fero, quot riſiones, quot iocos, quot fuauia, ſaltationes, blanditias, prothymias? O lorde god, howe many pleaſures haue I, what lawghingis, what paſtymes, what baſſinges, daunſinges, daliaunces, & ſwete entertaynementes?
                  
                     Prothyrum, a porche at the vtter doore of a houſe.
                  
                     Protipon opus, an image or fourme, wherof mouldes are made, in the whiche thinges be caſt of metall or erthe.
                  
                     Protogenes, of the firſt kynred or famylyrit was alſo the name of an excellent paynter.
                  
                     Protocollum, that whiche is firſte made or writen, which requireth correction.
                  
                     Protogenus, the firſt childe.
                  
                     Protogenia, the daughter of Deucalion and Pirrha.
                  
                     Protologia, a preface.
                  
                     Protollo, lere, to prolonge.
                  
                     Protomartyr, the firſt martyr.
                  
                     Protomedicus, the chief phiſicion aboute a Prince.
                  
                     Protomyſta, the chief preeſt, or deane.
                  
                     Protonotatiꝰ, a protonotary, or chief ſcribe or Secretary.
                  
                     Protopages, & Protopagus, firſte made or wrought, or late made.
                  
                     
                        Protoplaſ
                              •
                           es, & Protoplaſtus,
                      firſt fourmed ſo was Adam called.
                  
                     Protos, Proton, firſt.
                  
                     Prototocos, a woman late bringynge forth her firſt childe.
                  
                     Prototomus, the ſtalke which is firſt cut.
                  
                     Prototypus, & prototypon, the firſt exēple, or paterne.
                  
                     Protraho, traxi, trahere, to differe or prolonge.
                  
                     Protrepticus, a boke to inſtructe one, a doctrinall.
                  
                     Protrimenta, meate mynced ſmall.
                  
                     
                        Proueho, uexi, u
                              •
                           here,
                      to brynge or cary further.
                  
                     Prouectus aetate, aged.
                  
                     Prouectum ingenium, a longe proued wytte: alſo to promote, aduaunce.
                  
                     Prouectus ad dignitatem, promoted or aduaunced to honour.
                  
                     Prouectus aetate, runne farre in yeres.
                  
                     Prouectus, ta, tum, promoted.
                  
                     Prouectus, aged.
                  
                     Prouenio, ire, to come forth: alſoo to growe or increaſe,Plautus in Menech. to happen or chaunce. Nimis prouentum eſt nequiter, It is vngraciouſly chaunced.
                  
                     Prouentus, tus, reuenues, yerely profytes.
                  
                     Prouerbe, diligently.
                  
                     Prouerbium, a prouerbe.
                  
                     Prouide, circumſpectely.
                  
                     Prouideo, dere, to prouyde, to foreſee, to beware.
                  
                     Prouidentia, prouidence, foreſight:Cice. & Quint. ſomtyme it is vſed for god.
                  
                     Prouidus, prouident, circumſpect.
                  
                     Prouinciae, were countrayes, which the Romans gate farre frome Rome, where only their officers did rule. Prouincia is ſomtyme taken for the rule or autoritye of an officer: alſo an office, alſoo for a countraye or royaulme.
                  
                     Prouincialis, he that dwelleth in a prouince.
                  
                     Prouinciatim, frome countray to countray, or one countraye with another.
                  
                     Prouiſo, prouiſere, to ſee or beholde, to goo to ſee.
                  
                     Prouidens, uidentis, foreſeynge, prouident.
                  
                     Prouidentior, dentiſsimus, more prouident, mooſt prouident or circumſpect.
                  
                     Prouocator, he that prouoketh one, or he that appeleth, the appellant.
                  
                     Prouoco, care, to call from a farre, to ſtere, to inuite, to prouoke, to exhorte, alſo to appele to an hygher iuge.
                  
                     Prouocatio, an appele to an hygher court.
                  
                     Prouolo, are, to flye awaye, or beyonde, alſo to runne frome aferre.
                  
                     Prouoluo, uere, to rolle or tumble a greate ſtone or other lyke thinge: ſometyme to lye downe proſtrate.
                  
                     
                        Prout, for Sicut,
                      as,
                  
                     Proxeneta, a brokar.Feſtu
                           •
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Prox, of olde wrytars was taken for Proba vox, a good voyce or noyſe.
                  
                     Proximo, proximare, to approche or drawe nyghe.
                  
                     
                        Proxim
                              •
                           rium,
                      a place withoute the walles, ioyninge to the cytie, where byſſhoppes dyd aſſemble in their conuocations.
                  
                     Proxime, next.Cato.
                  
                  
                     
                        Proximi, for proximo: die proximi,
                      the next daye.
                  
                     Proximitas, nygheneſſe, neyghbourhede.
                  
                     Proximior, more nere.
                  
                     Proximus, a, um, nexte.
                  
                     Prouulgo, aui, are, to publyſſhe, or declare openly to the people.
                  
                     Prudenter, wyſely.
                  
                     Prudens, prudentis, wyſe, prudente, knowynge.
                  
                     Prudentia, wyſedome in deſiringe and exchuynge of thynges.
                  
                     Prugnum, olde wrytars vſed for Pronum, prone or apte.
                  
                     Pruina, froſt.
                  
                     Pruna, a burnynge cole.
                  
                     Prunioli, ſmalle muſſherons.
                  
                     
                     Pruinoſus, a, um, froſty.
                  
                     Prunerum, an orcharde ſette with damlyne trees, or plumme trees.
                  
                     Prunus, a damlyne tree or plumme tree.
                  
                     Prunum, a 
                        •
                     ſyne, prune, plumme, ſlo, or bullaſe.
                  
                     Prurio, rij, rire, to yche.
                  
                     Pruritus, rus, ychinge.
                  
                     
                        Prutigo, gli
                              ••
                           s,
                      ychinge with a delectation, as in the ſterynge of lechery.
                  
                     Pruſias, a kynge of Bythin
                        •
                     a, vnto whome Hanniball fledde after that he was banyſſhed frome Carthage.
                  
                     Prymneſtus, a poſt or ſtake, where vnto the cabull of a ſhyp is tyed.
                  
                     Prymnos, a nymphe or mayden of the ſee, one of the dawghters of Oceanus.
                  
                     Prytaneium, a counſayle houſe.
                  
                     Prytaneia, a counſayle aſſembled of great of fleers and iuges.
                  
                     Prytanis, the preſident or chief of the counſayle.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶ P. ANTE S.
                  
                     PSallo, li, lere, to ſynge.
                  
                     Pſalmodia, a dyuerſe or mixt ſonge.
                  
                     Pſalmus, a ſonge proprely to god, or of God.
                  
                     Pſalterium, an inſtrument lyke to a harp, alſo the Pſalmes called the Pſalter.
                  
                     Pſaltes, a ſyngynge man.
                  
                     Pſaltrix, tricis, & Pſaltria, a ſyngynge woman.
                  
                     Pſecas, adis, a drop.
                  
                     Pſegma, the pouldre or duſt, which cometh of the fylynge of braſſe.
                  
                     Pſellus, the name of an olde writar, whiche wrote of diete.
                  
                     Pſephiſma, atis, a decree.
                  
                     Pſephopecta, an auditour or caſter of accompte.
                  
                     Pſeudoadelphus, a counterfayt brother.
                  
                     Pſeudoangelus, a falſe meſſager.
                  
                     Pſeudolus, a falſe ſeruaunt.
                  
                     Pſeudo martyr, a falſe wytneſſe.
                  
                     Pſeudoprophera, a falſe prophete.
                  
                     Pſeudothyrum, a faulſe poſterne.
                  
                     Pſeudo, falſe or countrefait: and euery other nowne ioyned therewith, is thereby made falſe or countrefayt: as Pſeudopropheta, a falſe or countrefayt Prophete.
                  
                     
                        Pſ
                              •
                           lotrum,
                      an oynement to take awaye heares.
                  
                     Pſimmithium, that which we do call Ceruſe or whyte ledde.
                  
                     Pſitta, a fyſſhe, whyche we call a playce.
                  
                     Pſtracus, a popyn
                        •
                     ay.
                  
                     Pſycolutres, he that delyteth to bathe in colde water.
                  
                     Pſycomantium, a place where Nigromance is do call vp ſpirites.
                  
                     Pſora, ſcabbydneſſe▪
                  
                  
                     Pſylli, people in 
                        •
                     ibia, whoſe bodyes are v
                        •
                     enyme to ſe
                        •
                      pe
                        •
                     e
                        •
                     : and they alſo do cure the ſlyngynge and poyſonynge of ſerpentes by ſoukynge the place, whyche is venymed.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶ P. ANTE T.
                  
                     PTe, a ſyllable ioyned oftentymes to the ablatyne caſe, as meapre, tuapte, ſuapte, myne owne, thyne owne, his owne.
                  
                     Pteris, ferne.
                  
                     Pteromata, greate arches ouer the roofes made lyke wynges.
                  
                     Pretigium, a lytle ſkynne, whyche groweth frome the corner of the eye, and keuereth the ſyght: it is alſoo a grief vnder the fore part of the nayle, whan the fleſh goeth frō the nayle with payne.
                  
                     Pterna, the lower part of a ſayle.
                  
                     Ptiſana, the water, wherin barly is ſoden, alſo barly huſked, or excorticar, alſo frumēty made of barly.
                  
                     
                        Ptyas, adis,
                        Pli. 28▪
                        
                      an adder hauynge the coloure greene, drawynge towarde the colour of golde.
                  
                     Ptynge, a rauenouſe byrde, whyche taketh his praye by nyghte: and ſometyme fyghteth with the Egle ſo valiantly, that in crab bynge togither, they fall both doune to the grounde, and are taken by Shepehardes.
                  
                     Ptyſis, is ſpettyll: it is alſoo an exulceration or ſoore in the lunges, with a conſumpcyon of all the bodye, and ſpettynge of bloode.
                  
                     Ptiſanarium, a morter, wherein barley is brayed.
                  
                     Ptochotrophia, an hoſpitall for beggars, a ſpyttell houſe.
                  
                     Ptolomeus, the name of kynges of Egypte.
                  
                     Ptoſis, ruy
                        •
                     e, alſo the caſe of a nowne.
                  
                     Ptolemais, maidis, the name of a citie.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶ P. ANTE V.
                  
                     PVbens, he that is betwene a yonge man and a boye, of the age of .xiiii. yeres.
                  
                     Pubereſco, ſcere, to growe as a childe doeth towarde mannes ſtare.
                  
                     Pubeo, es, & Pubeſco, ere, to begyn to haue a bearde benethe: ſometyme to ſprynge, as herbes done.
                  
                     Puber, beris, & Pubes, beris, a yonge moſy

bearde, whyche ſpryngeth in the nether partes of a man at .xiiii. yeres of age▪ of a woman at yonger yeres, wherfore a man or woman at thoſe yeres is called Pubes: ſometyme youth, or a multitude of yonge men: alſo the priuy partes of the body: alſo beynge an adiectif, it ſignifieth yonge or tender.
                  
                     Pubertas, the yonge age of men and womē, whan they begynne to be apte vnto generacion: it is alſo the firſt commynge forthe of beares aboute the pryucy membres.
                  
                     Publicani, were they whyche toke in ferme of the people of Rome the rentes and reuenues due to the cytie at a rent certayne.
                  
                     Publica ſacra, ſacrifice done for the people.
                  
                     Publica fides, a ſaulfe condute, a generall lycence.
                  
                     Publicanus, a fermour.
                  
                     Publice, & Publicitus, openly in the face of the worlde. Sumptus publice dati, his expenſes borne of the citie or towne.
                  
                     Publicola, a fauorar of the people: the whiche name was gyuen to Valerius, whiche was one of the firſt conſules of Rome.
                  
                     Publico, care, to publyſſhe, to manifeſte, to make openly knowen.
                  
                     Publicum conſilium, the commune counſayle.
                  
                     Publicus, ca, cum, commune, but more proprely, publike, that is to ſaye, pertaynynge to euery ſtate of the people ioyntly and ſeuerally: See the true definicion therof in my booke called the Gouernour.
                  
                     Publipor, poris, Publius boye, or ſeruaunt.
                  
                     Publius, the name of a Romane.
                  
                     Pucinum vinum, wyne growynge nyghe to the gulfe of Venice.
                  
                     Pudefio, fis, fieri, to be aſſhamed.
                  
                     Pudenda, the pryuy membres.
                  
                     Pudens, tis, ſhamefaſt.
                  
                     Pudenter, with ſhamefaſtneſſe, baſſhefully.
                  
                     Pudeo, dui, dere, to be aſſhamed.
                  
                     Pudet, pudebat, puduit, puditum eſt, to be aſſhamed.
                  
                     Pudibundè, ſhamefaſlly.
                  
                     Pudibundus, da, dum, ſhamefaſt.
                  
                     Pudicè, chaſtly, honeſtly.
                  
                     Pudicitia, chaſtytye, clenneſſe of lyuynge.
                  
                     Syluſtius in Cat.
                     Pudicitiā habere, to be violated in the acte of lechery.
                  
                     Cicer. pro Flac.
                     Puditum, aſſhamed. Nonne eſſet puditum, ſi hanc cauſam agerent ſeuere? had it not bene a ſhame, yf that they had purſuyd that mater rigorouſly?
                  
                     Pudicus, ca, cum, chaſte.
                  
                     Pudor, doris, a moderacion that letteth the mynde, that it do not any thinge wantonly, or diſhoneſtly, ſhamefaſtneſſe, to ſaye or do any thinge diſhoneſt.
                  
                     Puella, a wenche, in Cambrige ſhyre they cal her a modder.
                  
                     Puellaris, re, childiſſhe.
                  
                     Puellaſcere, to waxe yonge agayne, to be maydenly.
                  
                     Puellus, a lytle childe, a babe.
                  
                     Puer, a chylde, a boye: alſo a ſeruaunt.
                  
                     Puerilis, puerile, of a chylde, chyldyſſhe, or boyiſſhe.
                  
                     Puerilitas, a chyldes acte, chyldyſſheneſſe, boyiſheneſſe.
                  
                     Pueritia, chyldehode.
                  
                     Puerpera, a woman that lyeth in of chylde.
                  
                     Puerperium, the tyme of a womanne to trauayle of chylde, ſometyme the chylde, alſo the byrth.
                  
                     Pugil, a champyon.
                  
                     Pugillaris, & Pugillare, pluraliter Pugillares, a payre of tables to wryte in.
                  
                     Pugillatorius follis, a ball fylled onely with wynde, which is ſtryken with a mans fiſte, and not with the palme.
                  
                     Pugiunculus, a ſhort daggar.
                  
                     Pugillatus, wraſtlynge with colars.
                  
                     Pugillus, a handfull, in gatheringe of herbes or other lyke thynge.
                  
                     Pugio, onis, a daggar.
                  
                     Pugna, batayle, the acte of lechery: alſo an aſſault, a diſceyte.
                  
                     Pugnaciter, valyauntly in batayle.
                  
                     Pugnator toris, a fightar.
                  
                     Pugnax, nacis, a great fightar.
                  
                     Pugnatior, & Pugnaciſsimus, more or mooſt fightinge.
                  
                     Pugnicula, a ſkyrmyſſhe.
                  
                     Pugnitatiola, 
                     idem.
                     Feſtus. No. Mar.
                  
                  
                     Pugnitus, in batayle.
                  
                     Pugno, are, to fyght.
                  
                     Pugnus, a fyſt.Vide 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Pulcher, chra, chrum, fayre, ſtronge, good, talle.
                  
                     Pulcherrime, mooſt beautyfully.
                  
                     Pulcherrimus, a, um, fayreſt.
                  
                     Pulchralis, le, fayre.
                  
                     Pulchré, an aduerbe, ſignifyeth fayre,
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      beautyfully, well fauoredly: ſomtyme valiauntly, alſo wyſely: ſometyme it is put for valde. Ac dum accubabam, quam videbar mihi eſſe pulchrè ſobrius,
                     Terent. 
                           〈◊〉
                         Eunuch
                           •
                        . And whan I layde me downe, I thoughte my ſelfe to be very ſobre.
                  
                     Pulchellus, a fayre lytle one.
                  
                     Pulchellus puer, a fayre lytle boye.Ci. ad 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Pulchtior, oris, & Pulchrius, fayrer.
                  
                     Pulchritas, beautye.
                  
                     Pulchreſeo, ſcere, to be fayre.
                  
                     Pulchritudo, dinis, beaultye, talneſſe of perſonage.
                  
                     
                     Pulegium, an herbe callyd Peny royall.
                  
                     Pulex, licis, a flee.
                  
                     
                        Pul
                              •
                           einus, a, um,
                      of a flee.
                  
                     Pulicoſus, a, um, full of flees.
                  
                     Pullarius, the keper of chykens.
                  
                     Pullarus, a weſyll or Stote, whiche kylleth chyckens.
                  
                     Pullaſter, a yonge chycken.
                  
                     Pullatio, hatchynge of chyckens.
                  
                     Pullatus, a mourner. Somtyme a manne in poore apparayle, ſomtyme rude, vnlernid.
                  
                     Pulleſco, ſcere, to ſprynge or burgen.
                  
                     Pullicenus, a newe hatched chycken.
                  
                     Pullicies, a bryngynge forthe or hatchynge of chyckens. alſo the folynge of coltes.
                  
                     Pulligo, ginis, blackeneſſe.
                  
                     Pullinus, na, num, of a colte. Pullini dentes, coltes tethe, whiche be fyrſte caſte.
                  
                     Pullulatio, a ſpryngynge forthe of a thinge in growynge.
                  
                     Pullulaſco, ſcere, to bourgen.
                  
                     Pullulo, lare, to ſprynge, to come vp yonge.
                  
                     Pullus, yonge, tender, in all kynde lyuinge. alſo a colte or fole, alſo a chycken.
                  
                     Pullus, a, um, ruſſette, ſometyme blacke, but rather puke color, betwene ruſſet & black.
                  
                     Pulmentarium, potage made with fleſhe or fyſhe, as forced gruell, or coleyſe.
                  
                     Pulmentum, gruelle.
                  
                     Pulmo, the lunges or lyghtes.
                  
                     Pulmonarius, he that is diſeſid in the lūges.
                  
                     Pulmonaria, an herbe callyd Lungworte.
                  
                     Pulmonia, be certayne apples, whyche be called in ſome place a hundred ſhyllingis.
                  
                     Pulpa, a lyttell ſynewe lyke to a vayne.
                  
                     Pulpamentum, a delycate dyſhe or meate.
                  
                     Pulpitum, a hault pace or pulpyte.
                  
                     Puls, a meate made of meale, water, hony, cheeſe, and egges. It maye be taken for potage.
                  
                     Pulſatiles uenae, the poulſes of a manne or womanne.
                  
                     Pulſatus, ta, tum, ſtriken as a harpe or other inſtrument is, whyche hath ſtrynges.
                  
                     Pulſim, as a thynge were ſtryken.
                  
                     Pulſo, are, to beate, to ſtryke, to hurte, to play on a harpe, or other lyke inſtrument.
                  
                     Pulſare hoſtium, to knocke at the doore.
                  
                     Pulſus, the wreſte of the arme, wherto the had is ioyned▪ but it is more proprely the poulſe or ſtroke that the arteries or beatyng vaines do make, wherby the ſtrēgth or debilitie of the ſyckenes is knowen in touchynge them.
                  
                     Pultarius, a potage dyſhe.
                  
                     Pulto, tare, to beate at a doore.
                  
                     Pulticula, a lyttell potage.
                  
                     Pultiphagi, & pultiphagonides, greatte eaters of potage.
                  
                     Puluero, rare, to lay with douſt, to be duſty.
                  
                     Puluereſco, ſcere, to be tourned in to poulder or duſte.
                  
                     Puluerius, a, um, of poulder or duſte.
                  
                     Puluerulentus, ta, tum, full of duſte.Seruius.
                  
                  
                     Pulueratio, a layenge of fyne erthe aboute vynes.
                  
                     Puluinar, a bolſtar of a bedde. alſo a bedde whyche was wont to be made in temples, as it were for the goddis. It is taken ſomtyme for a temple. alſo a tabernacle, wherin an ymage ſtandeth.
                  
                     Puluinatus, ta, tum, ſofte as a pyllowe.
                  
                     Puluinus, a pyllowe, ſomtyme a fetherbed, alſo a cuſſhyn, alſo a bedde of herbes in a gardeyne, alſo grauelle, alſo an engyne, wherewith ſhyppes are broughte into the docke.
                  
                     Puluis, ueris, powlder, duſte.
                  
                     Puluiſculus, fyne pouder or duſte.
                  
                     Pumex, micis, a pomeyſe to make parchemente ſmoothe, alſo to take cleane oute ſpottes or letters.
                  
                     Pumico, care, to pomeyſe.
                  
                     Pumicoſus, a, um, lyke a pomeyſe.
                  
                     Pumigatio, pomeyſynge or polyſhynge.
                  
                     Pumigatus, ta, tum, pomayſed, or polyſſhed.
                  
                     Pumilis, lyttell in ſtature.
                  
                     Pumilio, onis, & pumillus, a dwarfe, or any thynge lyttell in ſtature.
                  
                     Punctim, foynynge.
                  
                     Punctus, ſeu punctum, a poynte or tytle.
                  
                     Punctus temporis, a moment, the leeſt part of tyme.
                  
                     Pungo, pupugi, pungere, to prycke.Vide cōp.
                  
                  
                     Punicus, a, um, of Affrica.
                  
                     Punicus, aut puniceus color, redde.
                  
                     Punicum malum, a pomegranate.
                  
                     Punio, iui, ire, to punyſhe.
                  
                     Punitio, punyſhement.
                  
                     Pupa, a yonge wenche, a gyrle, a modder. it is alſo a poppette, lyke a gyrle.
                  
                     Pupilla, the balle or apple of the eye.
                  
                     Pupillaris aetas, the noueage of hym that is in warde.
                  
                     Pupillus, he that is in warde, or within age not able in yeres to occupye his propre lande. Alſo he that hath no father alyue.
                  
                     Puppes, & puppis, the foreparte or decke of the ſhyppe.
                  
                     Pupus, a yonge chylde, a baby. alſo a poppette or ymage lyke a chylde.
                  
                     Pupugi, the pretertence of purgo, I haue pricked or pounched.
                  
                     Pure, purely. Puriter, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Purgamen, ſeu purgamentum, fylthe, whyche cometh of any thyng that is clenſed.
                  
                     Purgatio, a purgation or purgyng.
                  
                     Purgo, gare, to make cleane, to purge. alſo

to excuſe.
                  
                     Vide cōp.
                     Purifico, to puryfye, or make pure.
                  
                     Purificatio, a purifyenge.
                  
                     Purime, old wrytars vſed for puriſsime, moſt purely.
                  
                     Puritas, tatis, purenes, cleanneſſe.
                  
                     Puro, tare, to make pure.
                  
                     Purpura, a Purple, whiche is a ſhell fyſſhe. wherof purple colour commeth. ſomtime it ſignifieth a garment of purple.
                  
                     Purpurarius, a, um, pertaynynge to purple colour.
                  
                     Purpuraſco, ſcere, to be of purple colour.
                  
                     Purpuriſſum, idem quod purpuriſſa.
                  
                  
                     Purpureus, a, um, of purple colour.
                  
                     Purpuratus, apparayled in purple.
                  
                     Purpurati, be the noble men of a Royalme, callyd peeres.
                  
                     Purpuriſſa, redde payntynge, wherewith harlottes doo paynt their vyſages.
                  
                     Purpuriſſo, are, to paynte the viſage ruddy.
                  
                     Purulentus, lenta, lentum, full of matter, or corruption.
                  
                     Purus, ra, rum, cleane, pure, fyne.
                  
                     Pus, puris, matter, whyche commeth oute of a ſoore.
                  
                     Puſillanimis, faynt harted, feble couraged.
                  
                     Puſillanimitas, faynt courage, cowardyſe.
                  
                     Puſillanimiter, cowardly.
                  
                     Puſillus, a, um, lyttell.
                  
                     Puſio, a boye.
                  
                     Puſtula, a puſſhe or lyttell wheale.
                  
                     Puſulae, blyſtars, which do ryſe on bred whā it is baken.
                  
                     Puſum & Puſam, olde wrytars vſed for Pucrum & Puellam, a boye and a gyrle.
                  
                     Puſtulatum argentum, roughe ſyluer whan it is newe molten.
                  
                     Putamen, minis, the ſhale of a nutte, or parynge of an apple or peare.
                  
                     Puteal, the ſeate of a great offycer, alſo the couerynge of a welle.
                  
                     Putealis, & puteanus, a, um, of a welle.
                  
                     Puteanus, a, um, of a pytte or well.
                  
                     Puteana aqua, well water.
                  
                     Putearius, he that diggeth a pytte or well.
                  
                     Puteo, tui, têre, to ſtynke.
                  
                     Puteoli, a cytie in Campania.
                  
                     Puteus, a welle.
                  
                     Plautus.
                     Puticuli, places where the commune people was buryed.
                  
                     Putidus, da, dum, ſtynkynge, vnſauery, vnpleaſaunt.
                  
                     Putilatum aurum, pure or fyne golde.
                  
                     Putiſco, ſcere, to ſtynke.
                  
                     Putitius, a foole.
                  
                     Vide cōp.
                     Puto, taui, tare, to cutte of or plucke awaye. that, which is ſuperfluous, proprely from trees. Alſo to ſuppoſe, to conſyder, to diſcuſſe, to gather, or conferre, to eſteme, to iuge. Putare rationem, to make accompt.
                  
                     Putor, toris, ſtenche.
                  
                     Putrefacio, to make to ſtynke.
                  
                     
                        Putreo, tri
                              •
                           i, trere,
                      to waxe leane, to be reſolued into ſtynkynge matter.Vide cōp.
                  
                  
                     Putreſco, ſcere, to putrifye.Vide cōp.
                  
                  
                     Putris, tre, corrupte, rotten.
                  
                     Putridus, da, dum, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Putredo, dinis, corruption.
                  
                     Putulentum, ſtynkynge.
                  
                     Putus, ta, tum, pure, tryed, fyne.
                  
                     Purum putum, fyned.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶ P, ANTE Y.
                  
                     PYcnoſtylon, a houſe or place buylded, where pylars ſtande thicke togither.
                  
                     Pycta & Pyctes, a wraſtler with a cole
                        •
                     
                  
                  
                     Pyctatium, a table, wherein the names of Iuges were wryten.
                  
                     Pygargus, a beaſte lyke to a falowe deere: it is alſo a byrde lyke to a hawke, hauynge a whyte tayle, I ſuppoſe hym to be that, which we call a ryngetayle.
                  
                     Pygmachia, wraſtlynge with colars.
                  
                     Pygmachus, a wraſtler.
                  
                     Pygmaei, people betweene Inde and Cathay, which are but one cubyte longe.
                  
                     Pympleides, the muſis.
                  
                     Pyr, fyre.
                  
                     Pyra, a bonfyre, wherin deed bodyes were burned.
                  
                     Pyralis, a fly, which commeth of the fyre, & as longe as he is therin, he lyueth: & whā he is farre frome it, he dyeth incontinent.
                  
                     Pyragmon, one of the names of Vulcanus.
                  
                     Pyrama, a certayne roſen.
                  
                     Pyramus, a yonge man, whyche ſlewe hym ſelf for the loue of a maydē called Thiſbe
                        •
                      it is alſo a ryuer in Cilicia.
                  
                     Pyramis, midis, a great thynge of ſtone or other matter, whiche he is brode beneth, and vpwarde is ſmalle and ſharpe on the top.
                  
                     Pyratium, a kynde of Sydar, callyd Pery.
                  
                     Pyrauſta, a worme lyuynge in the fyre, It is alſo a kynde of ſpyders, whiche hurteth hony combes.
                  
                     Pyrenei montes, Mountaynes, whiche do dyuyde Fraunce from Spayne.
                  
                     Pyretrū, & pyretra, an herbe callid Pelitory.
                  
                     Pyretus, a burnynge feuer.
                  
                     Pyraeus, an hauen at Athenes.
                  
                     Pyrgobaris, a howſe buylded lyke a towar.
                  
                     Pyrgoteles, was a cūnyng grauer in ſtones.
                  
                     Pyrgus, in latyne a towar: alſo a boxe, oute of the which men do caſt dyſe, whan they playe: it is alſo a certayn company of horſmen in batayle.
                  
                     
                     Pyrgus, a boxe, oute of the whyche dyſe are throwen.
                  
                     Pyriaſis, a certayne playſter to aſſwage the burnynge of a feuer.
                  
                     Pyrim, a lytell kernell.
                  
                     Pyrites, euery ſtone, out of the whych fire may be ſtriken.
                  
                     Pyrobola, a ſmythes hammer, wherewith he beateth on hotte yron.
                  
                     Pyroboli, arowes or dartes, whiche ſende forthe fyre, whanne they be ſhotte or caſte, and do burne the thynge that they doo touche.
                  
                     Pyrobolarij, they whyche doo ſhoote ſuche dartes.
                  
                     Pyrocorax, a crowe with a redde bylle. I ſuppoſe it to be of the kynd, wherof cornyſhe chowghes are.
                  
                     Pyrodes, he that fyrſte ſtrake fyre out of a flynte. alſo a ſtone of fyry colour.
                  
                     Pyromantia, a dyuynation by fyre.
                  
                     Pyrrhicha, & pyrrhiches, a fourme of danſynge, with moche mouynge of the bodye and geſture, lyke to them whiche do ſyght in battayle.
                  
                     Pyrrhicarij, they that daunce in the fourme of daunſynge, called Pyrrhica.
                  
                  
                     Pyrrhichius, a foote in meter of two ſhorte ſyllables.
                  
                     Pyrrhus, in latyne Flauius, ſiue Rufus, he that hath a ruddy or fyrye vyſage, by the whyche name the ſonne of Achilles was calledde, and a kynge of Epyre was ſoo callyd, whyche dydde make warre to the Romaynes.
                  
                     Pyrum, a peare.
                  
                     Pyrus, a peare tree.
                  
                     Pythagoras, an excellente Phyloſopher, whoſe Phyloſophye was in myſtycalle ſentences, and alſoo in the Scyence of noumbers.
                  
                     Pythagoricus, he that was of the ſecte of Pythagoras. Pythagoriſta, idem.
                  
                  
                     Pythius, one of the names of Apollo.
                  
                     Pythia, thiorum, playes made in the honor of Apollo.
                  
                     Python, a Dragon, whyche was ſlayne by Apollo.
                  
                     Pythopolis, a cytie in Aſye, in that parte, whyche is callyd Myſia.
                  
                     Pytiſma, matis, a ſpyrtynge oute of ſmalle ſpyttelle.
                  
                     Pyxacantha, & Pyxacanthos, a Berberye tree.
                  
                     Pyxis, idis, a boxe.
                  
                     Pyxidicula, a lyttell boxe, proprely wherin medycines are putte.
                  
                     Pyxidatus, pyxidata, pyxidatum, made lyke a boxe.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     
                        QVA, whyche way, by what place.
                  
                     Quadātenus, vnto what parte.
                  
                     Quadi, people of Boeme, or Boemia, which dyd eate the fleſhe of horſes and wolfes.
                  
                     Quadra, a trencher, wheron meate is cut: ſometyme a lofe of breadde cutte ſquare.
                  
                     Quadragenarius, naria, narium, of fourtye yeres olde.
                  
                     Quadragenus, a, um, fourtye. Quadragena ſcuta, forty crownes.
                  
                     Quadrageſima, Lente.
                  
                     Quadrageſimus, a, um, the fourtyth.
                  
                     Quadragies, fortye tymes.
                  
                     Quadraginta, fortye.
                  
                     Quadrangulum, a fygure, hauynge fowre corners.
                  
                     Quadrangulus, a, um, foure cornerde.
                  
                     Quadrans, tis, a certayne coyne, whyche we may call a ferthynge: all be it proprely it is the quarterne of a pounde weight. Alſo it is the ſomme in accompte where the receyte and the expenſes do accorde.
                  
                     Quadrantal, a fygure ſquare lyke to a dyſe. Alſo a certayn meſure, contaynyng .xlviii. meaſures, callyd Sextarii.
                  
                     Quadrantaria, a harlotte that wyll company with a man for a ferthynge.
                  
                     Quadrata ſtatura, a meane or competente ſtature.
                  
                     Quadratura, a ſquare.
                  
                     Qudratus, ta, tum, foure ſquare.
                  
                     Quadricornium, hauynge foure hornes.
                  
                     Quadriduanus, a, um, of foure dayes contynuaunce.
                  
                     Quadriennis, foure yeres olde.
                  
                     Quadriformiter, in a ſquare.
                  
                     Quadrigati, certayne coyne, hauynge in them the prynte of a charyotte.
                  
                     Quadrilinguis, he that ſpeaketh fowre ſondrye languages.
                  
                     Quadrinatus, a chyld of foure yeres old.
                  
                     Quadrilibris, bre, that whyche dothe waye foure poundes.
                  
                     Quadringentenus, a, um, the four hundreth.
                  
                     Quadringenteſimus, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Quadringenties, foure hundred tymes.
                  
                     Quadringentuplus, a, um, foure hundred times ſo moche.
                  
                     Quadripartitó, in foure partes.
                  
                     Quadriduum, foure dayes.
                  
                     Quadriennium, foure yeres.
                  
                     Quadrifariam, on foure partes.
                  
                     Quadrifidus, da, dum, that whyche may be ſlytte in foure partes.
                  
                     Quadriformis, me, that is of foure dyuers

fourmes or facyons.
                  
                     Quadriga, a carte drawen with foure horſes. ſomtyme a carte horſe.
                  
                     Quadrigarius, a carter.
                  
                     Quadriiugi, foure beaſtes yoked togyther.
                  
                     Quadrilaterus, ra, rum, with foure ſydes.
                  
                     Quadrimembris, of foure partes.
                  
                     Quadrimus, & quadrimulus, a child of four yere olde.
                  
                     Quadringenta, & quadringenti, foure hundred.
                  
                     Quadrinoctium, foure nyghtes.
                  
                     Quadripartitor, tiri, to diuyde in foure.
                  
                     Quadriremis, a ſhyppe with foure rewes of oores, or with foure toppes.
                  
                     Quadriſyllabum, of foure ſyllables.
                  
                     
                        Quadri
                              ••
                           um,
                      where as foure wayes doo meete.
                  
                     Quadro, are, to brynge in ſquare, to conſente or agree.
                  
                     Quadrum, a fygure foure ſquare.
                  
                     Quadrupedantia, & quadrupedia, foure foted beaſtes.
                  
                     Quadrupedo, dare, to go on foure fete.
                  
                     Quadrupliciter, foure maner of wayes.
                  
                     Quadruplico, care, to double foure tymes, or to make a thynge foure tymes as moche as it was.
                  
                     
                        Quadr
                              ••
                           bs,
                      a cytie, vnto the whyche doo come, or are broughte all the people, beinge lefte in foure cities,
                        
                           •
                        eſtus by the whyche name the citie of Athenes was callyd of Actius the poete.
                  
                     Quadrus, a, um, ſquare.
                  
                     Quadrupes, quadrupedis, a beaſte hauynge foure feete.
                  
                     Quadruplatores, were they, whiche for accuſynge of other, hadde the fourth parte of the goodes of theym, that were condempned.
                  
                     Quadruplex, fowre double.
                  
                     Quadruplo, & quadruplor, ari, to appeache a man for to haue parte of his goodes.
                  
                     Quadruplum, foure tymes as moche.
                  
                     Plautus in capt. Ci in Ver. Ti. Liuius
                     Quae, the whyche woman or other female kynde.
                  
                     Quae malum, what a myſchiefe.
                  
                     Quaecun
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , all that, what ſoo euer.
                  
                     Quaerceus, a, um, of oke.
                  
                     Quercicus, ca, cum, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Quercus, cus, an oke.
                  
                     Quercerus, ra, rum, colde, with a ſhakynge, as in a feuer.
                  
                     Quaeritabundus, ſtu
                        •
                     s or dilygente in ſeekynge.
                  
                     Quaerere liberos, to gette chylderne.
                  
                     Quaerneus, & quernus, querna, num, of an oke.
                  
                     Vide c
                           •
                        m.
                     Quaero, quaeſiui, quaerere, to demaunde, to aſke, to get, to ſerche, to examyne.
                  
                     Quaerquetum, & quercetū, a groue of okes.
                  
                     Quaeritio, ritare, to ſeeke, ſerche, or inquyre dylygently.
                  
                     Quaeſitor, a iuſ
                        •
                     yce or commyſſyoner to inquire of crymes, defaultes,Aſ. pedia
                           •
                        . or abuſes agaynſte the lawe.
                  
                     Quaeſitio, an inquirie, an exaīation, a ſerch.
                  
                     Quaeſo, ſiui, ſere, to beſeche.
                  
                     Quaeſticulus, a lyttell gayne.
                  
                     Quaeſtio, a queſtyon.
                  
                     Queſtiuncula, a ſmalle or lyght queſtion.
                  
                     Quaeſtionarius, an examynour.
                  
                     Quaeſtor, toris, the treaſourer of the commune Treaſourye, a Treaſourer of the warres, a Lyeuetenaunt to the chyef capytayne in warres. Alſoo a Iuſtyce by Commyſſyon of Oyer and Determyner.
                  
                     Quaeſtores Parricidij, Iuſtyces to inquere, of treaſon, or murder. We maye calle the coroners by that name.
                  
                     Quaeſtores urbani, were as the chaumberlaynes of London be nowe.
                  
                     Quaeſtores aerarij, Offycers of the Receypte, as the Chaumberers and tellers be nowe.
                  
                     Quaeſtorius, quaeſtoria, ſtorium, pertaynyng to the receypte.
                  
                     Quaeſtorium, was ſuche a place as the eſchequer is.
                  
                     Quaeſtor aerarij, a generall receyuour: but it ſeemethe to be ſuche an offycer, as the eſchetour is nowe in Englande.
                  
                     Quaeſtorius, torij, he that hadde bene in the offyce of Queſtor.
                  
                     Quaeſtorius, a, um, that pertayneth to the offyce of Quaeſtor. Vir quaeſtorius, a man, whiche hath ben in that offyce.
                  
                     Quaeſtuariae artes, craftes, wherby men do gayne money.
                  
                     Quaeſtuoſus, a, um, of moche gayne, ſtudyous of greatte lucre.
                  
                     Quaeſtura, the offyce of Quaeſtor.
                  
                  
                     Quaeſtus, tus, gayne, wynnynge.
                  
                     Qualibet, where it lyketh the.
                  
                     Qualiſqualis, what ſo euer.
                  
                     Qualiſcun
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , ſuche as it was.
                  
                     Qualiter, in the facyon or fourme.
                  
                     Qualis, le, what, of what qualitie.
                  
                     Qualitates, qualytyes, as fowle, fayre, wyſe, foolyſſhe, ſtronge, weake, dylygente, ſlowe. &c.
                  
                     Quallus, a baſkette, oute of the whyche wyne runneth, whan it is preſſed: Alſoo a baſkette or hamper, in the whyche womenne doo putte their ſpyndelles, their bottomes of threede, and ſuche lyke thynges.
                  
                     
                     Quam, thanne, Sommetyme after that. Sommetyme byfore that. Pridi
                           •
                         quam occideretur, The day before that he was ſlayne. Quam bene, howe well? Quam fortiter, howe valyauntly. Alſo it is often ioyned with the ſuperlatiue degree, to make it more vehemente: as, Quampauciſsimi, As few as may be. Quam doctiſsimus, excellentely lerned. Somtyme it importeth as moche as veraye. Cum quo quam familiariſsimé uixerat, With whom he lyued very familyarly. Alſoo it ſygnfyeth as. Duplo accepit quam perdiderat, He receyued dowble as moche as he loſte.
                  
                     Quamlibet, quantumuis, quantūlibet, what ſoo euer.
                  
                     Quammox, as ſoone, ſodaynely.
                  
                     Quamobrem? wherfore? for what cauſe? what to doo?
                  
                     Quam pené, almooſte, hit lackydde but a lyttelle.
                  
                     Quamplures, howe manye, verye manye, a greatte ſorte.
                  
                     Quamplurimus, quāplurima, quamplurimū,
very moche.
                  
                     Quampridem, longe before.
                  
                     Quamprimum, very ſhortely or ſoone.
                  
                     Quamuis, & quanquam, althoughe. ſometyme for Quantumuis.
                  
                  
                     Quandiu, as longe, durynge the tyme.
                  
                     Quando, whan. alſo ſens that.
                  
                     Plautus in Amphi.
                     Quandogentium, whan.
                  
                     Quandudum, howe late ſens, howe longe agoo?
                  
                     Quanquam, all be it, all though.
                  
                     Quandoque, ſometyme.
                  
                     Quandoquidem, for as moche as.
                  
                     Quanti, for howe moche, of what pryce or valewe.
                  
                     Quantillus, & quantulus, a, um, howe lyttell or ſmalle.
                  
                     Quantillum, howe lyttell.
                  
                     Quantitas, quantitie.
                  
                     Quanto, howe moche.
                  
                     Quantiſper, how longe.
                  
                     Quantus, quanta, quantum, howe moche, whyche is referred to noumbre, weight, and meaſure.
                  
                     Quantum, howe moche, as to, as concernynge. Quantum intelligo, as farre as I vnderſtande. Quantum ſuſpicor, as farre as I ſuppoſe. Alſo, accordynge as. Id de imperatore Romano, quantum euentus poſtea praedictum patuit Iudaei ad ſe trahentes, rebellarunt, The Iewes gatherynge that of the Emperoure, accordynge as the thynge, whyche was afore ſhewed of that whyche ſhoulde happen, appered afterwarde, made rebellyon.
                  
                     Quantū potes, in al ſpede that thou mayſte.
                  
                     Quantuſcun
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , howe moche, or howe many ſoo euer it be.
                  
                     Quantuſliber, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Quantuſquantus, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Quanuis, all be it, all though.
                  
                     
                        Quanuis, for ualdé.
                     
                  
                  
                     Quapropter, wherfore.
                  
                     Quaquauerſus, & quaquauerſum, on euerye ſyde.
                  
                     Quaqua, on euery ſyde.Plautus in Epid.
                  
                  
                     Quare, wherfore.
                  
                     Quarto, & quartum, the fowrthe tyme. All be hit proprelye Quarto ſygnifyethe the fourthe in order, as Quarto Conſul, he that hadde three in the offyce afore hym. Quartum Conſul, he that hath ben the fourthe tyme Conſul.
                  
                     Quartana, a feuer quartayne.
                  
                     Quartanarius, he that hathe a quartayne Feeuer.
                  
                     Quartarius, a Mulettour or keper of mules, whiche taketh but the fourthe parte of the wages or gayne.
                  
                     Quartuſdecimus, the fouretenthe.
                  
                     Quartus, ta, tum, the fourthe.
                  
                     Quaſi, Lyke as. Amas me quaſi filium, Thou loueſt me, as yf I were thy ſonne. Alſoo, as who ſaythe, as thowghe. Tu obiicis, quod uxorem repudiauerim, quaſi tu idem non feceris, Thou imbraydeſt me, that I haue forſaken my wife, as who laythe, thou haſte not doone ſoo to.
                  
                     Quaſillum, a lyttell hamper.
                  
                     Quaſſabundus, he that ſhaketh or moueth his heade.Plautus.
                  
                  
                     Quaſſo, are, to ſhake moche or often, alſoo to breake.
                  
                     Quaſſus, & quaſſatus, quaſſata, ſatum, ſhaken, braſte.
                  
                     Quatefacio, cere, to make or cauſe to ſhake or moue.
                  
                     Quatenus, howe moche, to the intent. alſo for as moche, alſo howe.
                  
                     Quater, foure tymes.
                  
                     Quaterdecies, fouretene tymes.
                  
                     Quatergemini, foure chylderne atte oone bourdeyne.
                  
                     Quaternarius numerus, the nūbre of foure.
                  
                     Quaternio, quaternionis, a quayre as in a booke, a leafe beynge folded into fowre partes.
                  
                     Quaterni, foure.
                  
                     Quaternus, a, um, the fourthe.
                  
                     Quaternum denum, the foure tenthe.
                  
                     Quatinus, a coniunction, whyche ſygnifyeth for, for as moche.
                  
                     Quatio, quaſsi, quatere, to ſhaake a thynge.Vide com.
                     
alſo to vexe, to caſte out.
                  
                     Quatriduum, fowre dayes, the ſpaace of foure dayes.
                  
                     Quatuor, foure.
                  
                     Quartus, ta, tum, the fourthe.
                  
                     Quadruplus, quadrupla, quadruplum, foure dowble.
                  
                     Quae, for & ſygnyfyeth and. Alſo that is to ſaye.
                  
                     Quearah, a meaſure of the Iewes, containyng two ounces and .ii. drammes.
                  
                     Quentia, olde wryters vſyd for potentia, puiſſaunce, power.
                  
                     
                        Queis, for quibus.
                     
                  
                  
                     Queiſcum, for cum quibus, with whome.
                  
                     Quemadmodum, lyke as.
                  
                     Queo quis, quiui, quire, I maye.
                  
                     Quercus, cus, vel ci, an oke.
                  
                     Querceus, a, um, of an oke.
                  
                     Suetonius in caligula Ce
                           •••
                        . ult.
                     Quercicus, ca, cum, idem quod quernus.
                  
                  
                     Quercerus, ra, rum, quyuerynge or ſhakyng for colde. ſomtyme it was taken for great and greuous, as Feſtus ſayth.
                  
                     Quercetum, a groue of okes.
                  
                     Querela, & querimonia, a complaynt.
                  
                     Queribundus, a, um, lamentable.
                  
                     Quaerimoniarius, a complaynant.
                  
                     Quernus, na, num, of an oke.
                  
                     Querna folia, oken leaues.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         com.
                     Queror, quaeſtus ſum, quaeri, to lamente or complayne.
                  
                     Querquedula, a waterfowle callyd a teale.
                  
                     Quaerulus, la, lum, that which complaineth, or is full of complayntes. It is put ſome tyme of the Poetes for ſhrylle or lowde in ſyngynge.V
                           •
                        rgiliꝰ in georgie. 
                     Cicadae querulae, graſſehoppers, whyche doo ſynge lowde, or with a ſhrylle voyce.
                  
                     Quaeſitah, amonge the Iewes dydde ſygnifye a coyne, ſometyme a lambe, ſomme tyme a ſheepe.
                  
                     Quaeſtus, quaeſtus, a complaynte, a lamentation.
                  
                     ¶QVI, the whyche. Alſoo ſometyme it ſygnifyeth howe. Efficite, qui detur tibi, Doo what ye canne, howe or by whatte meanes thou mayſte haue hyr. Qui uocâre,
                     Plautus in Amph. Howe arte thou callyd? Alſoo yt ſygnyfyeth why. Dauo iſtuc dedam negoti.
                     Te
                           •
                        . in An. 
                     S. Non poteſt. P. Qui 
                           •
                         S. Quia habet aliud magis ex ſeſe. I wyll commytte th
                        •
                     e mattier to Dauy. S. That may not be. P. Why? S. For he hath an nother greatter mattier to doo for hym ſelfe. Alſoo it ſygnyfyeth frome whenſe. Qui iſtaec tibi incidit ſuſpectio?
                     Ter. in An. From whens is this ſuſpycion happened vnto the? Alſo it ſygnyfyeth wolde to God. Qui illum Di omnes perdiunt,
                     Terent. in Phorm. I pray god that a vengeaunce lyghte on hym. Alſoo yt ſygnyfyethe bycauſe.Terent▪ in prolo. An. 
                     Nam in prologis ſcribundis operam abutitur, non qui argumentum narret, ſed qui maleuoli uaeteris Poetae maledictis 
                           •
                        eſpondeat, For he ſpendethe his laboure in wrytynge of Prologues, not bycauſe he wyll telle the argumente, but for as moche as he wolde make aunſwere to the yuell reportes of the olde enuyouſe Poete. Alſoo it ſygnyfyeth Wherefore.Cice. T
                           ••
                        
                      
                     Qui enim beatior Epicurus, quod in patria uiuebat, quam Metrodorus, quod Athenis? Wherefore was Epycure moore happye, that he dydde dye in his countreye, than Metrodorus that he dyed at Athenes.
                  
                     Quia, for. Alſoo hit ſygnyfyeth that.Ci. de 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                        ▪
                      
                     Sed tamen recordatione noſtrae amicitiae ſic fruor, ut beatae uixiſſe uidear, quia cum Scipione uixerim, All be it I take this pleaſure in remembrynge oure frendeſhyp, that I maye ſeeme to haue lyued moſte fortunatelye, that I lyued in Scypyones companye. Alſoo it ſygnyfyeth for as moch.Saluſtias in Catil. 
                     Sed quia multis & magnis tempeſtatibus vos cognoui fortes, fidosque mihi, eo animus auſus eſt maximum atque pulcherrimum facinus incipere, But for as moch as in many great ſtormes or daungiers I haue proued you to be valyaunt, and faythefull vnto me, therfore my hart is bolde to begynne an excellent and commendable enterpriſe.
                  
                     Quia nam, wherfore.
                  
                     Quia ne, in dede.
                  
                     
                        Quias, quiatis, for cuius, cuiatis.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Quias, a, um, for cuius, a, um.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Quibus in extremis, for quorum in extremo. Literae dantur mihi a te, quibus in extremis ſcriptum eſt?
                      I receyued letters frome you, in the laſte ende of the whyche hit is wrytten.
                  
                     Quicquid eſt, all that is, what ſo euer it be, what ſo euer.
                  
                     Quicquid pauxillum, neuer ſo lyttell.Plautus in trucule
                           •
                        .
                  
                  
                     
                        Qui cum, for cum quo. Qui cum loquitur filius?
                      With whome dothe my ſonne talke?
                  
                     Quicunque, who ſoo euer.
                  
                     Quicquam, any thynge.
                  
                     Quid, What. Quid cauſae eſt? What is the cauſe? Quid aetatis? How olde? of what aege? Quid animi? What mynde?Plautus in mercarore 
                     Quid animi eſt? What mynde is he of? Quid captiuo
                           •
                        um? Howe manye pryſoners? Tum Captiuorum quid ducunt ſecum?
                     Plautus in Epidico. Thanne howe many pryſoners doo they bryng with them? Quid id ſit hominis, cui

Lyco nomen ſier?
                     Plautus in praulo. Terent. in Hea
                           ••
                        . What man is he, whoſe name maye be Lyco? Quid mulleris uxorem habes, What maner of woman haſte thou to thy wyfe? Quid rei eſt? What is the mattier. Ibo intro ut quid huſus ſit rei ſciam:
                     Terent. in Eunucho. I wyll goo in, that I may knowe what the mattier is▪ 
                     Quid rei eſt tibi cum illa, What haſte thou to doo with hyr?
                  
                     Terent. in Phorm. Plautus in Picudolo.
                     Quid ſententiae? what is his or thyn opinyon? Quid iſtue uerbi eſt? what meaneſt thou therby? Alſo quid is taken for Aliquid, ſomewhat. Alſo ob quid for what, or wherfore. Quid? ſenem quoad expectas ueſtrum.
                     Terent. in phormi. But nowe? how longe wyll ye tary for your maiſter? Note here that after the dayly forme of ſpeakynge, quid is reherſed,Donatus. whā we paſſe from one matter to an other. Quid mecum eſt tibi? what haue I to do with the? Quid faceret aliud? what ſhoulde he doo els? Quid eo, what to doo? Propere curre ad Pamphilum. P. Quid eo? D. Die me orate ut ueniat. Rūne quyckely to Pamphilus. P. what to do? D. Say that I prayed hym to come. Quid uerbis opus eſt?
                     Plautus. what nede manye wordes? Quid multa uerba, idem. Quid multis moror? what ſhall I longe tarie? Quid mea refert,
                     Cicero de 
                           ••
                        icitia. what care I? Alſo quid ſignifyeth wherin. Quid enim indigens Affricanus mei? wherin had Scipio any nede of me?Terent. in Iunucho. 
                     Quid iſtic? Si certum eſt facere, facias
                           •
                        uerum ne poſt conferas culpam in me, What woldeſte thou I ſhoulde doo? If thou be determyned to doo it, goo to on goddis name: but afterward put not the fault in me.
                  
                     Terent. in phorm.
                     Quidnam, what is hit, or wherfore is it?
                  
                     Quidnam ille commotus uenit? What is it that he commeth ſoo chaufed? Alſo it ſygnifieth what.Terent. in Eunucho. 
                     Reuiſo quidnam Chaerea hic rerum gerar, I come to ſe what Cherea doth here.
                  
                     Terent. in Heaut.
                     Quid ni, Why not? Quo ore appellabo parrem tenes, quid dicam? S. quidni, With what countenaunce ſhall I ſpeake to my father▪ Woteſt thou what I wyll ſay? S. Wherfore ſhuldeſt thou not do ſo? Alſo it ſignifyeth ye. Archimedem noſti? P. quid ni?
                     Terent. in Eunucho. Knoweſt thou Archimedes? P. ye mary doo I.
                  
                     Quidam, one, any man, in the plurell numbre it ſygnifieth ſome.
                  
                     Quid agimus, What ſhall we do?
                  
                     Quidem, an aduerbe, affyrmyng that, whiche ye ſpoken. Sommetyme yt ſygnyfyeth verylye. Sommetyme it hathe no ſygnyfycacyon, but ys oonely a dyſtinction of thynges: as, Ego quidem ſcribo, tu uero legis, Ille autem dormit, I doo wryte, thou reedyſt, he alſoo ſlepethe.
                  
                     
                        Quid ita, for Cur,
                      wherfore.
                  
                     Quidpiam, any thynge, or any wyſe.
                  
                     Quid quaeris, What wylt thou more? What nedeth any more wordes?
                  
                     
                        Quid rum deni
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                           , Quid ergo, quid 
                              •
                           um poliea, Quid ita
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                           , quid interea, quid demum,
                      all theſe doo ſygnifye, whereto ſpeakeſt thou this? What than, or what meaneſt thou hereby?
                  
                     Quieſcas, uel quieſce, Holde thy peace,Plautus in milite. Leaue.
                  
                     
                        Quieſcas caeter
                              •
                           ,
                      care not for the reſte.
                  
                     Quies, & quierudo, reſte, ea
                        •
                     e, ſlepe.
                  
                     Quieſco, quieui, quieſcere, To take reſte,Vide com.
to ceaſſe.
                  
                     Quietalis, was a name of Pluto, callydde god of Helle.
                  
                     Quietus, quieta, quietum, quyete, peaſible, in reſte.
                  
                     Quietus eſto, care not.
                  
                     Quilibet, cuiuslibet, cuilibet, who thou wilt. alſo it ſometyme ſignifieth vyle or baſe in eſtymacyon.
                  
                     Quidlibet, what I, thou, or he wyll.
                  
                     Quin, but, why not. Quin uenis, why commeſt thou not?
                  
                     Quin pergis, Why goſte thou not?Ter. in An.
                  
                  
                     Quin dic quid eſt, go to, tell me what it is.
                  
                     Quin, for etiam, alſoo. Pudet me. S.
                     Terent. in Heauton. 
                     Credo, neque id iniuria: quin mihi moleſtum, I am aſſhamed. S. I beleue, and not without a cauſe: And I am alſoo ſorye therfore. Quin taces?
                     Terent. in Andria. Wylte not thou holde thy peace. Alſo it ſygnyfyethe but yet, or but for all that. C. Perij. S. Quin tu animo bono es. C.Terent. in Adelp. I am vndoone. S. But for all that be thou of good cheere. Alſoo therfore. Quin tu uno uerbo dic, quid eſt quod me uelis, Therefore telle me atte oone worde, whatte thou woldeſt haue me doo.Plautus in Aulularia. Alſo more ouer, or that moore is. Quin, ipſi pridem tonſor ungues dempſerat, collegir, omnia abſtulit praeſegmina, And that more is, the other daye, the barbour paryd his nayles, he gathered the parynges togyther, and caryed them all away with hym.
                  
                     Quincunx, quincuncis, of fyue ounces. Alſoo the gayne of fyue in oone hundrede by exchaunge amongeſte Marchauntes. It was alſoo an order of ſettynge of trees in a gardeyne or orchard veraye exactelye, that whyche waye ſoo euer that a manne dydde looke, the trees ſtoode dyrectely oone agaynſte an nother.
                  
                     
                     Quinarius, a, um, the nombre of fiue. quinarius lapis, a ſtone of fyue pounde weyght.
                  
                     Quinarius, narij, was amonge the olde Romains their halfe peny, whiche was fyue pounde weight of braſſe, callyd As, It is two ſoulces of frenche money, whyche is of our money.
                  
                     Quincentum, of olde wryters was vſed for quingentum, fyue hundred.
                  
                     Quincuntialis, le, of fyue ynches.
                  
                     Quincuplex, cuplicis, fyue double, or fyue folde.
                  
                     Quincuplus, a um, fyue tymes ſo moche.
                  
                     Quindecies, fyftene tymes.
                  
                     Quindecim, fyuetene.
                  
                     Quindeceremis, a barge with fyftene cres.
                  
                     Quindecuplex, fyuetene double or folde.
                  
                     Quindecuplus, a, um, fyuetene tymes ſoo moche.
                  
                     Quindenus, a, um, the fyuetenthe.
                  
                     Saluſtius in Iugort.
                     Quin ergo, Wherfore then. Quin ergo quod iuuat, quod charū aeſtimant, id ſemper faciant, Wherfore than, what ſo euer lyketh them, that whiche ſemeth pleaſant vnto them, let them doo it as longe as it pleaſeth them.
                  
                     Quingeni & quingenti, fyue hundred.
                  
                     Quingentarius numerus, the noumbre of fyue hundred.
                  
                     Quingentenus, & quingenteſimus, the fyue hundrethe.
                  
                     Quingenties, fyue hundred tymes.
                  
                     Quingentuplus, a, um, fyue hunderde tymes ſo moche.
                  
                     Quinimo, but rather.
                  
                     Quinquagenarius, genaria, rium, of fyftie yeres olde.
                  
                     Quinquaginta, fyftye.
                  
                     Quinquagenus, a, um, of fyftie.
                  
                     Quinquageſimus, a, um, the fiftieth.
                  
                     Quinquagies, fyftye tymes.
                  
                     Quinquageſies, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Quinquangulus, a, um, fyue cornerde.
                  
                     Quinquatria, triorū, a feaſt dedicate to Pallas, whiche duryd fyue dayes.
                  
                     Quinquatrus dies, a feaſt ſo called, bycauſe it was after the fyfth Idus of Marche.
                  
                     Quinque folium, an herbe callid cynkfoyle, or fyue leauyd graſſe.
                  
                     Quinque, fyue.
                  
                     Quinquies, fyue tymes.
                  
                     Quinquemeſtris, tre, of fyue monethes.
                  
                     Quinquenalis, le, that whiche hapneth or is done euery fyfthe yere.
                  
                     Quinquennis, ne, of fyue yeres.
                  
                     Quinquennium, the ſpace of fyue yeres.
                  
                     Quinquepartior, tiris, tiri, to dyuyde in fyue partes.
                  
                     Quincupertitus, in fiue partes diuided.
                  
                     Quinquertium, the exercyſe of fyue ſondrye craftes.
                  
                     Quinquertiones, they whiche exerciſed fiue ſondry craftes.
                  
                     Quinqueremis, a barge with fyue oores, it may be nowe taken for a ſhyppe with fiue toppes, or with fyue ſayles.
                  
                     Quinqueuiratus, an office or auctorite, wherin fyue men were aſſociate.
                  
                     Quinqueuir, oone whiche is in the ſayde authoritie.
                  
                     Quintana porta, was a gate in the Campe, where the armye was lodged, whyche was the chiefe gate next to that whiche was called Praetoria, where the market was wont to be kepte.
                  
                     Quintus, ta, tum, the fifthe.
                  
                     Quintia porta, & quintia prata, was a gaate and medowes at Rome, whyche tooke their names of one Quintius, a noble cō
                     ſule of Rome.
                  
                     Quintilis menſis, the moneth of Iuly.
                  
                     Quintipor, tiporis, the boye or ſeruaunt of Quintus.
                  
                     Quintius, & Quintus, the names of dyuers Romaynes.
                  
                     Quintius, a, um, pertainyng to Quintius.
                  
                     Quinus, a, um, fyue: quini denarij, fiue pens.
                  
                     Quipoté, howe is it poſſible?
                  
                     Quippe, ſurely, foraſmoche.
                  
                     Quippini, why not.
                  
                     
                        Quire, for poſſe,
                      to maye.Plautus. in Mene.
                  
                  
                     Quirinalis collis, an hylle at Rome, where the temple of Romulus was ſette.
                  
                     Quirinalis porta, the gate next to that hyll.
                  
                     Quirinalia, orum, dayes, in the whyche men dydde ſacryfyce to Romulus, callydde Quirinus.
                  
                     Quirinus, a, um, of Romulus.
                  
                     Quiris, quiritis, a Romayne.
                  
                     Quirites, was a name, wherby the Romans were callyd of their fyrſte kynge Romulus, called Quirinus, as hit were Quirinus people.
                  
                     Quiritatus, ritatus, a crye of Romayne chylderne.
                  
                     Quirinus, was the name of Romulus, after that he was taken for a god.
                  
                     Quiritare, to crye out, to ſtyrre vp the Romayns with a crye.
                  
                     Quiſnam homo eſt, what man is that?
                  
                     Quiſputas, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Quiſquam, any manne. It is ſomtyme vſyd in the femynyne gender for any woman.
                  
                     Quiſquam gentium, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Quiſque, euery manne. Doctiſsimus quiſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , Euery welle lerned man. Decimus quiſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , Euery tenthe.
                  
                     Quiſquilie, arum pluraliter, be thoſe thynges

whyche in makynge cleane of a garden or orcharde, be caryed oute, as ſtickes, leues,
                        
                           ••
                        d At. 1 and weedes: it is vſed of Cicero for noughty men, the refuſe of all other.
                  
                     Quiſquilium, a lytle braunche of a kynde of holy, whyche beareth grayne, wherewith ſcarlet and crymſyn colours be made.
                  
                     Quiuis, in the genitiue caſe cuius cuius, who ſo euer.
                  
                     Quiuis, in the genitiue caſe cuiuſuis, any mā: one of them
                  
                     Quis, quae, quod, vel quid, who or what.
                  
                     Quis, is ſometyme taken for ſome man.
                  
                     Quiſpiam, ſome man.
                  
                     Quiſquis, who ſo euer.
                  
                     Terent. in Adelph.
                     Quó, whyther. Quó abis, whyther goeſt thou?
                  
                     Quo non. Perreptaui vſque omne oppidum, ad portam, ad locum, quo non? I went all the towne aboute, to the gate, to the lake, there is no place but that I was in it. Alſo it ſignifieth frome whenſe and where. Illuc quaeſo redi,
                     Terent. in 
                           ••
                        delph. 
                     quo coepiſti, I beſeche the tourne backe agayne, where thou beganneſt:Terent. in Eunucho. alſo, bycauſe. Non pol quó quenquàm plus amem, aut plus diligā, eo feci, In good fayth I dyd it not bycauſe I more louyd or fauored any man:Ter. in An. alſo, wherfore. Forma bona memini videre, quo aequior ſum Pamphilo, I remembre ſhe is well fauored, wherfore I am the leſſe diſpleaſed with Pamphilus.
                  
                     Quo gentium, whyther: alſo Quo, ſignifyeth,Plinius. that. Neque enim id feci, quo tibi moleſtus eſſem, Nor I dyd it not, that I wolde diſpleaſe you: alſo, to what purpoſe or vſe. Quo mihi fortunam, ſi non conceditur vti, For what purpoſe ſhall fortune ſerue, if I may not haue commoditie by it?
                  
                     Quoaxo, are, to crye lyke a frogge.
                  
                     Quoad, vntyl, as longe.
                  
                     Quoad eius, as moche as he maye.
                  
                     Ci. pro lege Agraria
                     Quoad quenque peruenit, aut peruenerit expraeda, ex manubijs, ex auro coronario? How moche of the praye or ſpoyle, garlandes or crownes of victours is comē, or ſhall come to any of your handes?
                  
                     Ci. de ora.
                     Quoad eius facere poſſum, as moche as I may do.
                  
                     Quoaduſque, vntyll.
                  
                     Quocirca, wherfore.
                  
                     Quod, that, wherein. Sed ſi quid ſit, quod mea opera opus ſit,
                     Terenti. 
                     aut tu plus vides quam ego, manebo, But yf there be any thynge, wherein ye ſhall haue nede of my ſeruice, or that ye perceyue more than I do, I will tary:Plautus in A
                           ••
                        nar. alſo it is put for Quem. Allenum hominem intromittar neminem, quod illa aut amicum, aut patronum nominer: She maye let in no man, whome ſhe will call derlyng,Plinius. or maſter. Nube grauida candicante, quod vocant tempeſtatem albam, grando imminebit: whan there doeth appiere a greate clowde, that waxeth whyte, whiche they call a whyte tempeſte, ye ſhall haue hayle ſhortly after: alſo it ſygnifyeth for as moch or bycauſe. Senatuſconſulta duo facta ſunt odioſa, quod in conſulem facta putantur,
                     Cice Atti. 
                     Catone & Domitio poſtulante: Two actes of counſayle were made very diſpleaſant, for as moche as they were ſuppoſed to be made, at the deſire of Domicius and Cato:Ter. in. 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      alſo it ſignifyeth but. Quod ſi quieſcem, nihil eueniſſet mali, But if I had let it alone, there hadde none yll happened, or it had bene well ynoughe: alſo, as moche.Cice. Te
                           •
                        
                      
                     Tu velim, quod cum commodo valetudinis tuae fiat quàm longiſsime poteris, obuiā nobis properes: I wolde that ye, as moche as maye be with the heithe of your perſone, make ſpeede to meete with vs, as farre frome home as ye can. Alſo it ſignifyeth why.Vergilius in 
                           •
                        uc. 
                     Si ad vitulam ſpectes, nihil eſt quod pocula laudes: If thou conſydereſt the caulf wel, there is no cauſe why thou ſhuldeſt prayſe ſo thy pottes.Cice. Ter. 
                     In uiam quod tedes hoc tempore, nihil eſt, There is no cauſe why thou ſhuldeſt take thy iournay at this tyme: Alſo it ſignifyeth wherfore.Hor. in ep. 
                     Quod te per genium, dextram
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , Deoſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         penates obſecro & obteſtor, vitae me redde priori: Wherfore I beſeche and praye the, for thy good aungelles ſake, and for the loue betwene the and me, and for the ſainctes which be thyn auouryes, reſtore me eftſones, to my fyrſt lyfe, or to the ſtate that I was in erſt.Ter. in Eu. Alſo it ſignifyeth, as to that. Sane quod tibi vir videatur eſſe, hic nebulo magnus eſt. As to that, that thou thynkeſt hym a man, ſurely he is a ſtourdy vagabunde.
                  
                     
                        Quod abſ
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            moleſtia fiat,
                        Cice. Sulp.
                      ſo that it be no diſpleaſure vnto you. Quare pergratum mihi feceris, ſi eum in amicitiam receperis, atque eum (quod abſque moleſtia fiat) ſi qua in re opus ei fuerit: Wherfore ye ſhall do me ſinguler pleaſure, if ye take hym into your fauour, and (ſo that it be no diſpleaſure vnto you) whan neede requyrethe, be good lorde or maſter vnto hym.
                  
                     Quod quidem, no that. Non nouiſti me? P.
                     Plautus in Epidico. 
                     quod quidem veniat in mentem. Doeſte thou not know me? P. No that I remembre me.
                  
                     Quodammodo, ſomewhat.Ci. de. am
                           ••
                        
                      
                     Quamobrem vt hi, qui ſuperiores ſunt, ſummittere ſe debent in amicitia, ſic quodammodo inferiores extollere, Wherfore lykewyſe as they, which are ſuperior in ſtate or degree, ſhuld humble

them ſelfes in frendſhyp, ſo they whiche are inferior ſhulde aduaunce and ſette them ſelfes forewarde.
                  
                     Quodcun
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , what ſo euer.
                  
                     
                        Quodcun
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            militum, for quotcunque milites. Vos hortor,
                        Cice. atti. 
                        vt quodcūque militum contrahere poteritis, contrahatis.
                      I aduyſe you, that as many ſouldiours as ye can gete, ye gather vnto you.
                  
                     Terent. in andria.
                     
                        Quominus, for Vt non. Si poterit fieri, vt ne pater per me ſtetiſſe credat, quo minus hae fierent nuptiae, volo:
                      If it may be brought to paſſe, that my father maye beleue, that it is not in my fault, that this mariage is not concluded, I am content.
                  
                     Quomodo, howe, by what reaſon, in what maner,Plautus in Aulul. Plautus in milite. Plautus in amph. by what meane. Quomodo tibi res ſe haber, Howe is the matter with the? Sed quomodo diſsimulabat? But in what maner dyd he diſſemble? Primulo diliculo abijſti ad legiones, By tyme in the mornynge thou wenteſt to the armye. Amph. Quomodo? In what maner or facion? alſo it ſignifieth wherfore.Plautus in 
                           〈◊〉
                        . 
                     Illa quidem nullū ſacrificabit. G. Quomodo? quid igitur me volt? She will doo no ſacrifyce. G. wherfore? what thynge wolde ſhe than with me?
                  
                     Plautus in 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                     Quomodocunque, howe ſo euer it be. Sed tamen quomodocun
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , quamquàm ſumus pauperculi, eſt domi quod edimus: Yet how ſo euer it be, thoughe we be poure folkes, we haue at home ſomewhat to eate.
                  
                     Quomodoliber, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Quondam, Sometyme, ones: ſignifyenge the tyme paſt,Virg. or tyme to come. Quondam tua dicere facta Tempus erit: The time ſhal be ones, whan thyne actes ſhall be declared. Alſoo it is put in the tyme preſent.
                  
                     Vergili.
                     Quondam etiam victis redit in precordia virtus, Ye, and in them that are vaynquyſſhed, ſometyme good courage eftſones imbracith their ſtomakes. Sometyme it ſignyfyeth allwaye. Vt quondam in ſtipulis magnus ſine viribus ignis, Lyke as in ſtubbyll or holme ſyre is allwaye greate without any puyſſaunce.
                  
                     Plautus in Trin.
                     Quonam, whyther, Eamus intro, ſequere. S. Quo tute agis? C. quonam, niſi domum. Let vs go in, folowe me. S. whyther wylt thou go? whyther ſhulde I goo but home to my houſe?
                  
                     Quoniam, for as moche as.
                  
                     Quo officio es? what is thyne office?
                  
                     Quopiam, any whyther. Itut
                           •
                        ne Thais quopiam es? Thais, wylte thou goo any whyther?
                  
                     Quoquam, any whyther.
                  
                     Quoque, alſo.
                  
                     Quoquo, whereſoeuer.
                  
                     Quoquo pacto, In any maner of wyſe.Ter. in A
                           •
                        . 
                     Tum ſi maxime fateatur, cum amet aliam, non eſt vtile hanc illi dari: qua propter quoquo pacto caelato eſt opus, Than yf he vtterly cō
                     feſſe it, for as moch as he loueth another, it were not conuenient, that he were maryed to this woman, therfore in any maner of wyſe, this thinge muſt be kept ſecrete.
                  
                     Quoquo modo, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Quo quouerſum, ſeu quoquouerſum, euery waye, on euerye parte. Eius imperio claſſem quo quouerſum dimittunt,
                     Caeſ. in. 
                           〈◊〉
                        . By his commaundement they dyſpeched the nauy in euery part. Rates duplices quoquouerſum pedibus triginta é regione ſolis collocabat: he lette ſhyppes double agaynſte the ſonne, thirty feete euery waye.
                  
                     Quorſum, ſeu quorſus, apud Plinium, whyther, to what place, or thinge.
                  
                     Quorſum iſtuc? to what purpoſe.
                  
                     Quot, how many.
                  
                     Quota pars, how ſmall a porcion.
                  
                     Quotanuis, yere by yere, euery yere.
                  
                     Quotennis? of what age? howe olde?
                  
                     Quot annos natus, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Quotenus, a, um, how many.
                  
                     
                        Quotidianae forma,
                        Ter. in 
                              〈◊〉
                           .
                      a commune beautye or facion, euery daye ſene.
                  
                     Quotidiani ſumptus, dayly expenſes.
                  
                     Quotidianus, quotidiana, quotidianum, a thynge that is or happeneth dayly or daye by daye.
                  
                     Quotidie, dayly, euery daye.
                  
                     Quoties, howe oftentymes.
                  
                     Quotieſcun
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , as often.
                  
                     Quotquot, as many.
                  
                     Quotuplex, how many ſortes.
                  
                     Quotuplus, howe moche in meaſure or wayght.
                  
                     Quotus, ta, tum, of what numbre, howe many, Hora quota eſt, what is it a clocke?Horatius. 
                     Dic quotus es? Telle howe many be of you.
                  
                     Quotas aedes dixerit, id ego admodum incerto ſcio: How many houſes he ſpake of, I am not well aſſertayned, or I remembre not well.
                  
                     Quotuſquiſque, how many.
                  
                     Quouis, whyther, or to what place ye wyll.
                  
                     Quouis genrium, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Quouſque, how longe, how farre.
                  
                     Quouſque tandem, how longe yet.
                  
                     Qur, & Quor, wherfore.
                  
                     Quum, ſeu qum, whan, in the whiche.
                  
                     Quum primum, as ſoone.
               
            
            
               
               
                  
                     
                        RAbia, olde wryt
                        •
                     rs vſed for Rabies.
                  
                  
                     Rabidus, da, dum, madde or woode, as a madde dogge.
                  
                     Rabies, madneſſe of a dogge.
                  
                     Rabioſus, a, um, madde or very angry, woode angry.
                  
                     Varro.
                     Rabio, bire, to be madde or woode as a dogge.
                  
                     Rabioſulus, a, um, ſomewhat madde.
                  
                     Rabula, one which is haſty or wilfull, in any cauſe, ianglynge, or full of wordes.
                  
                     Racemarius, a twygge of a vyne, out of the which the grapes do ſpringe.
                  
                     Racematio, the gatheringe of grapes after that the greate cluſters be gathered to make wyne, the glenynge of grapes.
                  
                     Racematus, ta, tum, that hath grapes.
                  
                     Racemoſus, full of grapes.
                  
                     Racemus, a grape or a cluſter of grapes.
                  
                     Racha, a reprochefull worde of Hebrewe, which ſignifyeth, thriftleſſe, braynleſſe, fynally it is a rebukefull worde ſygnifyenge the extreme ire of the perſonne that ſpeaketh it.
                  
                     Radicitus, frome the roote, or vppe by the roote, Radicitus euellere, to plucke vppe by the roote.
                  
                     Radico, care, to roote or take roote.
                  
                     Radicula, an herbe, the iuyce whereof is good to waſſhe woulle: alſo a lytle roote.
                  
                     Radio, are, to ſende forth beames lyke the ſunne.
                  
                     Radius, a beame of the ſun, or other bright ſterre, ſometyme of the eyes: alſo a rodde or yerde, that Geometricians haue to deſcribe lynes: alſo a wayuers ſhyttell, wherwith he throweth the yern in to the webbe alſo the ſpoke of a wheele, alſoo an inſtrument, wherwith meaſures be ſhauen: alſoo longe olyues or oyle beryes.
                  
                     Radix, dicis, a roote.
                  
                     Rado, ſi, dere, to ſhaue, or make ſmoothe, to cut or pull vp, to hurte, to rent, to offende, to fatigate. Aures delicatas radere, to offende or fatigate delicate eares.
                  
                     Radula, an inſtrument to ſhaue with.
                  
                     Radulanus, a, um, that whiche is ſhauen of, frome any thynge.
                  
                     Ragadia, & Ragades, cleftes or choppes in the fundament.
                  
                     Raia, a ſee fyſſhe called Raye or ſkete.
                  
                     Ralla, a thynne garment.
                  
                     Rallum, the ſtaffe, wherewith plowghmen in tyllynge do put the erthe frome their ſhare.
                  
                     Ramalis, le, a bowghe.
                  
                     Ramale, a ſeryd or deed bowghe.
                  
                     Ramentum, a lytle piece of any thynge.
                  
                     Rameus, a, um, that whyche is of a bowgh.
                  
                     Ramex, micis, a kynde of rupture, whan the bowels do fal downe into a mans coddes: alſo a rayle or barre, whiche goeth ouerthwart a pale or a gate.
                  
                     Ramicoſus, he that is broken.
                  
                     Ramnus, a whyte thorne.
                  
                     Ramulus, & Ramuſculus, a lytell bowghe.
                  
                     Ramus, a bowghe.
                  
                     Rana, a frogge: alſo a ſickeneſſe which doth anoy cartell.
                  
                     Rana Scriphia, is a prouerbe applyed to thē that canne not ſpeake in tyme conuenient.
                  
                     Ranceo, cere, to be mouldy or putrifyed.
                  
                     Rancidus, da, dum, rankled, mouldy, or putrifyed: alſo vnſauery, or vnpleaſaunt.
                  
                     Rancidulus, la, lum, a lytle mouldy or putryfyed.
                  
                     Rancor, oris, rancour, fylth.
                  
                     Randus, in olde tyme was taken for aes, braſſe.
                  
                     Randuſcula porta, the braſon gate.
                  
                     Rantum, in the olde tyme was a quartern
                        •
                      of a pounde.
                  
                     Ranunculus, a lytell frogge, or froſſhe.
                  
                     Rapa, a plant and roote called Rape.
                  
                     Rapacia, rape leaues.
                  
                     Rapatior, more rauenous or catchinge.
                  
                     Rapaciſsimus, a, um, mooſt rauenous.
                  
                     Rapacitas, raueny.
                  
                     Rapaciter, rauenouſely.
                  
                     Rapax, acis, rauenouſe.
                  
                     Raphanus, a plante, and roote called Radyſſhe.
                  
                     Rapere aliquem in ius, to arreſt one, or cauſe him to be arreſted to appere before iuges.
                  
                     Rapide, quickly.
                  
                     Rapidus, a, um, very ſwift.
                  
                     Rapina, robbery.
                  
                     Rapinator, a robbar.Varro.
                  
                  
                     Rapio, pui, pere, to take by violence, haſt, or fury: alſo to rauyſſhe a woman.
                  
                     
                        Rapo, Raponis, for Rapax.
                     
                  
                  
                     Raptim, haſtily.
                  
                     Raprio, violent takynge of a perſone.
                  
                     Raptus, rauyſſhynge or deflourynge of a woman.
                  
                     Raptito, rare, to take often violently.
                  
                     Rapto, to take or drawe violently.
                  
                     Raptor, toris, a rauyſſhour or vyolente taker.
                  
                     Rapulum, a lytle rape roote.
                  
                     Rapuneulus, a lytle roote, whyche is eaten in ſalutes.
                  
                     Rara auis, a byrde ſeldome ſeene▪ whereby is ſignifyed any thynge that ſeldome happeneth.
                  
                     
                     Rarefacio, cere, to make thynne or ſlender.
                  
                     Rarefio, fieri, to be thynne or ſlender.
                  
                     Rarenter, ſeldome.
                  
                     
                        Rare
                              •
                           co, ſcere,
                      to waxe thynne, or not thicke growen, to be or happen ſeldome.
                  
                     Caeſ. in cō.
                     Rari, a ſonder, here and there one or a few.
                  
                     Raripilus, la, lum, thynne heared.
                  
                     Rarior, rarius, more ſelde.
                  
                     Rariſsimus, a, um, ſeldeſt.
                  
                     Rariſsime, mooſt ſelde.
                  
                     Raritas, ſeldomneſſe.
                  
                     Rarò, ſelde, rare.
                  
                     Raro, aui, are, to make ſcant or ſelde.
                  
                     Rarus, ra, rum, ſelde or not ofte, thynne, not thicke growen or ſet.
                  
                     Raſamentum, ſhauinge or ſhredes.
                  
                     Raſilis, ſile, that maye be ſhauen or made ſmoothe.
                  
                     Raſito, tare, to ſhaue ofte.
                  
                     Raſor, ſoris, a barbour, or ſhauour, alſoo a 
                        •
                     ydler.
                  
                     Raſotius, a, um, pertaynynge to ſhauynge.
                  
                     Raſta, a duche myle.
                  
                     Raſtellus, a lytle rake.
                  
                     
                        Raſt
                              •
                           um, & Raſter,
                      a rake.
                  
                     Raſura, the ſhauynge.
                  
                     
                        Rata
                              •
                           iae naues,
                      lyghters, or woode barges.
                  
                     Rates, tis, are pieces of tymber pynned togither, wheron haye or other lyke thinge beinge layde, they are drawen on ryuers, as on the great ſtreames of Germany and France is now ſene: but they be communly vſed and taken for ſhyppes, or the ſyde beames of a ſhyppe.
                  
                     Ratiarius, the maſter of a ſhyppe.
                  
                     Ratifico, care, to ratyfye, or confirme.
                  
                     Ratificatio, a ratification or confyrmation.
                  
                     Ratio, rayſon, counſayle, purpoſe, care, reſpecte, cauſe, the maner, the waye, the fourme, proportion.
                  
                     Ratiocinatio, rayſonynge.
                  
                     Ratiocinator, oris, a caſter of accompt.
                  
                     Ratiocinor, aris, to rayſon, to gather in argument, to accompte.
                  
                     Rationabilis, le, rayſonable.
                  
                     Rationale, that whiche hath the vſe of raiſon: alſoo that whiche a preeſt weareth at maſſe on his heed, & after putteth it backe lyke a hoode.
                  
                     Rationes referre, to yelde accompt.
                  
                     Rationem dare, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Plautus in amph. Terent. in Heau. Ter. in Ad.
                     Rationem dictare, to accompte.
                  
                     Ratio de integro ineunda eſt mihi, I muſte fynde another meane.
                  
                     Rationem ſubducere, Nunquàm ita quiſquam bene ſubducta ratione ad vitā fuit: quin res, aetas, vſus ſemper aliquid apportet noui, There was neuer man in the ordre of his lyfe ſo well aduyſed: but that mater, age & experience bringeth to hym ſomwhat at that is ſtraunge.
                  
                     Ratio conſtat, the matter appiereth, or is ſhewed.
                  
                     
                        Rationa
                              •
                           ius,
                      a boke of accompt: alſo a boke belongynge to the counſayle of Princes. wherin actes done and to be done are writen: alſo an auditour.
                  
                     Ratiuncula, a lytle accompt or rekenynge.
                  
                     Rationes putari, whan accomptes be examyned and tryed.No. M
                           •
                        r.
                  
                  
                     Ratare, olde wrytars vſed for Ratificare, to ratify, to confyrme.
                  
                     Ratum habere, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Ratus, ta, tum, ſtablyſſhed, confyrmed, ſuppoſed.
                  
                     Ratus, a participle ſignyfyenge, Suppoſynge.
                  
                     Ratus ſum, I ſuppoſed.
                  
                     
                        Raua vox,
                        Feſtus.
                      a voyce that maye not be well harde.
                  
                     Raucae, wormes, beinge in the rootes of trees, and careth them.
                  
                     Raucè, horſely.
                  
                     Rauceo, Raucio, cere, to be horſe.
                  
                     Rauceſco, ſcere, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Raucus, ca, cum, horſe.
                  
                     Raucedo, & Raucitas, horſeneſſe.
                  
                     Raudus, a thynge vnwrought, and vnpolyſſhed: it was alſo taken for aes, braſſe.
                  
                     Rauenna, a citie in Italy.
                  
                     Rauilia, purblynde or dull ſighted.
                  
                     Rauio, are, to be horſe.Feſtus.
                  
                  
                     Rauis, horſeneſſe.
                  
                     Rauiſcellus, a, um, lytell broune of colour.Plautus.
                  
                  
                     Rauus, a, um, horſe: alſo Rauus color, a dull or ſadde colour, or broune.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶R, ANTE E.
                  
                     REalis actio, an action concernyng the goodes.
                  
                     Reapſe, in the ſelfe or very thinge.
                  
                     Reate, a citie in Italy.
                  
                     Reatus, a fault or offence.
                  
                     Rebellare, to rebell.
                  
                     Rebellis, a rebell.
                  
                     Rebellio, rebellion.
                  
                     Rebito, tare, to retourne. At vnum hoc te quaeſo, ſi hue rebiter è Philocrare, vt eius mihi facias conueniendi copiā. But one thinge I praye the, if he retourne frome Philocrates, finde the meanes, that I may ſpeke with him.
                  
                     Reboo, are, to ſowne agayne.
                  
                     Recalcitro, trare, to ſtryke with the heele, to kicke.
                  
                     Recaleſco, ſcere, to waxe warme.
                  
                     Recaluaſter, tri, he that is balde before.
                  
                     
                     Recaluus, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Recalueo, ere, to be balde agayne.
                  
                     Recanto, tare, to charme awaye or charme out a thynge, which was brought in by inchauntement, as the witches called wyſe women are wont to do.
                  
                     Recapitulatio, a rehercynge of thynges in chapiters.
                  
                     Recedo, receſsi, recedere, to departe or goo awaye.
                  
                     Recedere a conditione, a perſona, a ſtatu, is to chaunge or alter the condicion, perſon, or ſtate.Cic. de off. 
                     Quanquàm id nomen durius efficit iam vetuſtas, à peregrino enim iam receſsit, All thoughe auncienty maketh that name diffuſe, yet is it now altered from beinge a ſtraunge worde.
                  
                     Recello, cellere, to plucke backe, or withdrawe.
                  
                     Recens, tis, newe late.
                  
                     Recentior, newer.
                  
                     Recentiſsimus, neweſt, or lateſt.
                  
                     Recēti pede recurrere, to runne eftſones after that he hath reſted him, to make a freſh courſe.Plautus in 
                           •
                        tin. 
                     Poſtquàm thermopotaſti gutturem, recipe te, & recurre pede recenti: After that thou haſte warmed thy throte with good drynke, take thy harte to the, and make a freſſhe courſe.
                  
                     Recenter, newly, freſſhely.
                  
                     Recentius, more newly.
                  
                     Recento, tare, to renewe.
                  
                     Recentor, taris, tari, to be renewed.
                  
                     Recenſeo, ere, to numbre or tell, to reken.
                  
                     Recenſus, us, & Recenſio, a tale or rekenynge.
                  
                     Recenſitus, ta, tum, tolde, or rekenyd.
                  
                     Receptaculum, the place, which receyueth thinges: alſo a place of ſuerty or comfort.
                  
                     Recepti in ciuitatem, they whiche of ſtraungers 
                        •
                     e made Citizens.
                  
                     Recepto, tare, to receyue often.
                  
                     Receptitius, a, um, that whiche is reſerued from other.
                  
                     Receptum, taken in cuſtome.
                  
                     Receptus, tus, a retrayt in batayle.
                  
                     Eraſm. in Chiliad.
                     
                        Receptui ca
                              •
                           ere,
                      to blowe the retrayte: alſo it is a prouerbe, which ſignifyeth to fynyſh or ende the contention.
                  
                     Receſsim, an aduerbe, whyche ſignifyeth, goynge backe.
                  
                     Receſſus, us, a goynge awaye or backe.
                  
                     Plautus in Men
                           •
                        ch.
                     Recident in te hae contumeliae, thoſe rebukes ſhall lyght on the.
                  
                     Terent. in 
                           •
                        olo. He.
                     Recidit ad paucos, it is come to a fewe perſonnes.
                  
                     Recidipna, a garment to ſoupe in.
                  
                     Recidiuus, a, um, eftſones reſtored: ſomtyme eftſones decayed or fallen.
                  
                     Recido, dere, to fall eftſones: or to fal backwarde.
                  
                     Recido, di, dere, to cut agayne, to cut behynde.
                  
                     Recinium, a ſquare garmente, whiche they that dyd weare them, dydde caſte the one part thereof ouer their ſhoulders at their backe, lyke to frenche clokes.
                  
                     
                        Recinia
                              •
                           i,
                      they that dydde weare ſuche clokes.
                  
                     Recino, ere, to ſynge agayne.
                  
                     Recipere ſe, to retourne or come agayne.Terent. in Phorm. 
                     Percuncta tum ibo ad portum, quoad ſe recipiat frater, I wyll go ſeeke at the hauyn, vntyll my brother come agayne.
                  
                     Recipere ſe ad coenam, to come to ſouper.Plautus in Capt. 
                     Hic homo ad coenam recipit ſe ad me, This man will come to me to ſouper.
                  
                     Recipe te ad me, come hyther to me.Plautus in Per.
                  
                  
                     Recipere ſe ex opere, to retourne frome his buſyneſſe.
                  
                     Recipere ſe domum, to go home.
                  
                     Recipere in aures, to heare: Nō aedepol iſtaec tua dicta nūc in aures recipio,
                     Plautus in ciſt. In good ſoth I do not heare now what thou ſayeſt.
                  
                     Recipere ſe in portum, to arryue at an hauyn.
                  
                     
                        Recipere ſe in Principem,
                        Plinius in panegyr.
                      to take on hym as a Prince.
                  
                     Recipere anhelitum, to fetche brethe or wynde. Priuſquam recipias anhelitum,
                     Plautus in mercatore 
                     vno verbo eloquere, vbi ego ſum, Or euer thou fetcheſt breth, tell me at a worde, in what caſe I do ſtande.
                  
                     Recipe animum, take breth.Terent. in Adelph. Cicero in Cato. Cato ſpeketh here of Fauius the wyſe Captayn
                           •
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Recipere, to recouer. Cum quidem me audiente Salinatori, qui amiſſo oppido fugerat in arcem, glorianti atque dicenti, mea opera Quint. Fab. Yarentum recepiſti: Certe, inquit ridens, nam niſi tu amiſiſtes, nunquàm recepiſſem: For in my hearynge, to Salinator, which (the towne of Tarentum being loſt) fledde into the caſtell, ſayenge vnto hym, Thou haſt recouered Tarentum Q. Fab. by my meanes: That is true ſayde he, lawghinge: for if thou haddeſt not loſt it: I had not recouered it. alſo to reſerue to a mans owne vſe.
                  
                     Recipie, Cato vſeth for Recipiam.
                  
                  
                     Receptus, ta, tum, receyued.
                  
                     Receptio, a retourne backe,Plautus in Aſinar. drawynge or bryngynge agayne. Quid tibi huc receptio ad te eſt meum virum? Why draweſte thou my houſbande eftſones backe vnto thy houſe.
                  
                     Reciprocatio, a goynge backe, or retournynge to the place that he came fro.
                  
                     Recipio, coepi, cipere, to receyue or take, to admitte, to call agayne, to brynge in faulſgarde,

to delyuer, to vndertake, to promyſe: alſo Recipere, is to reſerue to hym ſelfe, or to excepte a thinge in gyuynge or bargaynynge.
                  
                     Reciproco, care, to turne backe, to repete, to go backe.
                  
                     Reciprocus, ca, cum, that whiche is repeted or eftſones reherced.
                  
                     Reciſamentum, a lytle piece, a gobat.
                  
                     Reciſus, a, um, new cut.
                  
                     Recito, tare, to reade that other maye here and vnderſtande: to recite or telle eftſones.
                  
                     Reclamo, are, to denye with a lowde voyce or crye.
                  
                     Feſtus. Val. in po. Verg.
                     Recliuia, & Recliuium, is whan the ſkynne of the fyngar is looſe frome the nayle.
                  
                     Recludo, ſi, dere, to open. Infernas reſerat ſedes & regna recludat pallida, Vndo he the lockes of places infernall, and let hym ſet wyde open the pale regions of deth. Iuſtinus putteth Recluſus for clauſus, ſhut.
                  
                     Recocia, ſeconde or courſe cheeſe.
                  
                     Recogito, tare, to remembre.
                  
                     Recognitio, a knowlege.
                  
                     Recognoſco, noni, noſcere, to recogniſe, to knowe perfectly, to ouerloke.
                  
                     Recolligo, legi, ligere, to aſſemble or gather togither: alſo to reconcile. Quod ſcribis, etiam ſi cuius animus eſſet in te offenſior, a me recolligi oportere, quid dicas? Where thou wryteſt, that moreouer yf any man be diſpleaſed with the, that he ſhoulde be reconcyled by my meanes, whatte ſayeſte thou?
                  
                     Recolo, lere, to repute, to repete, to calle to remembraunce.
                  
                     
                        Recommi
                              •
                           iſcor, ſceris, recomminiſci,
                      to remembre, or call to remembraunce.
                  
                     Reconcilio, are, to reconcyle, to reſtore vnto fauour.
                  
                     Reconcilior, aris, reconciliari, to be reconcyled.Plautus in cap.
                  
                  
                     Reconciliare in libertatem, to ſette at lybertye.
                  
                     Reconciliatio, a reconcylynge.
                  
                     Recluſus, a, um, opened.
                  
                     Reconcinno, nare, to newe make, to make meete, proprely a garment.
                  
                     Recondo, dere, to hyde, to laye vppe.
                  
                     Recordor, aris, ari, to remembre.
                  
                     Recoquo, coxi, coquere, to boyle or ſeeth eftſones, to amende with ſtudy.
                  
                     Recordatio, remembraunce.
                  
                     Recreatio, a recreation, a reſtoringe.
                  
                     Recreo, aui, are, to recreate, to refreſſhe, to reſtore.
                  
                     Recreſco, ſcere, to growe agayne.
                  
                     Recrudeſco, ſcere, to renewe a fault made by Princes to their familiars.
                  
                     Recta, a ſouper, where they ſate all in a rewe.
                  
                     Rectangulus, is where lynes are ſoo ioyned, that no part is longar or ſhortar than another.
                  
                     Recta, an aduerbe ſignifyenge ſtrayghte.Terent. in Eunucho. 
                     Cur non recta introibas? why wenteſt thou not ſtrayght, or the ſtrayght waye in.
                  
                     Recté, well ynoughe. Quid tu igitur lachrymas? aut quid es tam triſtis? Pamp.
                     Terent. in Hecy. 
                     Recté mater. S. Quid fuit tumulti? Than wherefore doeſt thou mourne? or why arte thou ſo heuy? Pamph. It is well ynoughe mother. S. what was all this noyſe?
                  
                     Rectè, parere, to brynge forth no monſter.
                  
                     Rectè, of good right, with good raiſon.
                  
                     Recté, dicis, thou ſayeſt truely.
                  
                     Rectè eſt, it is ynoughe, or I haue ynough. Tum quod dem ei, recté eſt,
                     Terent. in Heauton. I haue alſoo ynough to gyue hym.
                  
                     Recté facere alicui, to do good to a man, Stultus & ſine gratia es, tibi rectè facere:
                     Plautus in Aulularia. 
                     quando quod facias perit, Thou art a foole and without thanke, to do hym any good, whan all is loſt that thou doeſt.
                  
                     Recté ferre, to take paciently. Si ſapis, ne
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         praeterquam quas ipſe amor moleſtias habet,
                     Terent. in Eunucho. 
                     addas: & illas quas habet, rectè feras, If thou be wyſe, adde to no more griefe than loue bringeth with hym, and them that he bringeth, ſuffre paciently.
                  
                     Recté, ſignifyeth ſometyme nothynge, as Donate ſayth. Rogo, nunquid velit. rectè, inquit: abeo, I aſked if he wold any thyng, Nothinge, he ſayde: I went than my way. alſo ye, ſtraight waye. S. Tu rus hinc abis?
                     Ter. in Ad. 
                     D. rectè, goeſt thou now into the contray? D. ye ſtrayght waye.
                  
                     Rectè valet, he or ſhe is in good helth.
                  
                     Rectius, better.
                  
                     Rectitas, & Rectitudo, Iuſtice or rightwyſneſſe.
                  
                     Rector, toris, a rular.
                  
                     Rectus, the nominatife caſe.
                  
                     Rectum inteſtinum, the gutte frome whenſe the ordure paſſeth.
                  
                     Rectus, ta, tum, ſtraight, which is not crooked, vpright, iuſt.
                  
                     Recubitus, a lyenge at reſte.
                  
                     Recubo, are, to lye and reſt.
                  
                     Recudo, cudi, dere, to newe hamer, or newe worke, as it were on an anduylde: alſo it is taken for, to make newe, or newe prynte.
                  
                     Recuperatores, iuges aſſigned, or commiſſionars, for a pryuate mater.
                  
                     Recumbo, to ſytte at a table, or at meales: ſometyme to leane on one. Recumbebat mecum vir egregius Fidius Rufinus, ſuper

eum municeps ipſius, There ſatte with me that worſhypfull man Fidius Rufinus, and aboue hym his neyghbour.
                  
                     Recuperatio, & reciperatio, & reciperantia, was of olde wryters ſayde, where there was a lawe made betwene the people of Rome, and other nations & cities, wherin they accordyd, that pryuate thynges taken, ſhoulde be redelyuered, whyche is nowe vſyd in our leagues and entercourſes with ſtraunge countrayes and prynces.
                  
                     Recupero, rare, to recouer.
                  
                     Recupio, cupiui, cupere, to deſyre moche. Quin ita faciam, ut récupias facere ſumptum, & ſi ego uetem: And yet wylle I ſoo handle it, that thou ſhalte moche deſyre to ſpende, although I wolde fordyd the.
                  
                     Recurro, rere, to rounne agayne, to goo or come agayne quyckely.
                  
                     Rècurſus, us, a runnyng backe, a recourſe.
                  
                     Recurſo, are, to runne often back or agayn.
                  
                     Recurué, an aduerbe, ſignifieng bowid bakwarde, crokydly.
                  
                     Recuruitas, tatis, a bowynge backe.
                  
                     Recuruo, are, to bowe backe.
                  
                     Recuruor, ari, to be bowed backe.
                  
                     Recuruus, a, um, bowed backe, or crooked
                  
                     Recuſabile, that whyche is worthye to be refuſyd.
                  
                     Recuſatio, a refuſall.
                  
                     Recuſator, a refuſer.
                  
                     Recuſo, are, to refuſe, alſo to defende.
                  
                     Recutitus, he that is circuncyſed. ſomtyme exulcerate.
                  
                     Redabſoluo, uere, to diſcharge or diſpeche. Sequere hac, te redabſoluam, qua adueniſti gratia, Folowe me thyther, I wylle dyſpatche thy mattier, for the whyche thou cameſt hyther.
                  
                     Redactus, ta, tum, brought.
                  
                     Plautus. in Curcul.
                     Redambulo, are, to retourne. Cura 
                           
                              
                           
                           quam
                         optime potes. Er. bene ambula, & redambula, Do the beſte that thou canſte. Er. wel get the hens, and come agayne quyckely.
                  
                     Redandruo, are, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Redamo, aui, are, to loue mutually.
                  
                     Redarguo, guere, to reproue.
                  
                     Reddo, di, dere, to render or yelde, to delyuer, to reſtore, to gyue, to make.
                  
                     Reddere certiorem, to aſſertayne.
                  
                     Reddere rationem, to make accompte, or rekenynge.
                  
                     Reddere, to putte in other. Tempeſtas uenit, confringit tegulas imbrices
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , ibi dominus indiligens reddere alias ne uult, The tempeſte camme, and brake the Tyles, and the Eueyſes, where as the neglygente owner wolde not putte other in theyr places.
                  
                     
                        Reddere commotum,
                        Ter. in An.
                      to cauſe one to make haſte, to haſte hym forwarde.
                  
                     Reddere dictum ac factum. Videre egiſſe iā neſcio quid cum ſene. S. De illo quod dudū? dictum ac factum reddidi, It ſeemeth thou haſte done late, I wote not what with the olde man. S. Meaneſt thou that, the other daye? thou haddeſt not ſo ſoone ſpoken, but it was doone.
                  
                     Reddidi impetratum, I brought it to paſſe.Plautus in Epid.
                  
                  
                     Reddere operam, to requyre a good turne or an ylle.
                  
                     Reddere aliquem, to reſemble or be lyke to oone.
                  
                     Redemptio, redemption.
                  
                     Redemptito, demptitare, to redeeme or bye agayne often.
                  
                     Redempto, tare, to redeme.
                  
                     Redemptor, toris, a redemer.
                  
                     Redeo, diui, dij, redire, to retourne.
                  
                     Redhibeo, hibui, bere, to cauſe the ſeller to haue ageyne that whiche he ſolde.
                  
                     Redhibitio, reſtitution.
                  
                     Redigo, degi, digere, to brynge by force or cunnynge. ſometyme to reſtore.
                  
                     Redigere in ordinem, to compelle menne to lyue according to their aſtate or profeſſiō
                  
                  
                     Redis ad ingenium, thou doeſt after thyne olde facion, or as thou arte wonte to do.Terent. in Hecy. Ter. in An.
                  
                  
                     Redire ad ſe. Sed paululum ſine ad me ut redeam, But lette me take breathe a lyttelle. Tandem reprime iracundiam, arque ad reredi: Nowe leaue thy fume, and remember thy ſelfe.
                  
                     
                        Redeam ad pauca, Vt ad pauca redeam,
                        Terent. in phorm. 
                        ac mittam illius ineptias,
                      To the intente that I wyll be ſhorte, and paſſe ouer his foly.
                  
                     Redi ad rem, goo to the pourpoſe,Terent. in Heaut. or to the mattier.
                  
                     
                        Redijt ad reſtim res. Opera tua ad reſtim mihi quidem res redijt,
                        Terent. in phormi.
                      By thy meanes I am brought to the poynte to hange my ſelfe.
                  
                     Redijt ad raſtros. Nam ſi illi pergam ſuppeditare ſumptibus Menedeme, mihi illaec ueré ad raſtros res redijt, Surely if I ſhuld mayntayne his expenſes Menedemus, it wolde brynge me to rake corne or graſſe for my lyuynge.
                  
                     Redit res in eum locum, the thynge is come ſo to paſſe. In eum iam res redijt locum, ut ſit neceſſe, The matter is come ſo to paſſe, that there is no remedy.
                  
                     
                        Redit mihi animus,
                        Terent. in Hecyra.
                      my courage is comme vnto me.
                  
                     Redit animo, it commeth to my mynde.
                  
                     Redire in concordiam, to be agreed.
                  
                     Redire in gratiam, 
                     idem, Alſo to be efteſones in fauour.
                  
                     
                     Redimicula, the ornamentes or apparaylle of a womans heed: as a veluette bonette or frenche hode.
                  
                     Redimio, iui, ire, to adorne or apparayle, or trymme.
                  
                     Plautus in Ruden.
                     Reditur, is retourned.
                  
                     Redhibitum, reſtored.
                  
                     Redico, cere, to tell or ſaye agayne.
                  
                     Rediculi, a temple at Rome withoute the gate callyd Capena, where Hannyball beynge aferde, retyred backe.
                  
                     Redimitus, ta, apparayled on the heed.
                  
                     Redimere, to take in charge.
                  
                     
                        Redinunt, for redeunt,
                      they retourne or comme agayne.
                  
                     Redinregro, a renewynge, a fortification.
                  
                     Redipiſcor, ſceris, ſci, to recouer or gette agayne.
                  
                     Redimo, dêmi, dimere, to redeme, to bye, to recouer, to recompence, to take in bargayne.
                  
                     Redemptores, they that hyre lande, or taketh any thyng in great or taſke.
                  
                     Ti Liuius Cae
                           •
                        . in cō.
                     Redintegrare, to begynne a freſſhe.
                  
                     Redintegrato animo, with courage reuyued, with a freſhe courage.
                  
                     Redito, tare, to retourne by and by.
                  
                     Reditus, tus, a retourne.
                  
                     Reduuia, whan the ſkynne commeth withoute the nayles of the fyngers. alſoo an adders ſkynne.
                  
                     Rediuiuum, that whiche retourneth efteſones to lyfe. Alſo that whiche of an old thynge is made newe or yonge.
                  
                     Rediuias, a worme callyd a tycke, whyche ſouketh bloode from a man or beaſte.
                  
                     Redoleo, ere, to ſmelle or ſauour.
                  
                     Redonatio, a gyuynge agayne of the thing that is taken.
                  
                     Redono, are, to gyue agayne.
                  
                     Redorior, riris, riri, to begynne agayne.
                  
                     Redormio, to awake.
                  
                     Redormitio, an awakynge out of ſlepe.
                  
                     Feſtus.
                     Redoſtio, rire, of olde wryters was taken for to gyue thanke.
                  
                     Reducem, & reduces, they do cal ſuch whiche are brought out of exile or captiuitie.
                  
                     Reducere, to brynge ſaulfe. Méque oppido in arcem reduco,
                     Apulcius. And I conueyed my ſelf quyckely into the Caſtell. Alſoo to pacyfye or appeaſe.Vergilius 
                     Numen
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         reducant, Lette theym appeaſe the wrathe or dyſpleaſure of god.
                  
                     Reduco, duxi, ducere, to brynge backe, or plucke backe, to delyuer or ſet out of peryll, to reconcyle.
                  
                     Reductus, a, um, brought backe or ſafe.
                  
                     Redundo, are, to ouerflowe, to reflowe or retourne backe, to redounde.
                  
                     Reduro, are, to ſtoppe or cloſe.No. Mar.
                  
                  
                     Reduplico, care, to double eftſones.
                  
                     Redulcero, rare, to impoſtume or make an impoſtume in ſome parte of the body.
                  
                     Refello, to proue fals, to repreue of falſehode, to denye that whiche is obiected.
                  
                     Referio, rire, to ſtryke agayne.
                  
                     Referre ad aliquem, to aſke one counſayle in any matter.
                  
                     Referre de re aliqua ad Senatum, was whan the Conſuls purpoſed a matter in the Senate, deſyrynge the Senatours to reaſon and conſulte therof.
                  
                     Referre pedem, to ſet forthe a foote, or goo.Plautus in mercatore 
                     Eutyche hāc uolo rem prius agi, quam meū intro refero pedem, I wyll that this thyng Eutyche be doone, or I go oone foote in.
                  
                     Retulit ad me pedem, He came toward me.Plautus in Epidico.
                  
                  
                     Referunt haec ad rem, theſe thinges pertain to the matter.
                  
                     
                        Refero acceptum, Omnia quae uidimus,
                        Cicero. 
                        ſi recte rationabimus, uni accepta referemus Antonio.
                      All that we ſee, yf we recken well, we may impute it onely to Antonie. Quod uiuit, mihi acceptum refert: He confeſſeth to be longe of me, that he nowe lyuethe.Cicer. pro C
                           •
                        uen. 
                     Verum omnem tranquillitatem & quietem ſenectutis refert acceptam clementiae tuae, But all the tranquyllytie and quyeteneſſe of his age, he confeſſeth to procede or haue receyued of your mercy and goodneſſe.
                  
                     Referre gratiam, to gyue thanke.Plautus in Moſtell. 
                     Nunquam ego illi poſſum gratiam referre, ut meritus eſt de me, I canne neuer gyue hym thanke ſuffycyent for that he hathe doone for me. Spero ego mihi quoque tempus tale euenturum,
                     Plautus in merca. 
                     ut tibi gratiam referam parem, I truſt the tyme ſhal come, that I ſhall doo you as moche pleaſure.Ci. in Sal. 
                     Non enim ſperaſti mutuam tibi gratiam relaturum, ut uiciſsim tuos compellarem, Thou dyddeſt not thynke, that I wolde in this wyſe haue requyted the, in remembrynge thyne auncetours, as thou haſte doone myne.
                  
                     Referri in acceptum, to be brought in a reckenyng. Poſteaquam reus factus eſt, primo negabat opus in acceptum referri poſſe, after that he was accuſed, fyrſte he denyed, that the warke mought be brought vnto a reckenynge.
                  
                     Referre in melius, to turne it to a better vſe.
                  
                     Referre mores, to expreſſe the condicyons or maners of an other.
                  
                     Referre oculos, to caſte the loke vpon one.Plin. epiſt. 156.
                  
                  
                     Referre par, to requyte. Ille quem beneficio adiungas, ex animo facit, ſtudet par referre, Whom thou getteſt with benefytte,

he dothe all thynges with a good harte, and ſtudieth to requyte the.
                  
                     Referte pedem, uel gradum, to ſteppe back, to retreate.
                  
                     Referre, to ſhewe or tel. At illa retulit, quaeſiuit
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , quidnam mihi uideretur, She tolde me all, and aſked what I thought therin.
                  
                     Cicer. pro Seruilio.
                     Refert. Cuius conſilii magni referebat te inter eſſe. Atte the whiche counſayle, it hadde bene very neceſſarye, that ye ſhulde haue bene.Terent. in phorm. 
                     Parui retulit non ſuſcepiſſe, It made lyttell matter, that he tooke hir not. Mea quid refert? What care I? Mea nihil refert? I haue noughte to doo with it. Tua refert, It is for thy profyte. Quid refert me feciſſe regibus, ut mihi obedirent, ſi me hodie hic umbraticus deriſerit? What auayleth it, that I haue made kynges to obeye me, yf nowe this lewde knaue ſhall laughe me to ſcorne? Refert, It is expedient or neceſſarye.Ver. geor. 
                     Neque enim numero comprehendere refert: It is not neceſſarye, to reherce them in numbre.
                  
                     Refercio, cire, to fylle.
                  
                     Refero, tuli, ferre, to brynge agayne, to reſemble, to reporte, to referre, to reuoke. Referebam me, I retourned. To adde to, or aſcribe, to turne, to renew, to brynge, to declare or expreſſe.
                  
                     Ci. in Piſ.
                     Refero impenſum, I make accompt of that whiche is beſtowed.
                  
                     Referre rationem, to yelde or make accompte.
                  
                     Refectus, ta, tum, reſtored, renewed, amended, made efteſoones.
                  
                     Reficio, ficere, to recreate, or reſtore, to amende, to make agayne.
                  
                     Reficior, ceris, ci, to be reſtored, recouered from ſicknes, Alſo renewed or new made.
                  
                     Refigo, fixi, figere, to make faſte or ſure, to thruſte in harde. Sometyme it ſignifyeth the contrarye, to drawe out that whyche is faſtned.
                  
                     Ci. Phi. 13
                     Refigere tabulas & leges, to vndoo or deſtroye lawes. Acta Antonij reſcidiſtis, leges refixiſtis: Ye haue cancelled the actes of Antony, and vndoone or diſſolued his lawes.Ver. aenei. 
                     Fixit leges, pretioque refixit, He ſtablyſhed lawes, and for money efteſoones diſſolued them.
                  
                     Refirmo, are, to faſten or ſtablyſhe agayne.
                  
                     Terent. in Adelph.
                     Reflatio, a contrary wynde.
                  
                     Reflatus, tus, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Reflecto, xi, tere, to bowe backe, to tourne back or agayn. Qu
                           •
                         neque fides, ne
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         iuſ
                           •
                        urandū, ne
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         illum miſericordia repreſsit, ne
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         reflexit, Whom neither promyſe, nor othe, nor yet pitie, withdrewe or pulled backe.
                  
                     Reflo, are, to blowe agayne or contrarye.
                  
                     Refluo, xi, fluere, to flowe.
                  
                     Refluxus, us, the tyde, whanne the water floweth.
                  
                     Refocillatio, a comfortynge or refreſhyng, or recreation.
                  
                     Refocillo, are, to recomforte, to refreſſhe,Plinius in panegyr. Plin. in epiſtol. 156. Plinius in panegyri. to recreate, to fortifye.
                  
                     Reformo, mare, to refourme.
                  
                     Reformator, a reformatour.
                  
                     Refoueo, foui, fotum, fouere, to nouryſſhe or comforte efteſoones, to reſtore or ſet in his fyrſte ſtate.
                  
                     Refractarius, obſtynate, in a wylfulle oppinion.
                  
                     Refragor, aris, ari, to reſyſte with wordes, or clamour.
                  
                     Refrango, fregi, refrangere, aut refringere, to braſte open.
                  
                     Refreno, refrenare, to pull backe one from a purpoſe.
                  
                     Refrico, care, to renewe a ſore or grief, whiche was out of remembraunce.
                  
                     Refrigeratorius, a, um, that whiche cooleth or maketh colde.
                  
                     Refrigeratio, a koolynge.Suetonius in Claudi.
                  
                  
                     Refrigeratus, ta, tum, kooled: alſo refreſhed or comforted.
                  
                     Refrigerium, a recreation or aduauncynge of the mynde.
                  
                     Refrigeſco, ſcere, to make colde.
                  
                     Refrigero, are, to coole, or make colde, to refreſhe or recomforte.
                  
                     Refrina, a beane, whiche the olde Romans were wont to bring home out of the felde,Feſtus. to doo ſacrifyce for the good lucke of their corne.
                  
                     Refuga, an vnrulye perſone, whiche wylle not be ordered.
                  
                     Refugio, gere, to flee or run away or backe.Colum. 4. alſo to refuſe.
                  
                     Refugium, refuge, ſuccour, or place where one may be ſuccoured.
                  
                     Refugus, a, um, that whiche gothe away,Sidonius. or is layde aparte.
                  
                     Refulgeo, gêrè, to ſhyne.
                  
                     Refundo, fudi, fundere, to reſtore that whyche lacketh. Quicquid deerit,
                     Seneca. 
                     ex meo refundam, Whatte ſoo euer dothe lacke, I wylle make it vppe of myne owne. Alſoo to paye home agayne, or to yelde. Id erat non tam accipere beneficium, quam refundere, That was not ſoo moche,Seneca de benefic. to receyue a good tourne, as to doo a good tourne. Alſoo to caſte vppe by vomyte. Quod heſterna crapula ingurgitauerat,
                     Plinius. 
                     palam refudit, That whyche in his yeſterdayes ryotte he ingourged or deuoured, he openely dydde parbrake or vomyte hit vppe.
                  
                     
                     Refutatio, a denyenge, a replycation, an argument to the contrary.
                  
                     Refuto, tare, to denie, to replye.
                  
                     Regaliolus, a byrde, betwene whome and the egle is contynual hoſtilitie, and is yelowe of colour.
                  
                     Regaliter, royally.
                  
                     Regalis, le, royalle.
                  
                     Regelo, are, to thawe, or reſolue that, whiche is froſen.
                  
                     Regenero, rare, to regenerate or efteſones ingender.
                  
                     Regero, geſsi, gerere, to putte in wrytynge, to brynge backe, to vomyte vp.
                  
                     Regeſtum, erthe caſte vp.
                  
                     Regia, a kynges howſe.
                  
                     Regieſco, ſcere, olde writers vſed, for creſcere, to growe.
                  
                     Regificus, ca, cum, that whereby a kynge is made.
                  
                     Regilla, a kynges robe.
                  
                     Regillus, a lyttell kynge. Alſo the name of a ryuer in Italy.
                  
                     Regimen, minis, a rule or gouernaunce.
                  
                     Regina, a queene.
                  
                     Regionatim, place by place, by euery region or coſte.
                  
                     Regio, a region or countrey, alſo a coſte, as eaſte, weſte, northe, and ſouthe.
                  
                     Regium, a cytie beyonde the mountaynes towarde Italye.
                  
                     Regius, a, um, of a kynge.
                  
                     Regius morbus, the iaundyſe.
                  
                     Regno, are, to reigne.
                  
                     Regnum, a realme, and the gouernance.
                  
                     Rego, xi, regere, to rule, to gouerne.
                  
                     Regor, geris, to be ruled or gouerned.
                  
                     
                        Regrador, de
                              •
                           i, di,
                      to goo backe.
                  
                     No. Mar.
                     Regredo, dere, to reuoke, or call agayne.
                  
                     Regredior, regredi, to go backe.
                  
                     Regreſsio, & regreſſus, us, a returne backe, a reſorte backe.
                  
                     Regula, a rule.
                  
                     Regularis, regulare, that whyche is vnder a rule.
                  
                     Regulo, are, to rule or dyrecte.
                  
                     Regulus, a Prynce or lorde of a lyttelle countreye, proprely Reguli, be the chylderne of kynges. Alſo Regulus is a lyttell byrde, callyd a wrenne, and a ſerpent callyd a Cockatryce, whiche ſleeth a man with his ſyghte. It was alſoo the name of a Conſule, whiche for kepynge of his promyſe, was putte to cruelle deathe by the Carthaginenſis. Alſo a great Rhetorician in the tyme of Plynie.
                  
                     
                        Reieculae, uel reijculae o
                              •
                           es,
                      ſheepe drawen out of the folde for aege or ſyckeneſſe, kebbers, crones, or cullyars.
                  
                     
                        Reiectanea,
                        Vergil. in Bucolio.
                      of phyloſophers be taken for thynges to be abhorrid, as ſyckneſſe, pouertie, and ſorowe.
                  
                     Reiectio, parbrakynge.
                  
                     Reiectio ſanguinis, the yſſuynge oute of bloudde atte the mouthe, the nooſe, or the vaynes.
                  
                     Reiectus, ta, tum, caſte out, caſte awaye, or put forthe.
                  
                     Reijcio, ieci, ijcere, to caſte awaye, to dryue backe. Tityre paſcentes a flumine reiice capellas, Tityre dryue thy gotes, that doo fede, awaye from the ryuer. Alſo to refuſe, to put away.Apulcius. 
                     Me uero tanquam inutilem reiecerunt, As for me they refuſed, as a perſon vnprofytable.Terent. in Phorin. 
                     Si altera illa magis inſtabit, forſitā nos reiiciat: If the other wil be importunate, perchaunce they wyll put me away.
                  
                     Reiicere iudices aut teſtes, to refuſe iudges or wytneſſes.
                  
                     Reiicere, to parbrake or vomyte.Se
                           •
                        tonius in Auguſt. 
                     Senos ſextantes non exceſsit: aut ſi exceſsiſſet, reiiciebantur, He exceded not twelue ounces, yf he paſſed that, they were caſte vp agayne.
                  
                     Relatio, a reporte, a reſpecte: Amonge Logycians, it is the effecte of the Relatyue, as the father, the ſonne, the mayſter, the ſeruaunt, the huſbande, the wife. For withoute the oone, the other canne not retayne his name, for a ſonne may not be withoute a father: nor a wyfe withoute a huſbande, nor a ſeruaunt withoute a mayſter.
                  
                     Relati in aerarios, were they, whiche for ſome defaute were by the mayſters of maners, called Cenſores, put out of the numbre of Citiſens, and dyd only pay tribute, or heedſyluer, as ſtraungers.
                  
                     Relatiue, hauynge relacion to a thynge.
                  
                     Relatiuum, a relatife, whiche hath relation to ſome thynge.
                  
                     Relaxo, are, to lowſe.
                  
                     Relegatus, banyſſhed.
                  
                     Relegatio, a banyſſhemente oute of his countreye.
                  
                     Relego, relegare, to banyſſhe, to remoue, to ſeuer oone frome an nother, to ſende awaye.
                  
                     Religatus, ta, tum, faſte bounde.
                  
                     Relego, legi, legere, to rede agayne.
                  
                     Relicinus, he that hathe a good buſſhe of heare, well trymmed behynde.
                  
                     Relicina frons, a fayre large and hygh forheed, without heare.
                  
                     Relictus, ta, tum, forſaken or lefte.
                  
                     Relictus ſum mihi, I am lefte alone.
                  
                     Religio, onis, relygion, a reuerende drede.

doubte leſte be ſhall offende.Plautus in C
                           •
                        rgal. Alſo conſcience, or as a man mought ſay, a ſcruple of conſcience.
                  
                     Religioſe, fearefully, doubtefully, daungerouſely, ſcrupulouſly.
                  
                     Religioſus, ſa, ſum, relygious, dredefulle, doubtefull.
                  
                     Liuius. 6.
                     In religionem uertere, to feare leeſte god were diſpleaſed.
                  
                     Religionem inducere, to brynge in feare of goddis diſpleaſure.
                  
                     
                        
                           ••
                        etonius i
                           •
                         Auguſt.
                     Religio eſt, it is not lefull. Huc introire, niſi neceſſario, & caſte, religio eſt, To enter in there, but for neceſſitie, and chaſtely, it is not lefull.
                  
                     Religioſus, ſa, ſum, religious, alſo ſuperſtitious.
                  
                     Terent in Heauton. Plautus in 
                           ••
                        y
                           •
                        .
                     Religioſe, any ſ
                        •
                     dly, circūſpectly, curiouſly.
                  
                     Relino, releui, relinere, to open that whiche is ſtopped. Releui omnia dolia, I haue broched all the veſſelles. Nolo ego nos pro ſummo bibere: nulli relerimus poſtea, I wolde not that we dranke all out: for I wyll for no manne ſette any a broche afterwarde.
                  
                     Religioni obſtringere, whiche is commonly ſayde to haue conſcyence in a thynge.
                  
                     Religioni obſtringi, to be bound in cōſciēce.
                  
                     Religioni exoluere, to diſcharge a mannes conſcyence.
                  
                     Religo, are, to looſe or vnbynde.
                  
                     Relimino, to gyue lyght.
                  
                     Relinquo, liqui, relinquere, to leaue. Relinquere animam, to dye. Relinquit eum animus, His harte fayleth hym.
                  
                     Reliquatores, they whyche bene in arrerage on theyr accompte. Alſo any other, whiche haue in their handes ſome part of that, whiche they ought to haue payde.
                  
                     
                        Reliqu
                              •
                           ae,
                      that whyche is lefte.
                  
                     Reliquium facere, to leaue, to omytte.
                  
                     Reliquus, a, um, the remenaunt, that which remayneth.
                  
                     Reliquum eſt, the reſte is.
                  
                     Pli. in epiſ.
                     Reluceo, luxi, cere, to ſhyne or be bryght.
                  
                     Reluctor, tari, to contende or ſtriue agayne.
                  
                     Reluo, luere, to paye agayne that which is borowed, to fetch home a gage or pledge. Alſo to waſhe efteſoones.
                  
                     Remandere, to chewe the cudde.
                  
                     Remaneo, ſi, nêre, to abyde ſtylle.
                  
                     Remano, are, to tourne backe to a place.
                  
                     Remanſio, an abydynge.
                  
                     Remecull, lyttell ſhyppes, whiche men of Lemnos vſed.
                  
                     Remedium, remedye.
                  
                     Remeligo, a fyſſhe, whyche cleanynge to the keale of a ſhyppe, cauſeth hym to tary.
                  
                     Remendo, are, to amende or correct a faut.
                  
                     Remeo, are, to retourne or go back ageyn.
                  
                     Remigatio, a rowynge or ſaylynge.
                  
                     Remiges, they whyche doo rowe in a galaye or boote.
                  
                     Remigium, the rowynge of a ſhyp or bote.
                  
                     Remigo, are, to rowe.
                  
                     Remigro, are, to go backe, to returne.
                  
                     Remillum, a thynge croked and brode.
                  
                     Reminiſcor, ſceris, ſci, to calle agayne to remembraunce.
                  
                     Reminiſcentia, the remembraunce of that, whiche was ones in the mynde.
                  
                     Remiſſe, fayntly, without courage, humbly: Sometyme meryly.
                  
                     Remiſsio, remyſſion, forgyueneſſe, a recreatyng of mynde after ſtudy or labour.
                  
                     Remiſſus, a, um, gladde, remytted or forgiuen, ſente agayne.
                  
                     Remitto, miſi, remittere, to ſende, to ſende agayne, to ſende backe, to releaſe or forgyue, to graunt, to lette downe, to commytte, or remytte, to relinquiſhe or leaue.
                  
                     Remittere animum, to putte awaye care, to vnbende or louſe.
                  
                     Remittere, to ceſſe. Remittere aliquid adolecentiae, pardon him ſomwhat for his youth.
                  
                     
                        Remittere nuntium. Gratiam habeo tibi, qum copiam iſtam mihi & poteſtatem facis,
                        Plautus in cap. 
                        ut ego ad parentes remittam nuntiū:
                      I thanke the, that thou gyueſt me this leaue, and alſo authoritie, that I maye ſende to thy frendes, to prouyde for the els where.
                  
                     Remiſsio, a releaſe, a loſynge, a withdrawyng. Oculorum remiſsio, a withdrawing of the looke.
                  
                     Remora, a lyttell fyſhe, whyche retayneth a great ſhyppe vnder ſayle.Ci. de ora.
                  
                  
                     Remorbeſco, to fall efteſones▪ into ſicknes.
                  
                     Remordeo, dêre, to tourment the mynde, or make one heuy.
                  
                     Remores, byrdes, whyche by their flyght or voyce ſygnyfyed, that the thyng purpoſed was not to be folowed,
                  
                     Remoria, a place on the toppe of the hyl callyd Auentinus, where Remus ſtoode, and by the flyght of byrdes, aduyſed the buyldynge of Rome.
                  
                     Remona, the dwellynge houſe of Remus.
                  
                     Remoueo, êre, to remoue, to take awaye.
                  
                     Remouere moram, make ye haſt, ſpede you.
                  
                     Remoror, aris, ari, to tary or make to abide.
                  
                     Remugio, gini, gire, to belowe or lowe agayne, to render a great ſowne.
                  
                     Remulco, care, & remulculo, is proprely to drawe a greatte ſhyp or barge with a laſſe veſſell, by tranſlation it ſignifieth to drawe a thynge eaſyly.
                  
                     Remulcus, a lyttell bore or barke.
                  
                     Remulinus ager, Remus felde.
                  
                     
                     Perottus.
                     Remuncopae, inſtrumentes, wherwith ſhippes be dryuen on lande.
                  
                     Remunero, are, & remuneror, ari, to reward to recompenſe a good tourne.
                  
                     
                        Remunera
                              •
                           o,
                      recompenſe.
                  
                     Remus, the brother of Romulus, whyche buylded Rome.
                  
                     Renauciſcor, ſceris, ſci, to gette agayne.
                  
                     Renarro, are, to telle, to repete.
                  
                     Renato, tare, to ſwym back, or ſwym agayn.
                  
                     Renes, the kydneyes.
                  
                     
                        Renideo, d
                              •
                           re,
                      to ſhyne, to ſauour or ſmell.
                  
                     Renodo, dare, to vnknytte, or vndo a knot.
                  
                     Renoues, garmentes made of ſkynnes of wol
                        •
                     es or other beaſtes, wherin the anci-Almayns were wont to lye in the warres.
                  
                     Renouo, are, to renewe.
                  
                     Renouello, lare, to make newe agayne.
                  
                     Rentifolia, a kynde of wylde roſes, whyche haue neither good ſauour nor facion.
                  
                     Renumero, rare, to paye agayne moneye, whiche is receyued.
                  
                     Renuntiata, an Ile by Ethiope, ſoo ryche, that the inhabytantes doo giue for a hors by exchaunge, a talent of golde.
                  
                     Renuntio, are, to report, to ſignify, to ſhew openly, to renounce, to refuſe, to reſigne, ſometyme to reſtore.
                  
                     Renuntiare uitae, to refuſe to lyue.
                  
                     Renuntiatur Conſul, he is declared conſule.
                  
                     Renuntiatio, a report, alſo a reſignation of an offyce. alſo a ſummons by an offycer.
                  
                     Plautus in 
                           ••
                        in.
                     
                        Renunti
                              •
                           ,
                      they whyche do carye tydynges from one to an other.
                  
                     Renuo, nuere, to refuſe, to deſpyſe.
                  
                     Renutus, nutus, a refuſalle or denyar with countenance.
                  
                     Reor, reris, ratus ſum, I ſuppoſe.
                  
                     Repagulum, a doore or wyndowe or other thynge that ſhutteth or cloſeth.
                  
                     Repages, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Repandus, a▪ um, bent or bowed, and brode backwarde, as ores were in the old tyme.
                  
                     Repando, dere, to bende backe.
                  
                     Reparo, rare, to repayre, to reſtore to the fyrſte aſtate.
                  
                     Reparamen, & reparatio, a repayrynge or reparation.
                  
                     Reparco, parſi, ſere, to ſpare.
                  
                     Repaſtinatio, a newe dyggynge aboute vynes. Alſo a bryngyng of grounde to temper with moche labour and dyggynge.
                  
                     Repaſtinatus, ta, tū, newe digged or brought in temper.
                  
                     Repaſtino, are, to dygge agayne about vynes, to alter lande or grounde, with ofte dyggynge or labourynge.
                  
                     Repaſtinor, nari, to be efteſones dygged, or brought into temper.
                  
                     Repauſo, are, to take reſte.
                  
                     Repedo, are, to go awaye, to go backe.
                  
                     Repello, puli, pellere, to put backe, to repel.
                  
                     Rependo, di, dere, to recompence.
                  
                     Repenſo, are, to ponder, to ouerſee, to iuge.
                  
                     Repente, ſodaynely.
                  
                     Repentinus, a, um, ſodayne.
                  
                     Reperibitur, it ſhall be founde.
                  
                     Repertor, he that fyndeth.
                  
                     Repercutio, cuſsi, cutere, to ſtryke agayn, to reuerberate.
                  
                     Repercuſſus, ſus, a reuerberation or ſtrykynge often.
                  
                     Reperio, reperi, reperire, to fynde by auenture. ſometyme otherwiſe.Plautus.
                  
                  
                     Repetere, to calle agayne. Hem repudiatus repetor, Howe nowe, beinge ones refuſed, I am callyd agayne. Alta repetita,
                     Ter. in A
                           •
                        . reherſed from the begynning, farre ſought, or farre fette.
                  
                     Repetere poenas, ab aliquo, to be auengyd on one.
                  
                     Repeto, I remembre. Me quidem adoleſcē
                        tulo, repeto quendam principem nomine alternis diebus declamare, alternis diſputare, I remembre me, whan I was a boye, that one, whyche was a prynce of name, dydde one daye declame, an nother daye diſpute.
                  
                     Repetenti memoria, to cal to remembrance.
                  
                     Repeto, tij, tere, to aſke again, to aſke often, or efteſoones, to reherce agayne, or repete, to reuolue.
                  
                     Repetundarum accuſari, is proprely where a man ſometime beinge in great auctoritie and hauyng the rule of a countrey, is accuſed and callyd to a reckenynge, for all that he hath receyued, being in his office, aboue that whiche is his ordynarye allowaunce, alſo for all thynge that he tooke wrongefully from any perſone or towne▪ whyche was the mooſte neceſſarie action for a publyke weale, that mought be deuiſed, to be nowe put in execution.
                  
                     Repignerator, he that redemeth or quiteth his gage or pledge.
                  
                     Repignero, are, to quite or redeme a pledge or gage. It may be taken ſometyme with vs, that whyche in our lawe is callyd to repleuy: and repignoratio, a repleuy: and repignoratitia actio, for a replegiare.
                  
                     Replaudo, dere, to make noiſe with the handes beaten togither.
                  
                     Replicatio, a replycation or vnfoldynge of a thynge.
                  
                     Replico, care, to vnfolde. alſo to reply.
                  
                     Replumbo, are, to vnſowlder.I
                           ••
                        ecō, 
                           〈◊〉
                         d▪ auro & argent
                           •
                        .
                  
                  
                     Repo, repſi, pere, to crepe, to runne as rootes do in the grounde.
                  
                     
                     Repoleo, liui, lire, to polyſhe agayne.
                  
                     Repolleo, lere, to be moche able, to be of power to doo.
                  
                     Colum. 5.
                     Repolleſco, ſcere, to be efteſoones ſtronge or in force.
                  
                     Reponere fidem, to truſte.
                  
                     Horatius.
                     Reponere, 
                     
                        •
                     s alſo to put in by writing. Scriptor honoratum ſi forte reponis Achillem, Thou that writeſt, if peraduenture thou putteſt in Achylles.
                  
                     Repono, ſui, nere, to putte or ſette agayne in his place, to laye vp, to recite agayne, to hyde, to redelyuer or reſtore, to reuoke, to repreſſe, to lay to more, or exaggerate, to heape one on an other, to make to grow agayne, to brynge agayne. Et quantum longis carpent armenta diebus,
                     Vergeo. 2. 
                     Exigua tantum gelidus ros nocte reponet: Loke howe moche the ſheepe in the longe dayes ſhall byte. The colde dewe in oone nyghte with growynge ſhall requyte.
                  
                     Reporto, are, to brynge backe, or agayne.
                  
                     Repoſco, popoſci, ſcere, to aſke agayne that whyche is myne owne, or is as it were dewe to me.
                  
                     Repoſitorium, a ſtorehowſe.
                  
                     Repoſitus, & repoſtus, ta, tum, layd vppe, to hyde. Manet alta mente repoſtum, Iudicium Paridis, Depe in his minde, remayned the iudgement, that Parys gaue betwene the goddeſſes, of the whiche ſprange the occaſyon of the deſtruction of Troye.
                  
                     Repotium, whan the day after the mariage frendes do come & drinke with the bride.
                  
                     Reprehendo, dere, to plucke backe, to reproue. Reprehenſi, caught.
                  
                     Repreſento, tare, to repreſent, to render, to brynge in preſence, or preſent a thynge, to laye before one.
                  
                     Reprimo, mere, to refrayne, to lette.
                  
                     Reprobo, are, to reproue.
                  
                     Reprobus, a man reproued.
                  
                     Reproces, ſharpe.
                  
                     Reptile, all thynge that crepeth.
                  
                     Repto, tare, to crepe moch: alſo to go ſoftly lyke a ſnayle.
                  
                     Repudio, are, to forſake, as a man forſaketh his wife, alſo to refuſe, to abādon, or leue.
                  
                     Ter. in A
                           •
                        .
                     Repudio conſilium, quod primum intenderam, I wyll nowe leaue the counſayle that I fyrſte intended to folowe.
                  
                     Repudium, a deuorce.
                  
                     Repudium remittere, to be deuorced.
                  
                     Repudium renuntiare, to declare a deuorce. Is me nunc repudium renuntiare iuſsit tibi,
                     Plautus in A
                           •
                        i
                           ••
                        . He wylled me to declare to the, that he hath forſaken the.
                  
                     Repudioſae nuptiae, mariage, after the which foloweth ſone after a deuorce,Plautus in Perſa. 
                     Neceſsitate me mala ut fiam facis, uerum uideto, me vbi uoles nuptum date, ne hac fama faciat, repudoſas nuptias, Thou compelleſt me to be nought, but take hede, that where thou wylte mary me, by that reporte he ſhall make ſuche a weddynge as ſhall ſoone after be diſſolued or broken.
                  
                     Repueraſco, ſcere, to be efteſones a chylde.
                  
                     Repugno, are, to repugne or ſay contrary, to reſyſte.
                  
                     Repugnanter, an aduerbe, whiche ſignyfyeth contrariouſly, diſpleaſantly.Cicero de amicitia. 
                     Vt igitur monere & moneri, proprium eſt uerae amicitiae, & alterum libere facere, non aſperé: alterum pacienter accipere non repugnanter, ſic habendū eſt nullam in amicitus peſtem eſſe maiorem, quam adulationē, blanditias, aſſentationem, Lyke therfore as to giue counſayle, and to be counſailed, proprely belongeth to very frendeſhyp, alſo the tone to do euery thyng frankely, the tother to take all thynge pacientely, not diſpleaſantly: So it is to be conſydered, that in frendſhyp there is no more peſtilence, than flatterye, fayre wordes, and conſentynge to all thynges.
                  
                     Repugnantia, repugnācy, where one thing agreeth not with an nother.
                  
                     Repungo, gere, to prycke agayne, or mutually diſpleaſe or offende.
                  
                     Repulſa, a puttynge backe of hym, whiche eyther demaundeth or looketh for authoritie or offyce.
                  
                     Repulſor, oris, he that putteth an nother man backe.
                  
                     Repulſus, he that is put backe.
                  
                     Reputo, tare, to thynke often, to conſyder moche, to reuolue in the mynde, to compt▪ Alſo to cut of efteſoones.
                  
                     Requies, reſte.
                  
                     Requieſco, ſcere, to reſte or take reſte.
                  
                     Requietus, ta, tum, that whiche reſteth.
                  
                     Requiro, requiſiui, requirere, to ſeke efteſones or often, to requyre.
                  
                     Res, occaſion. Ere nata melius fieri haud potuit, 
                           
                              
                           
                           quam
                         factum eſt,
                     Terent. in Adelph. Of the occaſion begon it coulde not better haue ben doone, than it is. Alſo it ſygnifieth meane. I am repperi rem, quo pacto nec fur, nec ſotius ſies:
                     Plautus in Ruden. I haue nowe founde the meane, howe thou ſhalt be neyther a thefe, nor a companion with hym.
                  
                     Rem facere, to gayne or wynne. Nunquam rem facies: abi, neſcis ine
                           •
                        care homines,
                     Terent. in Adelph. Thou ſhalte neuer gayne penye: Gette the henſe, thou canneſt noo ſkylle to angle menne.
                  
                     Rem habere cum aliquo, to haue to do with

one, to meddell with one.
                  
                     Ter. in Eu.
                     Res gerere, to haue or make warres. Scipione Aemiliano res in Affrica gerente, Polybius annalium conditor,
                     Plinius. lib. 5. 
                     ab eo accepta claſſe ſcrutandi orbis illius gratia circunuectus eſt: Scipion Emilianus making warres in Affrike, Polybius the wrytar of Hiſtories, with a certayne numbre of ſhyppes, was conuayed aboute that coſte, to inſerche that parte of the worlde.
                  
                     Plautus in Epidico.
                     Re iuuare, to helpe with deedes & not with wordes onely. Is amicus, qui in re dubia re iuuat, vbi re eſt opus, He is a frende, which in a caſe that is doubteful, helpeth me with his deedes, where deedes are required. Quid iſti credam?
                     Terent. in Eunucho. 
                     res ipſa indicat: what ſhal I truſt hym? the deede ſelfe declareth. Verba ad rem conferre, to doo as he ſayth. Vſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         adeo ego illius ferre poſſum ineptias,
                     Terent. in Eunucho. 
                     & magnifica verba, verba dum ſint, verū enim, ſi ad rem conferentur, vapulabit: Hitherto I can ſuffre his lewdeneſſe, and bragges, as longe as they are but wordes: but yf he do as he ſayth, he ſhall ſmart therfore.
                  
                     Re vera, in deede, in very trouthe, matter in dede.
                  
                     Reſalutatio, a courtayſe ſpeakynge to hym that ſpeaketh to you, a reſalutinge.
                  
                     Reſaluto, ſalutare, to ſalute hym that ſaluteth you.
                  
                     Reſarcio, ſi, cire, to amende, to refourme.
                  
                     Reſarrio, iui, ire, to weede eftſones corne.
                  
                     Res, a thinge, the thinge, the matter: ſometyme aſtate, condicion, buſyneſſe, contention, cauſe, rycheſſe or ſubſtance, profyte, weale, experience.
                  
                     Res eſt, it is matter in dede.
                  
                     Res ad manticam redijt, it is all come to a bagge and a ſtaffe, or a ſtaffe and a walet.
                  
                     Res comperendinata, a mater adiourned or deferred vntyll the thirde daye.
                  
                     Res iudicata, the matter or cauſe finally determyned and adiuged.
                  
                     Res controuerſa, the mater in ſute.
                  
                     Res forenſis, a mater in lawe.
                  
                     Respublica, a publike weale.
                  
                     Reſcindo, ſcidi, ſcindere, to cut or breake in ſunder,Vergil. 
                           •
                        eor. 
                           •
                        i. 1. to take awaye, to deſtroye, to make voyde or repell an acte or lawe, to breake vp. Coelum reſcindere fratres, Ter ſunt conati: Thries the brethern aſſayed to breke vp heuen, for to enter.
                  
                     Reſcio, ſciui, ſcire, to knowe a thinge, which is hydde and kepte ſecrete: alſo to knowe a thinge after that it is done, whiche was not knowen before.
                  
                     Reſciſco, ſcere, idem quod Reſcio.
                  
                  
                     Reſcribo, pſi, bere, to wryte agayne, to redelyuer, to repay money.
                  
                     Reſeco, are, to cut awaye that which is ſuperfluouſe.
                  
                     Reſecare ad vinum, to pare to the quicke, to touche the quicke in a mater.
                  
                     Reſecro, crare, to praye or deſire eftſones: alſo to aſſoyle one of his auowe.
                  
                     Reſegmen, the paringe of a mans nayles.
                  
                     Reſero, are, to open a thinge that is cloſed.
                  
                     Reſero, tere, to ſow or ſet agayne.
                  
                     Reſeruatio, a reſeruation, a kepyng of ſome thynge.
                  
                     Reſeruo, uare, to kepe a part frome other thinges, to reſerue.
                  
                     Reſes, idis, ydell frome accuſtumed labour or occupacion.
                  
                     
                        Reſex, ſecis,
                        Col. lib. 3
                      that which is cut and ſpringeth agayne, and beareth more fruyte than it dyd before.
                  
                     Reſideo, reſedi, reſidere, to reſt, to ſytte, to ſtande faſt.
                  
                     Reſido, ſedi, ſidere, to ſyt downe, alſo to abide.Plinius in Epiſto. 
                     Nam Viennenſium vitia inter ipſos reſidunt, noſtra late vagantur, For the faultes of men of Vienne, doo abyde with theym, oures runne abrode, and be euery where knowen.
                  
                     Reſidet in vultu, there doeth reſt or appiere in the vyſage.Cic. de 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      
                     Quorum non in ſententia ſolum, ſed etiam in nutu reſidebat autoritas, In whoſe ſentence not onely, but alſo countenaunce, autoritie reſted.
                  
                     Reſiduus, a, um, the reſt or remnaunt.
                  
                     Reſigno, are, to open that which is ſealed: ſometyme to ſeale faſt, alſo to ſhyt, ſometyme to reſtore agayne, alſo to reſigne or ſurrendre.
                  
                     Reſignatum aes, wages ſtopped for negligent ſeruice in warres.
                  
                     Reſilio, lij, iire, to lepe backe, or ſteppe away quickely.
                  
                     Reſimus, he that hath a camoyſenoſe, that is to ſaye, tourned vpwarde.
                  
                     Reſina, roſyn, all lyke gumme whyche runneth out of trees.
                  
                     Reſinatus, ſinata, tum, raſed, or dreſſed with roſyn.
                  
                     Reſipio, pui, pere, idem quod Reſipiſco.
                  
                  
                     Reſipiſco, reſipui, reſipiſcere, to retourne to perfect vnderſtāding, to be eftſones wiſe, where before he erred.
                  
                     Reſiſto, reſtiti, reſiſtere, to reſyſte or withſtande.
                  
                     Reſoluo, uere, to reſolue, to deſtroye, to pay dettes, to remoue, to vndo or vnlowſe.
                  
                     Reſolutio neruorum, the palſey.
                  
                     Reſono, nare, to ſowne agayne, to make an Eccho.
                  
                     Reſorbeo, bui, & pſi, bere, to poure out or diſgorge the licour that was receyued.
                  
                     
                     Reſpecto, are, to ſee often, to loue, to helpe.
                  
                     Reſpectus, tus, a looke: alſo, reſpect or regarde. Ne
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         eo reſpectu commorus diſceſſerat:
                     Plini. Hauynge no regarde thereunto he departed.
                  
                     Reſpergo, ſi, gere, to caſt water or other licour about, to ſprynkle.
                  
                     Reſpergimen, a ſprynklynge or caſtynge about of licour.
                  
                     
                        
                           ••
                        r. in An.
                     Reſpicere, to helpe or ſocour. Age, me in tuis ſecundis rebus reſpice: Let ſe, nowe in thy proſperitie, ſocoure me.
                  
                     Reſpicit nos deus, god hath pytie on vs. Tacemodo,
                     Plautus in 
                           ••
                        cch. 
                     deꝰ reſpiciet nos aliquis, peace now, ſome god will haue pitie on vs.
                  
                     Reſpicere ſe, to take hede or haue regarde of hym ſelf.Plautus in 
                           ••
                        udo
                           •
                        o. 
                     Non ſoles reſpicere te, cum dicas iniuſte alteri? Art thou not wont to take hede of thy ſelfe, whan thou ſayeſt wrong of another man?Terent. in 
                           ••
                        caut. 
                     Non tu te cohibes? non te reſpicis? non tibi exempli ſatis ſum? Wilte thou not beware? wilt thou not take hede of thy ſelf? am not I a good example vnto the?
                  
                     Reſpicio, exi, ſpicere, to loke backe, to haue regarde, to prouyde, to remedy, to kepe, to reſerue, to loue.
                  
                     Cice. Aul. 
                           •
                        orquato.
                     Reſpiro, are, to take brethe, alſo to take cō
                     forte, to retourne to the fyrſt ſtate. Si armis aut conditione poſitis, aut fatigarione abiectis, aut victoria detractis, ciuitas reſpirauerit: & dignitate tua tibi, & fortuna vti licebit: If that harneyſe, eyther by condicions of peace beinge layde away, or by weryneſſe of both partes beinge throwen awaye, or pulled awaye by victory, the citie ſhall recouer her fyrſt eſtimation, thou than ſhalt enioye thy poſſeſſions and dignitie.
                  
                     Reſplendeo, dere, to ſhyne.
                  
                     Reſpondeo, di, dere, to aunſwere, to appiere whan one is called, to agree, to conſent or be lyke or equall, to be againſt, as one thing ſet or lyenge agaynſte another.
                  
                     Reſponſio, an aunſwere.
                  
                     Reſponſito, tare, to make or gyue aunſwere: it pertayned proprely to lawiars: and them whyche hadde the interpretation of ceremonyes.
                  
                     Cice
                           •
                         pro C
                           ••
                        en.
                     Reſponſo are, to aunſwere.
                  
                     Reſponſum, an aunſwere.
                  
                     Reſponſus, ſus, ſui, where one thinge doeth agree with another, a conſent, a conueniencye.
                  
                     Reſpuo, ere, to refuſe, or reiect.
                  
                     Reſtagnó, reſtagnare, to contayne or holde water.
                  
                     Reſtat, Reſtare, to be or remayne of that thinge, that is lefte, to ſtande backe, to reſyſte. Hoc me reſtat, that remayneth or abydeth for me.
                  
                     Reſtauro, Reſtaurare, to reſtore, or make agayne.
                  
                     Reſtibilis, that which is renewed, or ſowen agayne.
                  
                     Reſtibilis ager, a feelde which is ſowen two yeres togither.
                  
                     Reſtinguo, xi, guere, to ſtint or put oute, or ceſſe, as fyre, lyght, and thurſt.
                  
                     Reſtio, onis, a roper: alſoo he that hangeth hym ſelfe.
                  
                     Reſtipulatio, a puttynge in of pledges,Plautus. put in gage or pledge, for to make aunſwere to an action.
                  
                     Reſtipulor, aris, ari, to make aunſwere in the lawe.
                  
                     Reſtite, to be redy to be ſowen, ploughed, or dygged.
                  
                     Reſtis, a halter or corde, a rope or bunche of of garlyke or onyons.
                  
                     Reſtem ducere, whan maydens and childrē daunſe togither hande in hande, or with napkens, leadynge one another. Ad reftim res redijt, the mater is in deſpayre, or deſperate.
                  
                     Reſtiro, tare, to abyde or tary.
                  
                     Reſtituo, ere, to reſtore, to yelde agayne.
                  
                     Reſtitutio, reſtitution.
                  
                     Reſto, tare, to remayne, to tary. Hic nunc me credit aliquam ſibi fallaciam portare,
                     Ter. in An. 
                     & ea me hic reſtitiſſe gratia: He weeneth, that I warke hym ſome falſhede, and that I tary ſtyll therfore.Cicero de finibus. 
                     Nullam querentes voluptatem Stoici reſtant. The Stoike Philoſophers do reſiſt or ſticke to their opynion, ſekinge for no pleaſure.
                  
                     Reſtat mihi, it taryeth for merit ſhal happen vnto me.
                  
                     Reſtricte & Reſtrictim, ſtraytely, or ſtrayte.
                  
                     Reſtringo, xi, ſtringere, to bynde or ſtrayne backwarde, to bynde agayne, to reſtrayne: ſometyme it ſignifyeth to lowſe. Apulci. Iumentum reſtrinxit, abire
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         ſtabulo liberum ſinit: he lowſed his horſe, and let hym out of the ſtable at libertye.
                  
                     Reſulto, tare, to lepe agaynſte a thinge, to rebounde, to rebelle, to leape or ſteppe backe.
                  
                     Reſumo, pſi, ſumere, to take agayne, to reſume.
                  
                     Reſuo, ere, to ſowe agayne, or make a double ſtyche: alſo to ryppe or vndo that whiche is ſowen, to vnſtytche.Suct. in an. 
                     Sumenti virilē togam, tunica laticlaui reſuta ex vtra
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         parte, ad pedes decidit: Whan he came fyrſte to mannes age, his Senatours cote beynge rypte on bothe ſydes, fell downe to his feete.
                  
                     
                     Reſupinus, na, num, vpryght, the bely vpwarde.
                  
                     Reſurgo, rexi, gere, to aryſe vppe.
                  
                     Reſurrectio, reſurrection.
                  
                     Reſupino, nare, to tourne vpwarde, or vpright, to reuoke or calle backe, to differ, to peruerte.
                  
                     Retae, trees growyng on the bankes of ryuers, or in the ryuers.
                  
                     Retardatio, a taryenge.
                  
                     Retardo, dare, to make to tary.
                  
                     Rete, tis, a nette.
                  
                     Retego, Retexi, tegere, to diſcouer or diſcloſe.
                  
                     Retento, entare, to retayne often, to tempte eftſones.
                  
                     Retexo, ere, to vntwyſte or vntwyne, or vnwynde: ſometyme to twiſt or wynde eftſones, to diſſolue.
                  
                     Retia culum, a lytle net.
                  
                     Retiarius, he that caſteth a nette, proprely in ſyghtynge to apprehende his aduerſarye.
                  
                     Retia, nettes, ſometyme it ſignifyeth one nette.
                  
                     Reticeo, cui, ticère, to holde ones peace, to ſpeake no worde, to kepe ſecrete, to ſaye nothynge.
                  
                     Reticentia, ſilence, whan one holdeth his peace.
                  
                     Reticula, a lytle net, wherin a mans heare or womens is truſſed.
                  
                     Reticulatus, Reticulata, culatum, made lyke a nette.
                  
                     Reticulum, a cawle or coyfe: alſo a bagge, wherin meate is caryed.
                  
                     Retinaculum, what ſo euer holdeth any other thinge, a ſtaye.
                  
                     Retinere, to holde vppe, that a man fall not. Ab retine me obſecro.
                     Terent in Heauton, 
                     B. obſecro quid tibi eſt
                           •
                         An. Diſperij. B. perij miſera, quid ſtupes Antiphila? Oh holde me vppe I praye the. B. alak what ayleth the? A. I am vndone. B. alas that euer I was borne, why doth thy hart fayle the Antiphila?
                  
                     Retineo, nui, nere, to holde agayne, to retayne, to kepe in remembraunce.
                  
                     Terent. in Adelph.
                     Retinere, to reſtrayne or let one frome doinge that, that he wolde. Pudore & liberalitate liberos retinere ſatius eſſe credo, quam metu: I thinke it better to reſtrayne children frome their wanton willes, by ſhame and liberalitie, than with feare.
                  
                     Retinens, he that kepeth ſtill.
                  
                     Retiolum, a Cawle, or coyfe.
                  
                     Retondeo, dere, to klyppe all ouer.
                  
                     Retorqueo, torſi, quere, to caſt backewarde, to throwe or ſhute agayne.
                  
                     Retorreſco, retorreſcere, to be burnedde with the ſunne.
                  
                     Retorridus, da, dum, burned or ſeryd.
                  
                     Retracto, ctare, to calle backe, or reuoke a thinge that is done, to drawe backe, to excuſe, to laye to another man, to drawe vp.
                  
                     Retrahe, traxi, trahere, to pull or drawe back, or to drawe to.
                  
                     Retribuo, buere, to recompence.
                  
                     Retrica, old writars called the water, wherwith gardens are watered.
                  
                     Retrimētum, the dragges of a thynge: ſomtyme ordure or dung.
                  
                     Retrò, behynde.
                  
                     Retrocedo, ceſsi, cedere, to go backe.
                  
                     Retrorſum, bacwarde.
                  
                     Retrorſus, a, um, turned backewarde.
                  
                     Retrudo, ſi, dere, to put backe.
                  
                     Retundo, dere, to make blunt or dull, that whyche is ſharpe: alſo to beate often on a thynge.
                  
                     Retuſus, a, um, dull, blunt, contrary to ſharp. Aliae agrorum partes,
                     Cic. de D
                           •
                        
                      
                     quae acuta ingenia gignant, aliae quae retuſa: Some partes of cō
                     trayes there be, whyche do bringe forth ſharpe wyttes, ſome bringe forth dull.
                  
                     Reualeſco, ſcere, to be recouered frome ſickeneſſe.
                  
                     Reueho, uexi, here, to brynge or cary backe, or agayne.
                  
                     Reuelatio, a reuelynge or a diſcloſynge of a thinge.
                  
                     Reuello, reuellere, to plucke backe, to pull agayne.
                  
                     Reuelo, are, to diſcouer.
                  
                     Reuenio, nire, to come agayne.
                  
                     Reuerendus, worthy reuerence.
                  
                     Reuerens, rentior, rentiſsimus, he that doeth reuerence.
                  
                     Reuerenter, reuerently.
                  
                     Reuerentia, reuerence or honour doone to one.
                  
                     Reuereor, retis, reri, to haue in reuerence.
                  
                     Reuerſio, a retourne.Budeus.
                  
                  
                     Reuertor, teris, ti, to retourne.
                  
                     Reuerto, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     
                        Reuincio, uinxi, uincere,
                        Verg
                              •
                           l. Gell.
                      to bynde backe or behynde, as to bynde ones handes behynde hym.
                  
                     Reuincere paratus eſt, whyche the lawyars do ſaye, Paratus eſt verificare, He is redy to auerr̄.
                  
                     Reuiſo, ſere, to retourne to ſee.
                  
                     Reuiuiſco, ſcere, to be reuyued.
                  
                     Reuoco, uocare, to calle backe, to reuoke, to brynge agayne, to drawe backe, to rayſe frome deth.
                  
                     Reuocare pedem, to turne backe, to recule.
                  
                     Reuocare, to reſtore or renewe. Item circa omnium ordinum ſtatum domi, foriſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , aut

correxit, aut exoleta reuocauit, aut etiam noua inſtituit: Moreouer concernynge the ſtate of al degrees, as wel within his houſe as withoute, eyther he dyd amende them, or renewed thoſe thynges that were oute of vſe, or els ordayned newe.
                  
                     Reuocatio, a reuocation or callynge backe.
                  
                     
                        
                           ••
                        deus.
                     Reuocare reſtes, to reherce the depoſicions of witneſſes, Publication.
                  
                     Reuolo, are, to flee backe.
                  
                     Reuoluo, ui, uere, to turne vppe and downe, to reuolue, to tourne backe, to remoue.
                  
                     Reuolutus, ta, tum, to be tourned backe, to be remoued.
                  
                     Reuolutio, a tournynge backe to the firſte place or poynt: a reuolucion or tournynge of celeſtiall bodyes or ſpheres.
                  
                     Reuorto, tere, olde wrytars vſed for Reuertor, to retourne.
                  
                     Reus, he that is ſued or accuſed, ſometyme he that is gyltye.
                  
                     Reus facti, gylty of an offence.
                  
                     Reus agitur, he is ſued or accuſed.
                  
                     Reus peragitur, he that is condemned.
                  
                     Reus ſtipulando, he that bargayneth.
                  
                     Reus uoti, he that hath auowed.
                  
                     Reum ſubdere, to accuſe one of gret offence
                  
                     Rex regis, a kynge.
                  
                     Rex ſacrificulus, was a chief miniſter of ſacrifices amonge the Romayns onely.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶R, ANTE H.
                  
                     RHabarbarum, Rubarbe, a preciouſe roote, medicinable to pourge coler. alſo to corroborate the ſtomake and lyuer.
                  
                     Rachinon, a ſpyder, hauynge a lytle blacke heed, and is ſomewhat whyte, and hath ſhort feete, whoſe bytynge is as venymous as the ſtyngynge of a Scorpion.
                  
                     Rhadamanthus, was kynge of Licia, which was a ſtrayghte executour of iuſtice: and therfore was ſuppoſed of the Paynyms to be afterwarde one of the iuges in hell.
                  
                     Rhagades, & Rhagadiae, certayne kleftes or as it were Scrachis aboute the ſiege or fundament.
                  
                     Pli. li. 24. cap. 14.
                     Rhamnus, a kynde of brembles, whyche is whyte, and beareth more frute than other do, and alſo hath floures, & ſendeth forth brāches with ſtrayght prickes, not croked as other are, and hath brode leues.
                  
                     Rhamnuſia, was called goddeſſe of vengeaunce.
                  
                     Rhamnuſius, a man of a town called Rhamnus, by Athenes.
                  
                     Rhampſinithus, the propre name of a kynge of Egypte.
                  
                     Rhaphanus, an herbe called Radyſſhe.
                  
                     Rhebanus, a ryuer in the mouth of Boſphorus, a countraye in Thracia.
                  
                     Rhea, was called the mother of goddes, called alſo Cibele.
                  
                     Rhea Syluia, the mother of Romulus and Rhemus.
                  
                     Rheda, a chariot.
                  
                     Rhedarius, a chariotman.
                  
                     Rhegiam, a citie on the bordure of Italy towarde Sicile: alſo an other citye not ferre frome Parma.
                  
                     Rheginus, a man of the citie of Rhegium in Calabre.
                  
                     Rhemi, people in Fraunce, called alſo Rhemenſes.
                  
                     Rhenones, cotes made of the ſkynnes of beaſtes.
                  
                     Rhenus, a noble ryuer in Germania, called the Rheyne.
                  
                     Rhenenſe vinum, Rheyniſſhe wyne.
                  
                     Rhenenſes, people dwellynge on the ryuer of Rheyne.
                  
                     Rheon, Reubarbe.
                  
                     Rheſus, kynge of Thracia, whiche came to the ayde of the Troianes, and was ſlayne of Diomedes: of whome a ryuer aboute Troye was called Rheſus.
                  
                     Rheti, a people in Italy.
                  
                     Rhetia, a countraye in Germany, whyche ſome men doo ſuppoſe to be Bauaria, or Beuer, called in Duche, Berue.
                  
                     Rhetor, oris, he that teacheth Rhetorike.
                  
                     Rhetorica, Rhetorike, or the crafte of eloquence.
                  
                     Rhetoricor, cari, to ſpeake Rhetorike.
                  
                     Rhetoricè, lyke a Rhetorician.
                  
                     Rhetus, a gyaunt, whome Dionyſe, beinge tourned into a lyon, ſlewe.
                  
                     Rhetoricus, an oratour, or a man cunnyng in the craft of eloquence.
                  
                     Rhetoriſſo, are, to ſpeake in the fourme of Rhetorike.
                  
                     Rheuma, a rewme or diſtillation of humours.
                  
                     Rheumatiſmus, the diſeaſe of rheume.
                  
                     Rhibis, a bremble called Raſpys.
                  
                     Rhinoceron, ontis, a beſt that hath an horne in his noſe, whyche naturally is enemy to the Olyphant: it is alſo an oyle veſſell, out of the which oyle is dropped.
                  
                     Rhinocerotis naſum habere, is ſayd of them that he witty. Iuuenes
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , ſenes
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , Et pueri na ſum, Rhinocerotis habent, Yong men,Horatius. olde men, And children, and all be witty.
                  
                     Rhodanus, a ryuer in Fraunce, called the Rone.
                  
                     Rhodia, a kynde of vynes.
                  
                     Rhodites, a certayne precyouſe ſtone, of

the colour of a roſe.
                  
                     Rhodope, a mountayne in Thracia.
                  
                     Rhodos, an Ile called Rodes.
                  
                     Rhodius, of the Rodes.
                  
                     Plini.
                     Rhododaphne, & Rhododendros, a tree, hauynge leaues lyke to an almonde tree, but greatter and fatter ſedes, open lyke a horne, which hath in them wulle lyke purple ſilke, a longe roote, ſalte in taſt, it groweth in watry places.
                  
                     Rhodonia, a gardyn of roſes.
                  
                     Rhodophone, that part of Syria, that goeth ouer the mountayne of Taurus.
                  
                     Rhodopeius, a, um, pertaynynge to the mountayne, of Rhodope.
                  
                     Rhombus, a fygure foure ſquare, hauynge the ſydes equall, the corners crooked. it is alſo a fyſh called a Birt: alſo a ſpynnynge wheele or tourne.
                  
                     Rhoeas, whan the corners of the eyen are open, ſo that there doo ſtill frome theym continuall dropes.
                  
                     Rhomphea, a ſworde.
                  
                     Rhoetus, a mountayne of Troye, where 
                        •
                     ax Thelamonius was buryed.
                  
                     Rhoeton, wyne made of pomegranettes.
                  
                     Rhopalon, a water lyly, called communely Nenuphar.
                  
                     Rhoxia, a countraye by Polonia.
                  
                     Rhoxalani, people on the north part, of the ryuer of Danubius, or Danowe.
                  
                     Rhureni, a people in Fraunce called Rhodes.
                  
                     Rhymnus, a ryuer.
                  
                     Rhyndacus, a ryuer, which runneth in to the ſee called Pontus.
                  
                     Rhyparographus, a paynter of tryfles, a Stayner.
                  
                     Rhytion, a veſſell lyke to a moone.
                  
                     Rhythmus, numbre or at meny in ſpeakinge.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶R, ANTE I.
                  
                     RIca, a garment of purple, hemmed or purfled. alſo a kerchief, whiche women do weare.
                  
                     Ricinus, & Ricinum, euery garment that is foure ſquare. alſo it is a kynde of Cucumbres. alſo an herbe lyke a fygge tree, but leſſe, hauynge leues lyke to a plane tree.
                  
                     Ricinium, & Ricinum, a cloke, whereof part was caſt ouer a mannes ſholder.
                  
                     Ricula, a handekerchief.
                  
                     Rictus, & Rictum, a grynnynge or ſcorneful openynge of the mouthe: alſo the fourme of the vyſage, whan a man grenneth, or a dogge brawleth.
                  
                     Rideo, riſi, ridêre, to laughe: alſo to ſkorne or mocke.
                  
                     Ridibundus, da, dum, that lawgheth moche.
                  
                     Ridica, a proppe, wherwith a vyne, or other lyke thinge is holden vp.
                  
                     Ridiculate, a thinge to laughe at.
                  
                     Ridiculum, 
                     idem. alſo a mocke.
                  
                     Ridiculus, a man whome men doo mocke or lawghe at.
                  
                     Ridicularius, a, um, idem quod Ridiculum.
                  
                  
                     Ridiculé, folyſhly.
                  
                     Ridiculoſus, a, um, idem quod Ridiculus.
                  
                  
                     Ridiculoſé, folyſhly to be lawghed at.
                  
                     Rigeo, gui, gere, to be feruently colde, alſoo to be harde or ſtyffe.
                  
                     Rigeſco, ſcere, idem quod Rigeo.
                  
                  
                     Rigidè, ſtyffely, ſharpely, cruelly.
                  
                     Rigidus, da, dum, colde, harde, ſtyffe, ſharpe or cruell.
                  
                     Rigo, are, to make weate, or to water a garden or felde.
                  
                     Rigor, Rigoris, colde, hardeneſſe, ſtyfeneſſe.
                  
                     Riguus, a, um, that maye be eaſyly weate or watered.
                  
                     Rima, a chynke, or kleft in woode or ſtone, where it is not cloſe ioyned.
                  
                     Rimula, a lytell chynke or cleft.
                  
                     Rimas agere, to be clouyn or chynked, as tymber or bourdes are with lyenge in the wynde.
                  
                     Rimā inuenire, to fynde an excuſe,Plautus in Cur. & in Caſina. or meane to eſcape.
                  
                     Rimor, aris, ari, to ſerche diligently, alſo to kleue as tymber doeth.
                  
                     Rimoſus, a, um, full of kleftes or chynkes.
                  
                     Ringo, xi, gere, to grynne or ſhew the teeth, as a dogge doeth whan he will barke or byte. alſo to be angry, to brawle, to barke.
                  
                     Ripa, a water banke.
                  
                     Riparia, a byrde whyche breedeth in water bankes.
                  
                     Ripae, ſeu Ripei, mountaynes in Archadia.
                  
                     Riphaei, mountaynes in Scythia.
                  
                     Riſcus, a cofer couered with lether: alſo a lytle wyndowe.
                  
                     Riſibilis, le, that which can lawghe.
                  
                     Riſus, laughter.
                  
                     Riſus ſardonius, a lawghter without myrth, as of them that be madde or cruell, ſuch as Iriſh men vſe whan they be angry.
                  
                     Ritè, dyrectely, truely, euen as it ſhulde be.
                  
                     Rituales, bookes, wherin the fourme of ceremonyes, and old maners and cuſtomes are wryten.
                  
                     Ritus, tus, an approued cuſtome.
                  
                     Riuales, they whiche equally doo loue one womanne, or be woars togither. alſo they, whoſe landes be deuyded by a ryuer or brooke: alſo they which dwel vpō ryuers.
                  
                     Riualitas, tatis, enuy or obſeruaunce betwixt

the louers of one woman.
                  
                     Plautus in Aſinar.
                     Riuinus, a wower, idem quod riualis.
                  
                  
                     Riuus, a ryuer or broke.
                  
                     Riuulus, a lyttell broke.
                  
                     Riuo, are, is to go to watryng, as beſtis do.
                  
                     Rixa, a braulynge contention.
                  
                     Rixoſe, brawlynge.
                  
                     No. Mar.
                     Rixoſus, a ſtryuer or brawler.
                  
                     Rixor, aris, ari, & rixo, to contende with brawlynge.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶R, ANTE O.
                  
                     RObigalia, the Ceremonyes pertaynynge to Robigus, the preſeruatour of corne.
                  
                     Robiginoſus, a, um, moche blaſted.
                  
                     Robigo, was honored of the Romains for a goddeſſe, whom they ſuppoſed mought preſerue their corne from blaſtinge. it is alſo that vice in corne called blaſting.
                  
                     Robigus, whome the olde Romaynes named the god, that preſerued corne from blaſtynge.
                  
                     Roboraria, places, whiche ar paled about.
                  
                     Roboreus, ea, eum, of oken tymber.
                  
                     Roboro, are, to fortifie.
                  
                     Roboſes, the old wryters vſed for robore, an oke.
                  
                     Robur, roboris, hard oke. It is alſo ſtrēgth and hardenes of the body. ſommetyme the ſtrength or hardnes of any thing generally
                  
                     Robus, olde wryters called redde of colour. Alſo al maner of matter, which had many redde vaynes, was called Robus. It is alſo a kynde of wheate, that yeldeth fayre meale, whiche we nowe called redde wheate.
                  
                     Robuſtus, ta, tum, ſtronge and harde.
                  
                     Rodo, ſi, dere, to gnawe as a mouſe or other lyke beaſte dothe. ſometyme to detracte or backbyte.
                  
                     Feſtus
                     Rodus, da, dum, a thyng vnperfect or rude, vnpolyſhed, vnwrought.
                  
                     Rogamen, minis, a deſyre.
                  
                     Rogatarii, Notaryes, whyche requyred the partyes, that eche of theym ſhoulde promyſe.
                  
                     Plautus.
                     Rogator, rogatoris, a begger frome doore to doore.
                  
                     Rogito, tare, to intreate or demande, to inquyre often, to aſke for a thynge.
                  
                     Rogo, are, to requyre, to pray, to inquyre, to aſke of one, to inacte.
                  
                     Rogare populum, to treat with the people.
                  
                     Quint Ilia.
                     Rogare ſacramento, to ſweare oone, or to gyue to hym an othe.
                  
                     Rogatio. was amonge the Romaynes, whanne the Tribunes, whyche were the heed officers of the people, were content that any acte ſhoulde paſſe, whyche was made by the ſenate, or by the ſame Tribunes deuyſed.
                  
                     Rogus, a great fyre, wherein deed bodies were bourned.
                  
                     Roma, the citie of Rome.
                  
                     Romanenſis, he that commeth from an nother countrey, and dwelleth at Rome.
                  
                     Romania, is a countrey called Thracia.
                  
                     Romanus, a Romayne.
                  
                     Romanus, na, num, of Rome.
                  
                     Romandui, Normandes.
                  
                     Romula, a tree, vnder the whiche Romulus and Remus were founde.
                  
                     Romuleus, a, um, & Romulidus, da, dum, of Romulus.
                  
                     Romulus, the fyrſte kynge of Romaines.
                  
                     Ronchiſſo, are, to route or ſhorte.
                  
                     Ronchus, a routynge. ſometyme a ſcorne.
                  
                     Ronchiſonus, he that routeth or ſnorteth.
                  
                     Rorarii milites, men in the vauntgarde, or a forwarde of a battayle.
                  
                     Roratio, is a diſeaſe in vynes, by the occaſyon wherof the chiefe grapes doo falle away.
                  
                     Roreſco, ſcere, to be waſhed with dewe.
                  
                     Rorifacio, cere, to ſpryncle.
                  
                     Rores, dewes.
                  
                     Roro, are, to dewe, or droppe downe lyke dewe.
                  
                     Rorulentus, ta, tum, full of dewe.
                  
                     Ros, roris, dewe.
                  
                     Roſa, a Roſe.
                  
                     Roſaceus, a, um, of roſes. Aqua Roſacea, Roſewater.
                  
                     Roſalia, garlandes of Roſes.
                  
                     Roſarium, a gardeyn or bedde of Roſes.
                  
                     Roſetum, a gardeyne of Roſes.
                  
                     Roſeus, a, um, of a roſe.
                  
                     Roſidus, da, dum, werte with dewe.
                  
                     Roſmarinum, Roſemary, or a lyttel ſnoute.
                  
                     Roſtellum, a lyttell beake or bylle of a byrd.
                  
                     Roſtra, rorum, roſtris, was a place in Rome afore the court callid Hoſtilia, wherin was a pulpite, in which the oratours of Rome were wonte to ſtande, whan they preched to the people, or declared any matter, of the whiche proceded this worde Pro roſtris, in the pulpit, or at the barre.
                  
                     Roſtrum, a beake of a byrde, a ſnowte of a beaſte or fyſhe, alſo the ſtemme of a ſhip or boote.
                  
                     Rota, a wheele.
                  
                     Roto, tare, to turne a thynge lyke a whele.
                  
                     Rotula, a lyttell whele. Rotella, idem.
                  
                  
                     Rotunde, roundly, aptely, elegantly, handſomly, proprely in wordes.
                  
                     Rotundus, tunda, dum, rounde, ſommetyme

well compacte or facioned. Ore rotundo loqui, to expreſſe moche in fewe wordes.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶R, ANTE V.
                  
                     RVbefacio, cere, to make redde.
                  
                     Rubefio, fieri, to be made redde.
                  
                     Rubellae, redde grapes.
                  
                     Rubellum vinum, clarette wyne.
                  
                     Rubeo, bere, to be redde.
                  
                     Ruber, bra, brum, redde.
                  
                     Rubeſco, ſcere, to be redde.
                  
                     Rubeta, a tode.
                  
                     Rubetum, a buſſhy cloſe.
                  
                     Rubeus, ea, eum, redde.
                  
                     Rubens, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Rubi, borum, a towne in Campania.
                  
                     Rubia, mader, wherwith clothe is dyed.
                  
                     Rubicon, conis, a ryuer in Italye, whyche dyuideth Italy from Lombardy.
                  
                     Rubicundus, da, dum, ruddy.
                  
                     Rubidus, da, dum, a ſwarte redde. Alſoo rowghe or courſe, as bredde, hauynge moche branne.
                  
                     Rubigino, are, to ruſte.
                  
                     Rubiginoſus, a, um, ruſtye.
                  
                     Rubigo, ginis, ruſte.
                  
                     Rubor, oris, redneſſe.
                  
                     Rubrica, red chalke, or ruddell, wherwith ſhepe are marked.
                  
                     Rubricera, roſette colour.
                  
                     Rubrus, a, um, redde.
                  
                     Rubricatus, ta, tum, coloured with redde, or ruddelyd, as ſhepe are.
                  
                     Rubus, a bremble.
                  
                     Ructo, are, to belke or breake wynde vppe warde.
                  
                     Ructito, tare, to breake wynde often.
                  
                     Ructuatio, idem quod ructus.
                  
                  
                     Ructus, belkyng or breking wynd vpward.
                  
                     Rude donari, to be diſcharged of attendāce proprely in warres.
                  
                     Rudē accipere, hath the ſame ſignification.
                  
                     Rudens, tis, a cabell of a ſhyppe.
                  
                     Ruderarium, a rangynge ſyeue.
                  
                     Rudero, rare, to laye on olde ſtoones and rubbell.
                  
                     Rudero, are, to daube or lay on morter.
                  
                     Ruderatus, ta, tum, where moche rubbyſhe lyeth.
                  
                     Rudetum, a place, where lyeth moche rubbyſhe or rubbell. Alſo lande, whiche hath lyen
                        •
                     ley, and is newly put in tylthe.
                  
                     Rudiarij, they whyche are dyſcharged of fyghtynge with ſwordes, as they whiche were calledde Gladiatores, that openlye faught, one with an other, to animate the Romaynes, with ſhedyng of their blode. They be alſo bodgers or amēders of old garmentes, alſo ſeuiars, or makers of ſieues.
                  
                     Rudicula, a potte ſtycke.
                  
                     Rudiae, arum, a citie in the further parte of Italy, ioynynge to Apulia.
                  
                     Rudimentum, the fyrſt teching of children.
                  
                     Rudio, dire, to teche one, which is vnlernid.
                  
                     Rudis, a rodde or yerde, whiche was gyuen to ſworde players, whan they came to .lx. yeres olde, in token that they were ſette at libertie. ſometyme lybertie frome labour.
                  
                     Rudis, de, rude, vnperfect, new, vnwrought
                  
                     Rudus, ruderis, ſhardes or pieces of ſtones broken and ſcattered, rubbell or rubbyſhe of olde houſes.
                  
                     Ruditas, rudenes, lacke of lernyng or wit.
                  
                     Rudo, rudi, rudere, to braye lyke an aſſe. It is ſometyme ſpoken of a man. ſometyme of a woman.
                  
                     Rufeo, & rufeſco, ſcere, to be ſommewhat redde.
                  
                     Rufo, fare, to make redde.
                  
                     Rufuli, certayne Captaynes made by the conſul, who afterward were called Rutuli.
                  
                  
                     Rufus, a, um, ſomwhat redde.
                  
                     Ruga, a wrynkle, or playte.
                  
                     Rugio, giui, gire, to rore.
                  
                     Rugo, gare, to be playted or wrynkled.
                  
                     Rugo, xi, gere, to belke.
                  
                     Ruina, ruyne, extreme decay.
                  
                     Ruinoſus, a, um, ruinous, in decaye.
                  
                     Rulla, the ſtaffe, wherwith the ploughman clenſeth his culter.
                  
                     Ruma, was of the olde writers callydde a teate, alſo it is the throte bolle.
                  
                     Rumen, the dewlappe of a beaſte. alſoo a place in the bely, a panche.
                  
                     Rumentum, a braſtynge oute, an apoſteme that braſteth out of the fleſhe.
                  
                     Ruma, a goddeſſe, whom the paynyms did ſuppoſe to be beneficiall to womens breſtes, and to ſuckynge chylderne.
                  
                     Rumigare, to chewe the cudde.
                  
                     Rumigero, rare, to carie tydynges.
                  
                     Ruminatio, a chewynge of the cudde, as a beaſte dothe.
                  
                     Ruminalis ficus, a figge tree, vnder the whiche it is ſuppoſed that a wolfe gaue ſucke to Romulus and Remus.
                  
                     Rumino, minare, & Ruminor, ari, to chewe the cudde. Alſo to calle efteſones to remembraunce.
                  
                     Rumex, icis, wylde ſorell. alſo a weapon like to a ſpeare.
                  
                     Rumifero, are, & rumigero, rare, to beare or brynge tydynges.
                  
                     Rumis, a teate.
                  
                     Rumito, to beare tydynges.
                  
                     
                     Rumigerulus, a teller of tydynges.
                  
                     Rumo, are, to gyue the teate to a chylde.
                  
                     Rumor, rumoris, tydynges, a rumoure, a bruyte.
                  
                     Rumpo, rupi, rumpere, to breake, to make werye, Rumpere moras, to make haſte.
                  
                     Rumpotinus, a buſſhe, whiche groweth in France, of whom Columella writeth, that no corne ſhulde be ſowen within twentye foote therof.
                  
                     Rumpotinetum, the place where ſuche buſhes doo growe.
                  
                     Rumuſculus, a lyttell rumour or brute.
                  
                     Rumula, a lyttell teate.
                  
                     Runa, a weapon, ſommetyme vſed in Fraunce.
                  
                     Runca, a ſawe, wherwith tymber is ſawen.
                  
                     Runcatio, weedynge.
                  
                     Runcina, a whypſawe, wherwith tymber is ſawen, it is alſo a buſheſythe, or bylle, to cutte buſſhes.
                  
                     Runcino, are, to ſawe tymber.
                  
                     Runco, care, to wede or pull vp.
                  
                     Runſor, oris, oone of the names of Pluto, callyd god of Helle.
                  
                     Vergil.
                     Ruere, is alſo to ouerthrowe, to rūne forth heedlynge. Quo moriture ruis, maioraque uiribus audes? Whyther runneſt thou hedlynge to be ſlayne, and attempteſt thinges aboue thy puiſſannces Alſo to lyfte vp. Et ruit atram, ad coelū picea craſſus caligine nubem,
                     Ver. geor. And beinge thycke, it lyfted vp to heuen a cloude, as blacke as pytche. ſometyme it ſygnyfieth to make a great noyſe. Ruit arduus aethey, The highe firmamente rumbled, or made a great noyſe.
                  
                     Ruo, rui, ruere, to falle, to poure out, to be deceyued, to ſubuerte, to make playne, to plucke vppe, to breake a ſonder, to throwe downe.
                  
                     Rupes, be hylles, bankes, or rockes: ſoo ſtepe downe, as noo manne maye clymme theym.
                  
                     In leg .xii. tabularum
                     Rupicapra, a wylde goote.
                  
                     
                        Rupicias, for damnum dederis,
                      thou ſhalte paye or yelde damages.
                  
                     Ruptus, rupta, ruptum, broken or braſte, weryed, torne or rent.
                  
                     Ruralis, le, ruſticall, or of the vyllage.
                  
                     Rureſtris, re, of the countreye, not of the citie or towne.
                  
                     Ruricola, a huſbande man.
                  
                     Rurigena, borne in the countrey, oute of a citie or great towne.
                  
                     Ruro, rare, to do after the countrey facion.
                  
                     Ruror, raris, rari, to dwelle in the countrey, or out of the citie.
                  
                     Rurſus, & Rurſum, efteſones or bakwarde, on the other parte.
                  
                     Rus, ruris, the countreye, oute of the Citie, where as houſbandrye is vſed and exercyſed.
                  
                     Ruſcum, a wande.
                  
                     Ruſpor, ari, to ſerche dilygently. It is proprely to ſhrape, as an henne dothe, whan ſhe ſeketh for meate.
                  
                     Ruſſus, & ruſſeus, a, um, redde.
                  
                     Ruſtica, a byrde lyke a partryche, but he hath a longer byll.
                  
                     Ruſticanus, na, num, ruſtycall, of the countrey or vyllage.
                  
                     Ruſticè, ruſtycally, vncourteyſly, rudely.
                  
                     Ruſticane, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Ruſticarius, caria, carium, pertaynynge to huſbandrye.
                  
                     
                        Ruſticatim, for ruſtice,
                      an Aduerbe, churlyſſhelye.
                  
                     Ruſticitas, tatis, carlyſſhenes, ſommetyme fearefulneſſe. Et ſi ruſticitas non vetat,
                     Ouidius. 
                     ipſa rogat, And yf that foolyſhe baſſhefulneſſe lette her nat, ſhe makethe requeſte.
                  
                     Ruſticor, caris, cari, to dwelle in the countrey, or exercyſe huſbandrye.
                  
                     Ruſticus, ca, ruſticum, ruſtycall, vplandyſhe, homely, without curteyſye.
                  
                     Ruſticus, is alſo the propre name of a man.
                  
                     Ruta, Rewe, callydde alſoo herbe Grace. It is amonge the lawyers all that is dygged oute of the grounde, as ſtone, cole, leadde, and other mettalle.
                  
                     Ruta & caeſa, All be it Mutius doth ſaye, that in Rutis & caeſis are thoſe thynges, that be not faſte in the grounde, nor are any parte of the buyldynge or the couerynge of a hous. Perchance we mought name theym heyre lomes.
                  
                     Rutabulum, a coole rake, to make cleane an ouen.
                  
                     Rutaceus, a, um, of rewe.Pliniu
                           •
                        .
                  
                  
                     Rutatus, ta, tum, made of rewe.
                  
                     
                        Rutatio, & rutus, for ructa
                              •
                           io,
                      belkynge.
                  
                     Rutellum, a lyttell mattocke.
                  
                     Rutilo, lare, te ſhyne.
                  
                     
                        Ruto, tare, for ructo,
                        Fla
                              •
                           . Cicero.
                      to belke or breke wind vpwarde.
                  
                     Rutor, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Rutrum, a mattocke.
                  
                     Rutum, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Rutuba, trouble. Id poſtea uiderimus,
                     Varro. 
                     nunc ſumus in rutuba, We wyll afterwarde ſee, nowe be we in trouble.
                  
                     Rutubatri, men that dygge with mattockes.
                  
                     Rutulus, la, lum, a brighte redde lyke to coles that be kyndled.
                  
                     Rutupinum promontorium, a goore or elbowe of lande in Englande, lyenge into the ſee, whiche I ſuppoſe is in Norfolke.
               
            
            
               
               
                  
                     
                        SABA, a citie in Ethiope.
                  
                     Sabaei, people in Araby.
                  
                     Sabbatarius, he that kepeth the ſabbath daye.
                  
                     Sabbatū, the day of reſte from labour.
                  
                     Sabaoth, in the plurelle numbre, in the hebrewe tunge, ſignifyeth of hoſtes, or armyes, or powers.
                  
                     Sabath, a propre name, wherof cometh Sabatheni, the name of a people.
                  
                     Sabbatiſmus, a vacation after labours.
                  
                     Sabbatizare, to kepe ſabbat daye.
                  
                     Sabe, in the tunge of Siria, is the moneth of February.
                  
                     Sabelli, people, whiche dwell in the mountaynes betwene the Sabines and Marſi, in Italye.
                  
                     Sabim, amonge the Arrabiane doth ſignifye god.
                  
                     Sabina, a weapon lyke a bore ſpeare.
                  
                     Sabini, people in Italy.
                  
                     Sabiuſa, a gate at Rome, out of the whiche men went to the Sabines.
                  
                     Sabora, a citie of Araby.
                  
                     Sabucus, an elder tree.
                  
                     Sabuletum, a grauell pytte.
                  
                     Sabulum, greatte grauell.
                  
                     Sabuloſus, a, um, grauelly.
                  
                     Saburra, laſtage, or baleſe, wherwith ſhippes are euen poyſed, to go vpryght, whiche is commonly of grauell.
                  
                     
                        Sabur
                              •
                           i,
                      a 
                        •
                     ynde of ſacrifice.
                  
                     Saburro, rare, to baleſe a ſhyppe.
                  
                     Sacal, a kynde of ambre founde in Egypte.
                  
                     Saccarius, he that beareth a ſacke.
                  
                     Saccarum, ſugar.
                  
                     Saccellare, to apparelle or amende wynes putte into ſackes.
                  
                     Sacciperium, a powche.
                  
                     Sacconia, a clothe to wype a thynge with. a napkyn, alſo a territorie.
                  
                     Sacculus, & ſaccellus, a lyttell ſacke.
                  
                     Sacer mons, an hylle by Rome, an other by Galatia, wherin golde is founde.
                  
                     Sacerdoralis, le, pertaynynge to a prieſte.
                  
                     Sacon, amonge the Indians, ſygnifieth a bryght purple colour.
                  
                     Sacondion, a precious, ſtoone of a bryghte purple colour.
                  
                     Saccularius, a crafty deceyuour, whiche in ſellynge of grayne out of ſackes, wylle conuey away parte.
                  
                     Saccus, a ſacke. Sacculus, a bagge.
                  
                     Sacellum, a chapelle.
                  
                     Sacer, cra, crum, holy: ſommetyme curſed, deteſtable.
                  
                     Sacer ignis, a ſycknes, wherin is vehement inflamation and burnyng of the body.
                  
                     Sacer locus, a place conſecrate or dedicate.
                  
                     Sacer morbus, the fallynge ſyckeneſſe.
                  
                     Sacerdos, dotis, a prieſte.
                  
                     Sacerdotium, prieſthode. ſometime a benefyce or ſpirituall promotion.
                  
                     Sacra uia, a ſtreete in Rome, where peace was made betwene Romulus and Tacius, and through the whiche the vanquyſhers paſſed with their triūph vnto the capitol.
                  
                     Sacramenta, is taken for men of warre.Iuuenall
                           •
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Sacramentum, an othe amonge vs chriſten men, it ſignifyeth a ſygne, wherin is contayned a diuyne myſterie, and is callyd a ſacrament.
                  
                     Sacramento contendere, to ſweare.
                  
                     Sacramento teneri, to be ſworne.
                  
                     Sacrarium, a ſextrie or veſtrie, wherein are kepte thynges halowed, and relykes.
                  
                     Sacratae leges, lawes, in the whiche it is enacted, that who ſo dothe offende agaynſt theym, is accurſed.
                  
                     Sacratio, a conſecration.
                  
                     Sacratius, more holy.
                  
                     Sacrator, he that dothe conſecrate.
                  
                     Sacrificium, ſacrifyce.
                  
                     Sacrifico, care, to do ſacrifice, to conſecrate to aſke forgyuenes of god.
                  
                     Sacrificulus, a prieſte.
                  
                     Sacrilegium, theft, or taking away of thynges halowed, callyd Sacrilege.
                  
                     Sacrilegiſsimus, an errant thefe in ſtelynge of thynges halowed.
                  
                     Sacrilegus, he that violently taketh awaye or ſtealeth thynges halowed, or thynges vnhalowed out of a holy place.
                  
                     Sacrimum, muſte or newe wyne.
                  
                     Sacriſcrinius, he that keepeth the kynges letters or Recordes, concernynge the Crowne, or bokes of great affaires.
                  
                     Sacrium, a kynde of aumbre, whiche commeth out of Scithia.
                  
                     Sacro, crare, to dedicate or halowe.
                  
                     Sacroſanctus, ta, tum, conſecrate or halowid with a ſolemne othe taken.
                  
                     Sacrum, any thynge dedicate to god. Alſo ſacrifice. ſometyme a temple or churche. Paulus Iureconſultus. Sunt aurem ſacrilegi, qui publica ſacra compilarint. Alſo ſacra do ſignifye holy wordes. alſo charmes.
                  
                     Sacrum Promontorium, a great mountayne or rocke in the ſouthweſt part of Spayne, lyenge on the ſee, callyd nowe, Capeſainct Vincent.
                  
                     Sadducei, men of a ſpeciall ſeete among the Iewes, that beleued not of any reſurrectiō, or that there be any angels or ſpiritis.
                  
                     Saeculū, is proprely the ſpace of a hundred yeres: it is commonly taken for a ſpace

of tyme, wherin one facion of the worlde hath contynued.
                  
                     Saepe, oftentymes. Saepenumero, ſaepiuſcule, ſaepicule, idem.
                  
                  
                     Saepius, more often. Saepiſsime, very often.
                  
                     Saeuio, uiui, ire, to be very angrye, to do valyauntly, to be cruell, or exercyſe tyranny.
                  
                     Saeué, cruelly.
                  
                     Saeuirer, rudely▪ 
                     Magis cogito, ſaeuiter, blanditer ue alloquar, I thynke more, where I may ſpeake to hym rudely, or gentylly.
                  
                     Saeuitia, & ſaeuitudo, crueltie.
                  
                     Saeuus, ua, um, cruelle, horrible. ſometyme angry, valyant, myghty.
                  
                     Saga, a wyſe or ſubtil woman, alſo a witch.
                  
                     Sagaperium, a gumme or roſyn, which runneth out of a kyxe or tree, callyd Ferula.
                  
                     Sagaris, a ryuer.
                  
                     Sagaria, the craft to make clokes to weare on harneyſe.
                  
                     Sagarius, a ſeller of ſuche clokes.
                  
                     Sagatus, apparayled in a ſouldiours cloke.
                  
                     Sagax, acis, wyttye.
                  
                     Sagaces canes, yernynge houndes.
                  
                     Sagacitas, wyttyneſſe or ſharpenes of wyt.
                  
                     Sagaciter, wyttyly.
                  
                     Sagda, a grene ſtone, whyche the Caldees haue made faſt to their handes.
                  
                     Sagena, a greatte nette.
                  
                     Sagimen, & ſaginatio, nouryſhynge.
                  
                     Saginarius, a, um, that whiche is franked or made fatte.
                  
                     Sagina, meate, wherwith all thynge is fatted. ſometyme ſuperfluous fatte.
                  
                     Saginarium, a place wherein any thynge is franked or made fatte.
                  
                     Sagino, are, to make fatte.
                  
                     Sagio, ui, ire, to ꝑceyue quickly or ſharply.
                  
                     Sagitta, an arow, alſo the top of a twygge or rodde.
                  
                     Sagittarius, an archer. It is alſo one of the xii. ſygnes amonge the ſterres.
                  
                     Sagitto, tare, to ſhoote.
                  
                     Sagma, a packe ſaddell, or ſumpter ſaddell. alſo an heape.
                  
                     Sagmen, minis, graſſe, plucked vp with the erthe, whiche in the olde time the ambaſſadours of the Romanes dyd, whan they denounced warres to other people.
                  
                     Sagum, a ſouldiours clooke.
                  
                     Sagulum, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Saguntus, a citie in Spayn, whiche for the conſtant fydelitie, kepte to the Romains, was diſtroyed by Hanniball.
                  
                     Saguntina fames, extreme famyne, a prouerbe made of the famyne, whyche was in the cytie of Saguntus, whan Hanniball beſyeged it.
                  
                     Sais, a citie of Egypte, where is one of the entries into the ryuer of Nilus, the entry or porte is callyd Saiticum.
                  
                  
                     Sal, ſalis, ſalt. ſomtime it is put for wiſdom, myrth. Sales, quycke or ſharpe ſentences, ieſtynges. ſometyme it ſygnifieth the ſee.
                  
                     Sala, a ryuer in Germanye.
                  
                     
                        Salaces,
                        Vergilius.
                      water that ryſeth out of a quycke ſpringe.
                  
                     Salacia, was called goddeſſe of water.
                  
                     Salaconia, pryde.
                  
                     Salacones, they whiche are proude.
                  
                     Salamandra, a beaſte in fygure lyke to a lyſarde, full of ſpottes, which beinge in the fyre, dothe extincte it, and is not burned.
                  
                     Salamin, Salamis, mina, an Ile by Athenes.
                  
                     Salaminius, a, um, of that yle.
                  
                     Salamoniacus, a kynd of ſalt founde vnder ſand, which is lyke to alume, & is medicynable, in diſſoluynge & purgyng of fleume.
                  
                     Salanga, a very hygh hylle betwene great Brytayne and Irelande, nowe callid our ladyes hylle.
                  
                     Salapuſius, may be callid a mery ieſting boy. It was a name giuen to Caluus an orator, which being of a childes perſonage, vſed moche ieſtynge and tauntynge meryly.
                  
                     Salaria uia, an hygh way, by the whiche ſalt was caried to Rome.
                  
                     Salarium, wages gyuen to ſeruauntes.
                  
                     Salarius, a ſalter.
                  
                     Salarius, a, um, pertaynyng to ſalte.
                  
                     Salax, acis, lecherouſe.
                  
                     Salebrae, places whiche are not playne.
                  
                     Salebroſus, a, um, vnplayne, where a manne can not goo, excepte he do leape.
                  
                     Salentinum, a countre yt in Italy.
                  
                     Salentini, a people in Italye.
                  
                     Salgama, thynges condite or conſerued, as peares, figges, grapes, and other lyke.
                  
                     Sali, a kynde of byrdes, whiche be greatte breders: as partriches or hennes, I ſuppoſe them to be hethecockes.
                  
                     Saliares coena, a banket or ſupper made by the prieſtes of Mars.
                  
                     Saliares uirgines, maydens, whyche were with the prieſtes of Mars, and did ſacrifyce with the byſhops, wearyng on them cote armures, and byſſhoppes myters on theyr heedes.
                  
                     Saliaris, re, ꝑtaining to the priſtis of Mars.
                  
                     Salicaſtrum, a kynde of wylde vyne, rounnynge vpon wyllowe trees.
                  
                     Salicetum, & ſalictum, a place where wyllowes growe.
                  
                     Salientes, the cockes or pipes of cundites, oute of the whiche water ſpouteth.
                  
                     Salignus, na, num, of wyllowe or wythy.
                  
                     Salii, the prieſtes of Mars.
                  
                     Salillum, a lyttell ſalte ſeller.
                  
                     
                     Salina, a place, where ſalte is made.
                  
                     Salinae, narum, a citie in Sicile.
                  
                     Salinator, the name of a noble mā of Rome.
                  
                     Salinacidus, & ſalnacidus, a, um, that whiche is ſalte in taſte.
                  
                     Salinum, a ſalte ſeller.
                  
                     Salio, iui, ire, to ſalte or powder.
                  
                     Salio, iui, ij, ire, to leape.
                  
                     Salitura, powdrynge or ſaltynge.
                  
                     Salitus, ta, tum, ſalted.
                  
                     Saliuo, are, to laye ſalue.
                  
                     Saliua, & ſaliuum, ſpettell.
                  
                     Saliunca, a plant, hauynge long leaues, ſomwhat yelowe, and a yelowe flowre, & groweth ſhorte, and hath many rootes. It is taken for the Spikenarde, that groweth in Fraunce, and is commonly vſed.
                  
                     Saliſi, people in the mountaynes of Alpes, confynes to the Swycers, and the people called Boii.
                  
                  
                     Saliuarius, he that layeth ſalue.
                  
                     Salix, icis, a wyllowe or wythye.
                  
                     Salmatis, a fountayne in Caria.
                  
                     Salmacia, a praye gotten without labour.
                  
                     Salmacidus, da, dum, that whyche ſauoureth of ſalte.
                  
                     Salmo, onis, a fyſhe called Samond.
                  
                     Salmonius, the kynge of Elides, which takynge foolyſhely vppon hym, to haue diuine honours doone vnto hym, and wolde ſeme to caſte lyghtnynges, lyke vnto Iupiter, being ouerthrowen with lyghtning, was caſte into helle.
                  
                     Sal nitrum, ſalte peter, whiche is putte into gunne powder.
                  
                     Sallo, lere, to powder with ſalte.
                  
                     Salo, a ryuer callyd alſo Bibilis, wherwith yron is tempred, and made ſtronger.
                  
                     Salomon, & Solomon, monis, is interpreted peaſible, the name of a kynge of Iewes, the ſonne of kynge Dauid, who exceded all men in wiſedome and knowlege, and neuer the leſſe was by dotage on women brought to ydolatrie.
                  
                     Salomonius, a, um, of Salomon.
                  
                     Salon, a countrey of Bithinia, very cōmodious for the feedynge of cattell.
                  
                     Salone, a cytie in Liburnia betwene Dalmatiam and Illiriam.
                  
                     Salpa, a fyſhe whiche wylle not be ſodden, excepte it be beaten, as ſtockefyſhe is.
                  
                     Salpyga, a kynde of emotes or pyſmeres.
                  
                     Salſamentatius, he that ſelleth ſawce.
                  
                     Salſamentarius, a, um, pertaynyng to ſauce. Vas ſalſamentarium, a veſſelle, whereinto ſawce is putte.
                  
                     Salſamentum, ſauce.
                  
                     Salſedo, ſalteneſſe.
                  
                     Salſicortex, a tree, that bereth maſte, which nothyng wyll eate, excepte onely ſwyne.
                  
                     Salſilago, & ſalſugo, ginis, a ſalte lycour.
                  
                     Salſura, mereſawce or bryne.
                  
                     Salſus, a, um, ſalte in taſte.
                  
                     Saltabundus, da, dum, that whyche leapeth or daunſeth.
                  
                     Saltatio, daunſynge.
                  
                     Saltator, & ſaltatrix, a daunſer.
                  
                     Saltatorius, a, um, pertaynyng to daunſyng. Ludus ſaltatorius, a ſcoole of daunſynge.
                  
                     Saltatrix, & ſaltatricula, a daunſynge wench.
                  
                     Saltatus, tus, daunſynge.
                  
                     Saltem, at the leſte waye.
                  
                     Saltiae, people ioynynge to the ſee callyd Pontus Euxinus.
                  
                     Saltim, uel ſaltuatim, by leapes.
                  
                     Saltito, tare, to daunſe, to leape often.
                  
                     Salto, tare, to daunſe.
                  
                     Saltuarius, a keper of a wod, a wodwarde.
                  
                     Saltuoſus, a, um, full of woddes.
                  
                     Saltus, a thycke wodde, alſo a leape.
                  
                     Saluator, toris, a ſauyour, he that kepeth or ſaueth a thynge from diſtruction or loſſe.
                  
                     Saluber, bris, bre, holſome, hole.
                  
                     Salubrior, ius, Saluberrimus, a, um, more holſome, moſte holſome.
                  
                     Salubriter, holſomely.
                  
                     Salubritas, helthe.
                  
                     Salue, & Salueto, & ſaluete, god ſpede you. ye be welcome, ſometyme contrary, farewell, God be with you.
                  
                     Salueo, ère, to be ſaufe, or ſpede well, to be well at eaſe.
                  
                     Salue. S. ſatis eſt mihi tuae ſalutis, nihil moror non ſalueo, God ſpede. S.Plautus i
                           •
                         trucule
                           •
                        . It ſuffyſeth me that thou arte in helthe: but in fewe wordes I am not well at eaſe.
                  
                     Saluia, an herbe callyd ſauge.
                  
                     Saluiatū, a drench for a horſe or other beeſt.
                  
                     Saluifico, care, to make ſafe, or to ſaue.
                  
                     Saluo, are, to ſaue.
                  
                     Saluebis à meo Cicerone, my ſonne Cicero commendeth hym vnto you.Ci. ad A
                           •
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Salua res eſt, the matter gothe well.
                  
                     Salum, the ſee.
                  
                     Salus, lutis, helthe.
                  
                     Salutarius, the forefynger.
                  
                     Salutatio, a ſalutation.
                  
                     Salutator, toris, a ſaluter.
                  
                     Salutatorium cubiculum, a chamber, where men do ſtande and abyde to ſalute a prince or noble man in auctoritie, callyd nowe a chamber of preſence.
                  
                     Salutem, in the old tyme was vſed for ſaltē.
                  
                     Salutem dicere, to ſalute or to haue recommendation to any man.
                  
                     Salutifer, ra, rum, holſome.
                  
                     Salutaris, re, holſome.
                  
                     Salutaris digitus, the forefynger.
                  
                     
                     Salutariter, in helth.
                  
                     Salutiger, he that bryngeth recommendacions from another perſon.
                  
                     Saluto, tare, to ſalute, aſwell at commyng as at departinge: alſo to honour.
                  
                     Saluus, a, um, ſaulfe, hole, ſounde, withoute damage or harme.
                  
                     
                        
                           ••
                        nius
                     
                        Sam, for Eam,
                      her.
                  
                     Samara, an hil in the eaſt Oceā ſe, at the further ende of the mōtayne called Caucaſus.
                  
                     Samarobrinae, people in Fraunce, aboute Cambry.
                  
                     Samaria, a countraye in Iudea.
                  
                     Sambuca, an inſtrument of muſyke, now called doulcymers, an engyne of warre, wherwith fortreſſes were aſſaulted.
                  
                     Sambucina, a woman whyche playeth on doulcymers.
                  
                     Sambuceus, a, um, of Elder or Alder tree.
                  
                     Sambucus, an Elder or alder tree.
                  
                     Sambuciſtria, idem quod Sambucina.
                  
                  
                     Samia, veſſelles made in the Ile of Samos.
                  
                     Samius, a, um, of the Ile of Samos: the olde wrytars dyd vſe it for ſharpe, and Samiare, to whette or make ſharpe.
                  
                     Samites, people of Samnium a contraye in Italy called nowe Aprurium.
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        o. Mar. Plautus.
                     Samium, a ſhell.
                  
                     Samiolum, a lytle ſhell.
                  
                     Samos, the name of an Ile in the ſee, called Icarium.
                  
                     Samothracia, an Ile by Thracia in Grece.
                  
                     Sampſuchus, & Sampſuchum, an herbe called Maioram.
                  
                     Sanates, people dwellynge aboute Rome.
                  
                  
                     Sancio, xi, cire, to conſecrate, to make firme.
                  
                     Sancire leges, is to conſtitute lawes.
                  
                     Feſtus
                     Sancus, one of the names of Hercules.
                  
                     Sanctè, firmely.
                  
                     Sanctificatio, halowynge.
                  
                     Sanctifico, care, to halowe.
                  
                     Sanctitas, holyneſſe.
                  
                     Sanctitudo, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Sanctio, a lawe, a thynge decreed and ſtablyſſhed.
                  
                     Sanctus, ta, tum, holy, inuiolable by a lawe, pure and cleane, vncorrupted. Vir ſanctus, a bleſſed man.
                  
                     Sanctimoniales, Nunnes.
                  
                     Sanctimonium, the profeſſion of religious perſonnes.
                  
                     Sanctimonia, & Sanctitas, holyneſſe, perfection.
                  
                     Sanctuarium, a place conſecrate or halowed.
                  
                     Sandalium, a ſlyppar.
                  
                     Sandala, a ſpice called ſaunders.
                  
                     Sandaraca, a colour founde in mynes of ſiluer, or golde, yelow ocker.
                  
                     Sandaliotis, an Ile called now Sardinia.
                  
                     Sandaracinus, colour made with yelowe Ocker.
                  
                     Sandaſtros, & Sandaphorion, & Sandariſon, & Sandaſsites, a preciouſe ſtone, hauynge in a bright colour yelowe ſpeckes, and is called alſo, Garamandita.
                  
                     Sandyx, dicis, an herbe of a delicate odour, hauynge a ſhort ſtalke, in the reſidue lyke to fenell. it is alſo a colour called a bryght yelowe.
                  
                     Sandicinus color, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Sanè, an aduerbe, whiche ſignifyeth, ye, or certaynely, on goddes name. Bellum ſané difficile geſsit, he fought a very daungerouſe batayle.
                  
                     Sanè vt vis, be it as thou wilt.
                  
                     Sanè quàm vtile, ſuerly very profytable.Gelli.
                  
                  
                     Sanè quidem, ye hardely.Ter. in An. 
                     Nempe ergo aperte uis, quae reſtant me loqui? D. Sanè quidem. But wilte thou than that I ſhall telle playnely all the reſt? D. ye hardely.
                  
                     Saneſco, ſcere, to be or waxe hole.
                  
                     Sanga, a ryuer in Portugall.
                  
                     Sangaris, a ryuer of Galatia, whyche runnynge through Phrygia, falleth into Propontis, the ſee.
                  
                     Sanguen, guinis, & Sanguis, guinis, bloode. alſoo a tree, the barke whereof is of the coloure of bloode.
                  
                     Sanguineus, a, um, full of bloode. alſo cruell. ſometyme of ſanguyne or bloody colour.
                  
                     Sanguinolentus, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Sanguiculum, the bloode of a kyd or ſwyne, wherwith pouddynges are made.
                  
                     Sanguino, are, to bleede.
                  
                     Sanguinaria, & Sanguinalis, an herbe that ſtoppeth bloode.
                  
                     Sanguinarius, cruell, blody.
                  
                     Sanguinolentus, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Sanguis, guinis, bloode.
                  
                     Sanguiſuga, a worme, which is in ſtandinge waters, and doeth ſowke the bloode of men or beaſtes that come in to it. it is alſoo called Hirudo.
                  
                     Sanies, mater, corrupted bloode.
                  
                     Sanna, a ſcorne or mocke.
                  
                     Sannio, onis, a dyſarde in a playe or diſguyſynge: alſo he which in countenaunce, geſture, and maners is a foole.
                  
                     Sanitas, tatis, helth.
                  
                     Saniter, lyke a hole man.
                  
                     Sannaus, a ryuer in Aſia.
                  
                     Sano, are, to heale.
                  
                     Sanſa, the ſtone of an olyue.
                  
                     Sanſucus, Maioram.
                  
                     Sanſucinus, a, um, of Maioram.
                  
                     Sancae, the ſtones of Olyues.
                  
                     Sāterna, ſouldre, wherwith gold is ſoudred.
                  
                     
                     Santones, people in Fraunce.
                  
                     Sanus, na, num, hole, holſome.
                  
                     Sanitas, tatis, helthe.
                  
                     Sapa, muſte or newe wyne ſodden to the halfe deale.
                  
                     Saperda, a dunge hylle.
                  
                     Sapide, ſauourely.
                  
                     Sapidius, more ſauourely.
                  
                     Sapidus, da, dum, ſauoury, well ſeaſoned.
                  
                     Sapiens, tis, wyſe.
                  
                     Sapientia, the kunnynge of thynges diuine and humayne, wyſedome.
                  
                     Sapio, ſapui, ſapere, to taſt or ſauour, to fele, to be wiſe, to haue a right opinion.
                  
                     Plautus in P
                           •
                        eudo
                           •
                        o. Plautus in Epidi
                           •
                        o.
                     Sapio rem, I knowe what I haue to doo.
                  
                     Sapiunt malè, they be yll aduyſed.
                  
                     Sapit hic pleno pectore, he is meruaylouſe wyſe.
                  
                     Plautus in T
                           ••
                        n Plautus in Perſa.
                     Sapit plus, he hath more wytte.
                  
                     Sapit ſatis, he is wyſe ynough.
                  
                     Sapis multum ad geniū, thou knoweſt howe to make good chere.
                  
                     
                        Sapor, 
                              •
                           ris,
                      a ſauour, a taſte.
                  
                     Sapphiratus, a Saphyr full of ſpottes.
                  
                     Sapphirinus, na, num, of a Saphire.
                  
                     Sapphirus, a ſtone called a ſaphyre.
                  
                     Sappho, a woman poete.
                  
                     Sappinus, the lower parte of a fyrre tree, whiche is without knottes.
                  
                     Saprum, a drynke, made with ſalte and the fruite callyd Sorba, whiche helpeth men that haue the colyke.
                  
                     Sapros, vynewed.
                  
                     Sapſa, of olde writers was vſed for ipſa.
                  
                     Sarcaſmos, a maner of ieſtynge or ſcoffing bytyngely.
                  
                     Sarcimen, a ſeame.
                  
                     Sarcina, a truſſe or packe, or fardell. ſometime it is taken for an vnprofitable burden.
                  
                     Sarcinas colligere, is proprely of menne of warre, whanne they remoue or departe from their campe.
                  
                     Plautus in Moſtell.
                     
                        Sarcinas, atis, for ſarcina.
                     
                  
                  
                     Sarcinator, a taylour.
                  
                     Sarcinatrix, tricis, a ſhepſter, or ſeameſter.
                  
                     Sarcinae, all ſtuffe that is cloſed or ſhutte vp in coffers.
                  
                     Sarcino, are, to lade. ſometyme to ſowe.
                  
                     Sarcio, ciui, cire, to make hole agayne, to amende a thynge decayed or appaired, to make amendes.
                  
                     Sarcion, a ſtone of carnacion colour.
                  
                     Ser. Sulp.
                     Sarcito, pay the damages or coſtes.
                  
                     Sarctè, hole.
                  
                     Sarcophagus, a ſepulchre.
                  
                     Sarculo, are, to rake.
                  
                     Sarculum, a rake.
                  
                     Sarda, a red ſtone, wherin ſeales ar grauē.
                  
                     Sardanapalus, a kynge of Aſſiria, monſtruouſe in all kyndes of lechery, and therfore was ſlayne of one of his lordes as he ſatte ſpynnynge amonge harlottes.
                  
                     Sardinia, an Ild in the ſee callyd Liguſticum, by Geane.
                  
                     Sardis, a citie in Lidia.
                  
                     
                        Sardo, for intelligo,
                      I vnderſtande.
                  
                     Sardoa, an herbe lyke to ſmallage,Neulu
                           •
                        . whiche groweth in Sardinia, wherof if a manne eate, he ſhall grenne and make countenance of laughynge, and ſo dye.
                  
                     Sardonius riſus, a grennynge or laughyng without cauſe, a longe laughter.
                  
                     Sardonychatus, hauynge apparayle garniſhed with the ſtone called Sardonix.
                  
                     Sardonychus, idem quod Sardonyx.
                  
                  
                     Sardus, & Sardinenſis, & Sardous, a, um, of Sardinia.
                  
                     Sardonyx, onychis, a ſtone of the colour of a mannes nayle.
                  
                     Sarepta, a towne in Siria, where Hely the prophete was borne.
                  
                     Sargacae, people in the northe parte of the worlde, ioynynge to the greatte mere of Meotis.
                  
                     Sargus, a fyſhe beinge in the ſee of Egipt.
                  
                     Sari, an herbe, growynge in waters, hauing an harde roote, and wounden, neceſſarie for ſmythes.
                  
                     Sariſſa, a longe ſpeare.
                  
                     Saronicus, a boſome of the ſee agaynſte Iſthmus.
                  
                     Sarmatia, all that great countrey, wherein is contayned Ruſſia, Liuonia, & Tartaria.
                  
                     Sarmata, a man of that countrey.
                  
                     Sarmenta, twiggꝭ or ſhroude of trees cut of.
                  
                     Sarmentitius, tia, um, made of twygges or ſmalle boughes.
                  
                     Sarnus, a ryuer in Campania.
                  
                     Sarpa, a vyne cutte of, ſhradde.
                  
                     Sarpedon, the kyng of Liſia, whiche came to the ayde of the Troyanes agaynſte the Grekes.
                  
                     Sarpo, pere, to clenſe or make cleane.
                  
                     Sarra, an Ile callyd ſometyme Tyrus: alſo the wyfe of Abraham.
                  
                     Sarra, a citie in Epire.
                  
                     Sarranus, na, num, of that citie.
                  
                     Sarraballa, plurali numero, a worde of Caldey, ſignifienge breches.
                  
                     Sarraca, the name of two cities, whereof the tone is in Media, the tother in Felici Arrabia, or the ryche Arrabie.
                  
                     Sarracum, a certayne carre, wherin wodde or ſtones be caried.
                  
                     Sarranae ueſtes, garmentes of purple.
                  
                     Sarraſtes, people in Campania.
                  
                     Sarrio, rire, to wede corne.
                  
                     Sarritor, & ſartor, toris, a weder of corne.
                  
                     
                     Sarritura, & ſartura, weedyng of corne.
                  
                     Sarſina, an olde citie in Italy, where Plautus the writer of comedies was borne.
                  
                     Sarta tecta, houſes letten to certayne perſones to kepe them alway repaired ſuffyciently, for a certayne ſomme of money.
                  
                     Sarta tecta locare, to ſette oute houſes at a price certayne to be repaired.
                  
                     Ci. in Ver.
                     Sarta tecta exigere, to charge a man with reparations.
                  
                     Sartago, ginis, a fryenge panne.
                  
                     Sarte, hole.
                  
                     Sarticum, an entrie in to the ryuer of Nilꝰ.
                  
                     Sartor, & ſarritor, an harower or weder of corne.
                  
                     Sartum tectum habere, to keepe hoole and ſounde, or vncorrupted or hurte.
                  
                     Sartutillus, the bealye of a ſwyne ſtuffed with meale.
                  
                     Sas, olde writers vſed for ſuas.
                  
                     Saſo, an yle fyue myles frome the citie of Brunduſium in the realme of Naples.
                  
                     Saſon, a ryuer.
                  
                     
                        Sat, for ſatis,
                      inough. Quantum ſat
                           •
                        eſt, aſmoche as is ſufficient. Sat habet, it is ſufficient. Sat ſcio, I knowe well inough.
                  
                     Satagitae, people in the countrey nowe called Tartarie.
                  
                     Satago, gi, gere, to be dylygent, to do with ſpede, to be buſy about a thynge.
                  
                     Satanas, is interpreted an aduerſary, by the whiche name the diuel was called, bicauſe that he was aduerſarye to Chriſte. Alſoo what ſo euer is contrary to peace, is callyd Satanas.
                  
                     Satarchae, people in Scythia, which excluded from them the vſe of golde & ſyluer.
                  
                     Satelles, litis, one retayned to garde a mās perſone. Alſo a catchepoll or baylyff, that dothe attache men.
                  
                     Satellitium, a garde, the offyce of ſuche a perſon or offycer.
                  
                     Saterona, a beaſte, whiche doth lyue ſome tyme in water, ſometyme on lande.
                  
                     Satias, ſacietie, fulnes or weryneſſe in moche vſynge of a thynge, ſometyme it ſignifieth abundaunce. Hi, ſaltibus occupatis, externorum agros inuaſêre,
                     
                        
                           •••
                        uſtius. 
                     frumenti
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         ex inopia graui, ſatias facta, After that they had gotten the woddes or foreſtes, they inuaded the landes of them that were borderers, and from ſcarſitie of corne, they happened to haue their fylle or haboundaunce.
                  
                     Satiabilis, le, that whiche may be eaſyly ſatisfyed.
                  
                     Satietas, tatis, a ſacietie or fulneſſe.
                  
                     Terentius.
                     
                        Satin, for ſatiſne, Satin ſana es?
                      Arte thou not well at eaſe?
                  
                     Satin ſaluae? Be all thinges well?
                  
                     Satio, tionis, the acte of ſowinge of corne.
                  
                     Satio, tiare, to ſatiate or fylle, whyche hath relation not only to the body and ſences, but alſo to the mynde.
                  
                     Satis, ynough, as moche as dothe nede.
                  
                     Satis acceptio, a couenaunt, wherby a man is bounden, and ſureties with hym.
                  
                     Satiſaccipere, to take ioynt ſuertyes.
                  
                     Satiſdatio, & ſatiſdatum, dati, the ſuertie or bonde, wherby menne are bounden for an nother, for perfourmance of couenaunte, or the couenantour and ſuerties with him.
                  
                     Satiſdator, he that is bounden for perfourmaunce of couenant
                  
                     Satiſdo, dare, to put in ſureties for perfourmance of couenantes. alſo to be bounden with ſuerties for the performynge of couenauntes.
                  
                     Satisfacio, cere, to ſatiſfye.
                  
                     Satisfactio, ſatisfaction.
                  
                     Satiſpraeſtatio, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Satis praeſto, tare, idem quod ſatis dare, to fynde ſuretie.
                  
                     Satis, ſuper
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , ynough and to moche.
                  
                     Satius, the comparatiue degree of ſatis, it ſygnifyeth better.
                  
                     Satiuus, a, ū, that may be ſowen, or is ſowen.
                  
                     Satnois, a ryuer of Frigia.
                  
                     Sator, toris, he that ſoweth corne.
                  
                     Satrapa, amonge the Perſians were as dukes and Erles be here.
                  
                     Satrapia, a prouince, Duchie, or Countie.
                  
                     Satullo, are, idem quod ſaturare, to ſaciate or fyll ſuperfluouſely.
                  
                     Satur, turis, full fedde, ſometyme aboundant or plentuouſe.
                  
                     Saturcia, an herbe callyd Sauery.
                  
                     Saturio, onis, he that hathe eaten ynoughe,Plautus in Perſa. and to moche.
                  
                     Saturitas, fertilitie, or plentuouſnes. Alſoo abundance in exceſſe.
                  
                     Saturnalia, fyue dayes aſſigned to Saturne in December, wherin men vſed to feaſte one an other, & to ſende mutual preſentes.
                  
                     Saturnalitium, pertayninge to the ceremonies of Saturnus.
                  
                     Saturnia, was the name of a towne. Alſoo high places were called Saturnia.
                  
                     Saturnius, a, um, of Saturnus.
                  
                     Saturniniani, were heretikes, whyche affyrmed, that onely ſeuen aungelles made the worlde agaynſt the conſcience of god the father.
                  
                     Saturninus, a mountayne at Rome, whiche was afterwarde called Tarpeius.
                  
                     Saturnus, one of the ſeuen planettes: alſoo a god of the paynyms.
                  
                     Saturo, are, to ſaturate or fyl with any thing

ſuperfluouſely, moſte commonly in eating.
                  
                     Saturum, & Satyrum, a citie of Calabria, not farre from Tarentum.
                  
                     Satus, ta, tum, ſowen or begotten.
                  
                     Satus, tus, the ſowynge, alſo ſede.
                  
                     Satyra, a matter or poeſye made in the rebuke of ſome aſtate or perſone.
                  
                     Florus.
                     Satyria, a crowe.
                  
                     Satyricus, & ſatyrus, a maker of ſuche mattiers.
                  
                     Satyriacum, an ymage of Priapus.
                  
                     Satyriaſis, a ſyckenes, wherby the membre of a man ſtandeth alway without appetite or dilectation.
                  
                     Satyrica, was a comedye, wherin Satyres were brought in.
                  
                     Satyricè, an aduerbe, whyche ſygnyfyeth ſharpely and with reproche.
                  
                     Satyrus, a beaſt hauyng the heed of a man, and the bodye of a gote.
                  
                     Satyrion, an herbe, hauynge leaues lyke a lyllye, but ſmaller, a knappe with manye ſmalle purple floures, and a roote lyke the genytours of a man.
                  
                     Saucio, are, to wounde.
                  
                     Saucius, a, um, wounded, ſometyme werye.
                  
                     Sauior, aris, ari, to kyſſe ſwetely.
                  
                     Saura, a lyſarde, whiche lyeth in hedges.
                  
                     Saurites, a ſtoone, whiche is founde in the bealye of a grene lyſarde.
                  
                     Sauromatae, peple called alſo Sarmatae, Ruſſes, Tartariens, Moſcouites.
                  
                     Saxatilis, le, ſtonye. Piſces ſaxatili, fyſſhes bredde amonge ſtones.
                  
                     Saxeus, a, um, ſtonye, or of a ſtone.
                  
                     Saxlfragium, & Saxiphagos, an herbe called Saxiphrage.
                  
                     Saxonia, Saxonie. Saxones, the people.
                  
                     Saxoſus, a, ū, full of great ſtones or rockes.
                  
                     Saxulum, a lyttell rocke.
                  
                     Saxum, a rocke. ſometyme a ſtone.
                  
                     Saxumferratum, a citie in Italy.
                  
                     Saxum uoluere, to tourne the ſtone. A prouerbe applyed to theym that be fatygate or weryed with contynuall and vnprofytable labours.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶S, ANTE C.
                  
                     SCabellum, a fote ſtoole, or lowe ſettle.
                  
                     Scaber, bra, brum, ruſty, rough, ſometyme fylthye.
                  
                     Scabies, ſcabiei, a ſcabbe.
                  
                     Scabioſus, a, um, ſcabbed.
                  
                     Scabo, bi, bere, to rubbe or ſcratche.
                  
                     Scabredo, dinis, a roughneſſe of the ſkynne, as whan it dothe wrynkle.
                  
                     Scabrae, roughely, not playne, or ſmothe.
                  
                     Scabrities, & ſcabritia, ruſtyneſſe, filthines, rowghnes.
                  
                     Scabro, onis, a worme, which is ingendred of the carrayne of a deed horſe.
                  
                     Scaea, an hauen at Troye.
                  
                     Scaei, people in Thracia.
                  
                     Scaena, a place, whyche ſeruyth onely for enterludes or comedyes to be playde in, whiche was in the fourme of halfe a cerkle. It is alſo where trees or buſſhes, are cutte and layde ouer the heed, in ſuche fourme, a
                        •
                      men may vnder them walke or ſytte in the ſhadowe. It is alſoo where a vyce or offence is openly detected, in ſuche wiſe as mē do cry out or wonder at it.
                  
                     Scaenaticus, uel ſcaenatilis, for a player in comedies or enterludes.
                  
                     Scaenicula, a diminutiue of ſcaena.
                  
                  
                     Scaenicus, ca, cum, pertaining to enterludes.
                  
                     Scaenicus, a player in enterludes.
                  
                     Scaenitae, people of Arabie, whiche dwelle alway in tentes, couered with the heares of gotes, amonge whome yf a ſwyne or hogge be brought, it dieth.
                  
                     Scaenoma, a tente, alſo a bagge.
                  
                     Scaenopegia, the feaſte of the tabernacles, wherin the Iewes did ſet vp tabernacles or tētes in ſimilitude of them, wherin they dwelled whan they came out of Egipte.
                  
                     Scaenos, in greke, is a tent or ſhadowe.
                  
                     Scaeua, the lefte hande, alſo he that vſethe the lefte hande for the ryghte.
                  
                     Scaeuus, a, um, ylle,Feſt
                           ••
                        . ſometyme it ſygnyfyeth good, as Scaeuū omen, good lucke or chāce.
                  
                     Scala, & ſcalae, ſcalarum, a ladder. Alſoo a payre of ſtayres.
                  
                     Scalmus, a lyttell piece of wodde, whervnto ſhyppemen doo bynde their oores, to rowe the more eaſyly.
                  
                     Scalpo, pſi, pere, to ſcratche, alſo to graue in mettalle.
                  
                     Scalprum, & ſcalpellū, an inſtrument, wherwith any thyng is ſcraped or rubbed, alſo a ſurgeons inſtrument, wherewith he taketh corrupte fleſſhe from the bones. It is alſo a grauynge yron.
                  
                     Scalptor, ſcalptôris, a grauer.
                  
                     Scalptura, grauynge in mettall.
                  
                     Scalpturatum, pauement made with ſtones, of dyuers colours, ioyned togither.
                  
                     Scalpturio, riui, rire, to ſcrape as a Cocke dothe, or other fowles.
                  
                     Scalpurio, rire, to ſcrape as a henne dothe.
                  
                     Scamander, dri, a ryuer, whiche dyuydeth Europa from Aſia.
                  
                     Scamandria, a towne by the hauen of Iliū, not farre from Troye.
                  
                     Scamnum, a benche or fourme. Alſo a ſtep or griſe, wherby a manne gothe vp vnto a high bedde. Alſo a balke vntilled betwene

two forowes.
                  
                     Scamonea, an herbe, the iuyce whereof is vſed in medicine to purge coler vehemētly. All be it that it is venemous, & leaueth wars matter behynd, than it doth expell.
                  
                     Scandalides, a kynde of dates.
                  
                     Scandalum, occaſyon to ſynne, gyuen by an nother to hym that ſynneth.
                  
                     Scandinauia, an yle in the north occean ſee, the quantitie wherof was neuer founde.
                  
                     Scandix, dicis, an herbe lyke to cheruyll, but it is ſweter, and hath a whyte floure, and a lyttell roote.
                  
                     Scando, di, dere, to clymme.
                  
                     Scandulaca, an herbe, whiche runneth vppon corne, as iuye dothe on trees.
                  
                     Scandulae, ſhyngle, whiche be tyles of wod, wherwith dyuers churches be couered.
                  
                     Scandulum cōtectum, a houſe couered with ſhyngle, or wooden tyles.
                  
                     Scanſile, that whiche maye be clymmed or gone vppon.
                  
                     Scanſio, a clymmynge vp.
                  
                     Scapha, a boote.
                  
                     Scaphiarius, a boteman.
                  
                     Scaphium, a baſon or veſſelle to receyue vryne or ordure.
                  
                     Scapilium, the ſpace betwene the ſhulders.
                  
                     Scaprum, a knyfe, wherwith vynes and other lyke thynges are cutte.
                  
                     Scaptenſula, a place in Macedoni
                        •
                     , where ſyluer was dygged.
                  
                     Scaptia, an olde citie in Italy, wherof came Scaptia tribus.
                  
                  
                     Scapulae, the hynder parte of the ſhulders.
                  
                     Scapularis, a boye or wenche, whiche is oft beaten aboute the ſhulders.
                  
                     Scapularis ueſtis, a garment, whiche couereth onely the ſhoulders.
                  
                     Scapus, the heade of popie or other lyke herbes, wherin be the ſedes, lykewiſe the huſke of grapes, wherin the graynes be contayned.
                  
                     Scarabaeus, a fly with a blacke ſhell or huſke called a bytell: whiche breedeth in cowe ſhardes, and is black. Alſo there is a kind of thē, which hath hornes like to an hart.
                  
                     Scarabaeus aquilam, a prouerbe applyed to ſuche as endeuour them ſelf to do diſpleſure to thoſe that be more puiſſant thanne they are.
                  
                     Scarifico, care, to launce or open a ſore, that the matter corrupted may iſſue.
                  
                     Scarificario, launcynge.
                  
                     Scarus, a fyſhe, whiche dothe chewe lyke a beaſte. ſome menne doo ſuppoſe it to be a Gylte heed.
                  
                     Scatebrae, the bollynge or ryſynge vppe of water out of a ſpryng or ſourges of water.
                  
                     Scateo, tere, to runne or braſt out, as water dothe out of a narowe or ſtrayte place.
                  
                     Scaturigo, ginis, & ſcaturies, braſtynge oute of water or other thynge in lyke maner.
                  
                     
                        Scatu
                              •
                           io, ire,
                      to runne out or abrode, alſo to ſpringe or growe abroode, as ſomme herbes done.
                  
                     Scaturitio, a runnynge as water dothe.
                  
                     Scauri, they whiche haue their toes ſwollen, or their ankley croked, that they may not goo faſte, it was alſoo an honourable houſe of the Romaynes.
                  
                     Scazon, tis, a kynde of meter.Donatus. Vergil.
                  
                  
                     Sceleratè, myſcheuouſly.
                  
                     Scelerator, tis, he that polluteth or defileth.
                  
                     Sceleratus, he vnto whome a myſcheuouſe dede is done. ſometyme it ſignifieth hym that dothe an yll dede.
                  
                     Sceleratus campus, a felde at Rome, where the nunnes of Veſta were buryed quicke, if they were founde to lyue incontinently.
                  
                     Sceleroſè, vngraciouſly. Sceleſte idem.
                  
                  
                     Sceleroſus, a, um, he that hath done an vngracious or myſcheuous dede.
                  
                     Sceleſtus, ta, tum, vngracious, ful of vnhappyneſſe, myſcheuous, vengeable.
                  
                     Sceleroſus, full of vngraciouſnes.
                  
                     Scelero, rare, to pollute.
                  
                     Scelus, ſceleris, a myſcheuous dede. alſo an vngracious perſon.
                  
                     Scenoma, a pauyllyon, a ſacke.
                  
                     Scena, a pauyllyon or halle. Alſo a ſcaffold.
                  
                     Sceparnon, a couerynge.
                  
                     Scepſis, a citie in Phrigia.
                  
                     Sceptici, were a ſecte of Phyloſophers, whiche affirmed nothynge: the chiefe of that ſecte was Pirrhus and Herillus.
                  
                     Sceptrum, a princis ſeptre.
                  
                     Scheda, a leafe of paper, a ſcrowe.
                  
                     Schedia, a thynge lyke to a brydge with trees pynned togither, wheron thynges are caried in the water, in the ſteede of a barge, as it may be ſene on dyuers greate ryuers in hygh Germany.
                  
                     Schedion, any thynge ſodaynly made, and without moche labour.
                  
                     Schedula, a lyttel ſcrowe or leafe of paper.
                  
                     
                        Schema, atis, & ſchemat
                              ••
                           ,
                      a figure. alſo an ornamēt, ſpecially in ſpech. ſomtime a garmēt.
                  
                     Scheſis, where a multitude of wordes are brought in togyther vnioyned, as, Nubila, nix, grando, procellae, flumina, venti, Cloudes, ſnowe, hayle, ſhowres, flouddes, wyndes.
                  
                     Schilichi, amonge the Iewes was a weight of foure ounces.
                  
                     Schiſma, matis, a diuiſyon, ſpecially in the churche.
                  
                     Schiſton, the mylke that remayneth after

that the mylke is ſodden, whiche is callyd well courdes.
                  
                     Schoenobates, he that gothe on a corde.
                  
                     Scoeniculae, harlottes, whiche dreſſe theym ſelfes with ſtynkynge oynementes.
                  
                     Schoenitae, people, whiche do dwelle in pauyllyons.
                  
                     Schoenoplocos, a roper.
                  
                     Schoenus, nuntis, a ryuer by Athenes, alſo an other in Archadia, and alſo a tree callid Lentiſcus.
                  
                     Schoenus, a ſpace of grounde contaynynge thre ſcore furlonges.
                  
                     Schola, a ſchoole. Alſo a place in a bayne, where men dyd abyde, whiles other were bained, lykewiſe in a porche, wherin men taried for anſweres. Scholae, are taken for dyſputations betweene the mayſter and his ſcholers.
                  
                     Scholaris, lare, pertaynynge to ſchooles.
                  
                     Scholaſticus, a ſcholer.
                  
                     Scholaſticus, ca, cum, ſcholaſticall.
                  
                     Terent. in 
                           ••
                        aut. Terent. in Eunucho.
                     Scibilis, le, that which may be eaſily knowē.
                  
                     
                        Scibo, for ſciam,
                      I ſhall knowe.
                  
                     
                        Sci
                              •
                           e fidibus,
                      to be perfytte in playenge on inſtrumentes.
                  
                     Sciens feci, I dyd it wittingly.
                  
                     Scienter feci, I dyd it cunnyngly.
                  
                     Scientia, counnynge.
                  
                     Scilicet, as who ſayth. It is moche, ſurely, moreouer. Sommetyme it implyeth a negatyue.
                  
                     Scilla, an herbe, whiche hath a rote lyke an oynyon. ſome call it Squilla.
                  
                  
                     Scincus, a kynde of ſmall cockodryls in the ryuer of Nilus.
                  
                     Scindo, ſcidi, ſcindere, to cutte.
                  
                     Scinpodium, a lyttell cowche or benche.
                  
                     Scintilla, a ſparke.
                  
                     Scintillo, are, to ſparkle.
                  
                     Scio, ſciui, ſcire, to knowe.
                  
                     Scire ſciſcere
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , to ordeyne and inacte, as it is in our parlyament.
                  
                     Sciolus, he that knoweth ſomwhat.
                  
                     Scio vti foro, I knowe what I haue to do, alſo I can accommodate my ſelfe to other mens maners, & to the condycions of the tyme and place preſent.
                  
                     Sciomantia, a part of nygromancy wrought by ſhadowes.
                  
                     Sciopodes, people, whiche lyenge vpryght do ſhadowe them ſelfes with their feete: all be it euery one man hath but one legge: and yet be they wonderfull ſwifte.
                  
                     Sciotericon, a dyalle ſette vppon a walle, to knowe by the ſonne what is a clocke.
                  
                     Scipiadae, & Scipionidae, they whyche were of the progenye of Scipyons, the noble captaynes of Romaynes.
                  
                     Scipio, the ſurname of a noble howſe in Rome.
                  
                     Scironia ſaxa, rockis in the ſee by Athenes.
                  
                     Scirpea, a dunge potte or colne made with roddes.
                  
                     Scirpicula, a lyttell hooke, wherwith ruſſhes, or any thynge is cutte of in bynding of thynges.
                  
                     Scirpita, howped veſſelles.
                  
                     Scirpo, are, to bynde.
                  
                     Scirpus, a ruſhe, or an oſyar. Nodum in ſcirpo querere, To ſeke for a knotte in a ruſhe is a prouerbe, wherby is ſignified, to ſeke to diligently for a thyng that maye not be found, or to make doubt of a thing, whyche is playne.
                  
                     Scirpeus, a, um, of ruſhes.
                  
                     Scirpiculum, a baſkette.
                  
                     Scirron, a thynge growen in a man or womans bealy, ſpecially in them, which haue the dropſy, & cauſeth the bely to be great.
                  
                     Scirophorion, the moneth of May.
                  
                     Scirthoſis, a diſeaſe in the eyes, commynge of a longe inflammation, fleſhe growyng in them ſomwhat blue.
                  
                     Scirta, is a kynde of oynyous, growyng in wynter, callyd ſcalyons.
                  
                     Sciſcitor, taris, tari, & Sciſco, ſciſcere, to demaunde. Alſoo ſciſcere, is to ordeyne or inacte.
                  
                     Sciſcitò, gyue thou ſentence or iudgement, gyue thy voyce or conſent in election.
                  
                     Sciſco, ſciui, ſciſcere, to knowe, Alſo to decerne or gyue ſentence.
                  
                     Sciſsilis, le, that whiche may be cutte.
                  
                     Sciſsio, ſciſſura, & ſciſſus, us, a cutte.Plautus▪ Amph.
                  
                  
                     Scita, ordynaunces made by the people.
                  
                     Scitamenta, pleaſant meates.
                  
                     Scite, cunnyngly, craftily.
                  
                     Scitor, aris, ari, to demaunde or inquire.
                  
                     Scitum, a decree, or ſtatute.
                  
                     Scitus, ta, tum, wyſe or wyttie, alſoo propre or feate.
                  
                     Scytae, people in the northe parte of Aſia, whiche were cruell, and harde to be vanquyſhed, they be nowe callyd Ruſſyans, Moſcouites, and Tartariens.
                  
                     Sciurus, a ſquyrell.
                  
                     Scius, he that knoweth a thyng.
                  
                     Scythia, the name of all the countrayes togyther.
                  
                     Scleriaſis, a ſwellynge of the eye lyddes, with payne and redneſſe.
                  
                     Sclerophthalmia, where the eye lyddes ben harde, and waxe heuy with ache.
                  
                     Sclopus, a ſowne, which is made with puffynge of the chekes.
                  
                     Scobina, an inſtrumēt, wherwith any thing is ſhauen. ſometyme the ſhauyng ſelfe.
                  
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           , are,
                      to wounde, to ſhaue of.
                  
                     
                        S
                              •
                           obs, ſcobis,
                      that which comith of the ſha
                     
                        •
                     yng or boryng of wodde or mettall▪ alſo grit of ſtones, wherwith metal is ſcoured.
                  
                     Scoletia, a kynde of ruſte or canker.
                  
                     Scolopendra, a worme with many feete and rough, callyd a palmer.
                  
                     Scolymos, the floure of a thyſtell.
                  
                     Scombrus, a fyſhe.
                  
                     Scomma, matis, a ſcoffe, or ſentence ſpoken in myrthe, whiche ſowneth otherwyſe thā is ment of hym that ſpeaketh.
                  
                     Scopa, a brome or beſome to ſwepe▪ houſes.
                  
                     Scoparius, & ſcoparia, he or ſhe that dothe ſwepe.
                  
                     Scopei, men of lyttell ſtature.
                  
                     Cicero ad 
                           〈◊〉
                         c. Ci. de ora
                        
                           ••••
                         per
                        
                           •••
                        .
                     Scopae, dyſſolute men without wyt or coūcil.
                  
                     Scopas diſsipare, to ſay or do a thyng without any purpoſe or reaſon.
                  
                     Scopo, pare, to ſwepe.
                  
                     Scopelon, an hygh place, where men ſtande to beholde or eſpie.
                  
                     Scopuloſus, a, um, rocky, or full of rockes.
                  
                     Scopula, a bruſhe, ſuche as payntours and pargettours doo vſe.
                  
                     Scopus, & ſcopulus, an high rocke, alſo it is a marke, wherat men do ſhote. ſometyme it ſygnifieth any thynge, wherevnto that whiche is ſpoken, hath a principal reſpect.
                  
                     Scopi, be grapes, after that the wyne is preſſyd oute.
                  
                     Scoria, the refuſe of metal tried out by fyre. Somtyme it ſignyfyeth care or grefe.
                  
                     Scorodon, Garlyke.
                  
                     
                        
                           ••
                        bro
                           •
                        ꝰ.
                     Scorpena, a fyſhe, whyche kepeth hyr ſelfe to one make.
                  
                     Scorpionarii, they whyche doo ſhoote in croſſebowes.
                  
                     Scorpites, a ſtone of the colour of a ſcorpiō.
                  
                     Scorpiuros, an herbe and floure called ruddes or marygoldes. It is alſo a worme like to that whiche is callyd Locuſta.
                  
                     Scorpius, & ſcorpio, onis, a venimous worm called a Scorpyon, whiche ſtryketh with his taylle, and neuer ceaſſeth to ſerche, where he maye haue occaſyon to ſtryke. Alſo a ſygne in the fyrmament. It is alſo a croſſebowe. Som men take it to be an arkbuſhe. Alſo a whyppe, hauing plummettis of leade at the endes of the cordes. It is alſo an herbe, whyche hathe ſeedes lyke to Scorpyons.
                  
                     
                        Scorte
                              •
                           ,
                      that which is of lether: as Scortei numi, lether money.
                  
                     Scortes, the codde of a man or beaſte.
                  
                     Scorteus, tea, eum, that whyche is made of ſkynnes.
                  
                     Scortor, aris, ari, to haunt or company with harlottes.
                  
                     Scortum, an harlote or ſtrumpette: it is alſo the hyde of a beaſte.
                  
                     Scotia, Scotlande.
                  
                     Scoti, Scottes, or Scottyſhmen, of whom ſayncte Hierom writeth in this wiſe. Quid loquar de caeteris nationibus, quū ipſe aduleſceniulus, in Gallia 
                           ••
                        derim Scotos, gentem Britannicam, humanis ueſci carnibus: & quum per ſyluas porcorum greges & armentorum, pecudum
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         reperiant, paſtorum nates, & foeminarum papillas ſolere abſcindere, & has ſolas ciborum delitias arbitrari? Whatte ſhall I ſpeake of other Nacyons, ſens that whanne I was a boye, I ſawe in Fraunce, Scottes, a people of Britayn, eate mennes fleſſhe: and whanne they founde in the foreſtes herdes of ſwyne, beaſtes, and cattayle, they wolde cutte of the buttockes of the boyes, whyche kepte theym, and alſoo the womens pappeo, and toke that to be the moſte deyntie and delycate meate.
                  
                     Scotos, in Greke, darknes: It is more aptly callyd in the northerne tunge, myrke.
                  
                     Scotoma, & ſcotomia, dymneſſe of ſyghte.
                  
                     Scranteum, a ſkynne, wherin arrowes are putte: it may be callyd a ſheafe.
                  
                     Scraptia, a worme, whyche is founden in leaues. Alſo a vyle and ſtynkyng harlotte, a driuelynge queane.
                  
                     Screabile, that whiche may be ſpette or retched out of the lunges or ſtomake.
                  
                     Screator, he that retcheth or ſpitteth.
                  
                     Screatus, tus, ſpettynge or rechyng to ſpye.
                  
                     Screo, are, to reache in ſpettynge.
                  
                     Scriba, a Secretarye, a Notarie, a Scribe, a Clerke.
                  
                     Scribello, late, the olde wryters vſed for Scribo.
                  
                  
                     Scriblita, a delycate meate made of paſte ſtuffed and wounden lyke a rope. I thynk it to be ſuche as fartes of Portyngal are.
                  
                     Scribo, ſcripſi, ſcribere, to write, alſo to make ſometyme to paynte.
                  
                     Scribligo, ginis, an vntrue fourme of ſpeakynge or wrytyng, callyd alſo ſoloeciſmus.
                  
                  
                     Scrinarius, the keper of ſecrete letters.
                  
                     Scriniolum, a caſkette or forſar.
                  
                     Scrinium, a coffer, or other like place, wherin iewelles or ſecrete thinges ar kepte, as euydences and recordes of iudgementes or inrollementes.
                  
                     Scriptio, an inſcription, or any other writing
                  
                     Scriptor, toris, a wryter.
                  
                     Scriptorius, a, um, apt for writyng.
                  
                     Scriptum, that whiche is writen.
                  
                     Scriptura, writynge. ſometyme ſtyle. Alſoo reckenynge of a baylyffe, whiche byeth and ſelleth cattell.Budeu
                           •
                        
                        ▪
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Scripturarius, he that writeth thynges whiche be commonly done, or bokes of reckenynge for baylyffes and reues.
                  
                     Scrobs, ſcrobis, a dyche or furrowe.
                  
                     Scrobulus, a lyttell dyche or furrowe.
                  
                     Scropha, a ſowe that hath pygges.
                  
                     
                        Scro
                              •
                           um,
                      the codde or ſkynne, wherein be the ſtones of a man. Scrota, be alſo lyttel ymages made of paſte, whyche are wont to be gyuen to chyldren.
                  
                     Scrupuloſa res, a thynge wherin there ſeemeth to be ſome difficultie.
                  
                     Scrupuloſus, a, um, ſcrupulous or doubtfull in lyghte thynges. ſometyme it ſignifieth dyffuſe or difficulte.
                  
                     Scrupulatim, by ſmall pieces.
                  
                     Scrupulū inijcere, to bring into a mans mind, doubte, carefulneſſe, or thought.
                  
                     Scrupulū eximere, to put away dout or care.
                  
                     Scrupulus, a lyttell ſharpe ſtoone, whiche ſometyme hapneth to falle into a mannes ſhowe, and hurte his heele. It is alſo taken for moche ſollicitude, alſo for dyfficultie, or ſpiced conſcience. Alſo a poiſe, whiche is the thyrde parte of a dramme: and than is it alſo writen with y, as Scrypulus.
                  
                  
                     Scrupus a lyttell ſtone or piece of a ſtone.
                  
                     Scrupeus, a, um, ſtonye.
                  
                     Scruta, old garmentes, horſeſhoen, and ſuch other baggage, ſolde for neceſſite. alſo litle ymages made in paſte, ſold to the people.
                  
                     Scrutarius, he that ſelleth olde ſtuffe, or maketh ſuche ymages.
                  
                     Scrutinium, a ſerche.
                  
                     Scrutor, aris, ari, to ſerche.
                  
                     Scrutellꝰ, the bely of a ſwine farcid or ſtuffid
                  
                     Sculna, olde wryters vſed for ſequeſter, an arbytrour.
                  
                     Sculpo, pſi, pere, to carue ymages in ſtoone. ſometyme to graue in mettall.
                  
                     Sculponeae, wollen ſockes.
                  
                     Sculponeatus, he that dothe weare woullen ſockes.
                  
                     Sculptile, that whiche is carued or grauen.
                  
                     Sculptor, a grauer, a caruer.
                  
                     Sculptrix, a woman of that occupation.
                  
                     Sculptura, Ingrauynge or caruynge.
                  
                     Scurra, a railer, a ſcoffer. Scurrilitas, railyng.
                  
                     Scurrilis, le, pertaynyng to raylynge.
                  
                     Scurriliter, in raylynge or ſcoffyng facion.
                  
                     Scutarius, a buckeler maker, or a maker of tergates.
                  
                     Scutarius, ria, um, pertaynynge to ſhyeldes or tergates.
                  
                     Scutatus, armyd with a ſhielde or tergate.
                  
                     Scutella, a ſawcer.
                  
                     Scutuca, a ſkourge.
                  
                     Scutula, a rounde fygure, ſuch as ſpynners or ſpiders do warke. alſo a veſſell, whyche contayneth .viii. ounces. alſo a ſtaffe, wherwith flaxe is beaten.
                  
                     Scutulatus, ta, tum, rounde and wroughte 
                        〈◊〉
                      the fourme of a copwebbe.
                  
                     
                        Scu
                              •
                           igerulus,
                      a cuſtrell▪ or page, which beareth his maiſters ſhielde or bucklar.
                  
                     Scutriſcum, a diminutiue of ſcutra, or ſcutula.
                  
                  
                     Scutulata ueſtis, a garment of ſylk, wherin be wrought fygures lyke to roūd copwebbes.
                  
                     Scutulatus, is a colour, I ſuppoſe a wachet.
                  
                     Scutulum, a lyttell ſhielde.
                  
                     Scutum, a t
                        •
                     rgat or ſhielde, a buckelar.Palladius
                  
                  
                     Sylace, a cytie in Grecia.
                  
                     Scylla, a daungerouſe Rocke in the ſee by Sycile. Alſoo a ladye, daughter of Niſus, kynge of Megarenſis, whyche for loue of Minois, hyr fathers ennemye, ſtale a pourple heare frome her fathers heed, whiche cauſed hym to be vanquyſſhed: But ſhe being forſaken of Minois, threwe her ſelfe into the See, and was transfourmed into a byrde of hir name. It is alſo a kynde of fyſhe in the ryuer of Liris in Campania.
                  
                     Scyllaceum, a towne in the furthermooſte parte of Italy, fyrſte buylded and inhabyted by men of Athenes.
                  
                     Scylleta, places wherein is taken the fyſſhe callyd Scilla.
                  
                     Scylleum, a promontorie or hyl in the part of Grecia, nowe callyd Morea.
                  
                     Scyllis, the name of a Greke, whych ſwimmynge vnder water, dyd cutin ſonder the Cables of the ſhyppes of the Perſyans.
                  
                     Scyllus, luntis, a towne in Achaia.
                  
                     Scylurus, the name of a manne, whyche hauynge foure ſcore ſonnes, whanne he dyed, he callydde theym afore hym, and delyueryd to eueryche of theym a ſheafe of arrowes, commaundynge theym to breake the ſheafes incontynente: whyche whanne they moughte not doo, he toke out of the ſheafes oone arowe after an nother, and brake theym all lyghtely, declarynge therby vnto his ſonnes, that yf they contynued and agreed well togither, they ſhoulde be puyſſaunt: and yf they varyed and were dyſſeuered, they ſhulde be feble and ſhortly diſtroyed.
                  
                     Scymnus, the whelpe of a lyon.
                  
                     Scynifes, bytynge gnattes.
                  
                     Scyphus, a great cruſe or iugge.
                  
                     Scyricum, a blonket colour or light wachet.
                  
                     Scyros, an ile in the ſee callid Egeū, where Achilles was hid in a maidens garment.
                  
                     Scytala, a lytel beaſte callyd a ſhyrewe.
                  
                     Scyritae, people in India, whiche haue noo noſes, but in the ſtede of a noſe they haue two holes in their vyſage.
                  
                     
                     Scythia, is a great countreye, whiche ſtretcheth into the eaſt from the ryuer of Tanais, & hath on the ſouth part Sacos and Sogdianos, people vnder the kynge of Perſia, and on the ſouthe parte be countreyes vnknowen and deſerte, and is nowe vnder the dominion of the greatte Cane of Cataye.
                  
                     Scitha, a man or woman of Scithia.
                  
                     Scythicus, ca, cum, of Scithia.
                  
                     Scython, a countraye nowe called Thracia in Grece.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶S ANTE E.
                  
                     SE, is a pronowne, and ſygnyfyeth hym or hyr.
                  
                     Sebaſta, uel Sebaſtapolis, a citie in Siria.
                  
                     Sebemytum, a cytie in Egipte.
                  
                     Sebethos, a fountayn at Naples, which ſerueth the citie, running throughout the cite.
                  
                     Secale, a certayne grayne, whyche ſerueth onely to putte away hunger.
                  
                     Secedo, ſeceſsi, ſecedere, to goo backe, or to go out of company, to go away, to goo to play or ſporte from labour.
                  
                     Secerno, ſecreui, ſecernere, to diuide, or laye oone frome an nother, to laye or putte by it ſelfe.
                  
                     Seceſpita, a cuttynge knyfe, wherewith the paynyms diuided their ſacrifice.
                  
                     Seceſſus, us, & ſeceſsio, a departyng, a vacation from buſyneſſe, a ſecrete place.
                  
                     Secinium, a cake of breadde cut in ſacrifice.
                  
                     Secius, later. Nec eo ſecius, neuer the later.
                  
                     Secludo, ſi, dere, to ſhutte out.
                  
                     
                        Seclum, for ſeculum,
                      the ſpace of one hundred yeres.
                  
                     Secluſa ſacra, ceremonies, that be ſecretely vſed, to be hadde in the more reuerence.
                  
                     Seco, cas, cui, care, to cutte. Viam ſecare, to leade the waye.
                  
                     Secare, is alſo to folowe.
                  
                     Secors, & ſocors, dis, harteleſſe, apte to no purpoſe, profytable neyther to hym ſelfe nor to any other.
                  
                     Secordes agni, lambes late enyd or fallen.
                  
                     Secordia, & ſocordia, ſluggardneſſe, vnaptneſſe, luſkyſſheneſſe.
                  
                     Secreta, thynges ſecrete. A ſecretis, of the pryuie councyll.
                  
                     Secretè, & ſecretò, priuyly.
                  
                     Secta, a dyuers conſent in ſondrye wylfulle opinions, a ſecte of philoſophers, a ſect of heretikes.
                  
                     Sectacula, the ſequele.
                  
                     Sectarius ueruex, the bell wether, that goth before the flocke.
                  
                     Sectilis, le, that whiche maye be cutte.
                  
                     Sectio, onis, a cuttynge, a diuiſion, the partynge of a praye in takynge of a towne.
                  
                     
                        Sectio,
                        Caeſ. in cō.
                      all that is taken in pray at the wynnynge and ſackynge of a towne.
                  
                     Sectiuus, ua, um, that is often cut.
                  
                     Sector, aris, ari, to folowe, to rounne after one. Alſo to folowe in maners or fourme of ſpeakynge, or lyuynge. Alſo to hunte or chaſe a beaſte.
                  
                     Sectores, byers of forfayted goodes. Alſo they that do take profyte by the condemnation of other.
                  
                     Sectura, a cuttīg, caues vnder erth, or mines
                  
                     Secubo, bare, to lye aparte.
                  
                     Secula, a ſythe, wherwith hey is mowen.
                  
                     Seculum, ſome do ſuppoſe it to be the ſpace of one hundred yeres,Plini. ſome of one thouſande yeres, other of .xxx. yere. ſometyme it is taken for tyme. Seculum ſterile, a barrayne tyme.
                  
                     Secunda menſa, the laſte courſe, wherein commeth fruite and conſerues.
                  
                     Secundae, darum, the after byrthe.
                  
                     Secundarius, a, um, of the ſeconde ſorte.
                  
                     Secundo, the ſeconde tyme or place, alſoo efteſoones.
                  
                     
                        Secund
                              •
                           , are,
                      to proſper or make proſperoꝰ.
                  
                     Secundo lumine, the nexte daye. Caeſaris interdicta, ſi re ſecundo lumine hic offendero, reſpuentur, If I find the here the next day, I wyll ſet litle by Ceſars cōmandementis.
                  
                     Secundus panis, browne bread. Paſti ſiliquis,
                     Horatius. 
                     & pane ſecundo, Fed with beane huſkes, and browne breadde.
                  
                     Secundum, an aduerbe, ſignifieth nye, or by. Secundum aurem, by the eare. Alſo nexte after. Secundum patrem, next after my father. ſometyme for. Secundum te litem do, I iudge the matter for the▪ alſo in. Secundū quietem, in reſt. alſo vppon. Secundum ea, thervpon. Secundum Platonem, After the ſaying of Plato. Secūdum Pythagorā uino, I lyue lyke to Pythagoras. Secundum flumen, Alonge by the ryuers ſyde.Caeſ. in cō.
                  
                  
                     Secundus, da, dum, ſeconde or nexte to the fyrſte. Alſo proſperouſe. Secunda fortuna, Good or proſperous fortune. Res ſecund
                           •
                        , that whiche dothe folowe our deſire or appetite, good fortune. Secundo flumine nauigat, He gothe, or ſayleth, or roweth with the ſtreme. Secundus uentus, A good wynd. Secundum praeſentem, as if he were preſent. Et poſt edictum ſecundū praeſentē iudicabitur, And after the decre, iugement ſhall be gyuen, as if he were preſent.Vlp
                           •
                        anus.
                  
                  
                     Securis, an axe. ſommetyme it is taken for an offycer, whiche hath auctoritie to commytte men to thexecution of dethe.
                  
                     Securé, quietely, ſurely, in ſaufegarde.
                  
                     
                     Securus, ra, rum, ſure quiete, without care.
                  
                     Securitas, quietenes, lacke of care, ſuretie.
                  
                     Secus, by, or nighe to.
                  
                     Secus flumen, ſeruntur ſalices, nyghe to the ryuer, wyllowes are ſette. Alſo it ſygnyfyeth otherwyſe, or other, Non dixi ſecus ac ſentiebam, I ſayde none otherwyſe thā I thought▪ 
                     Quid diximus tibi ſecus, 
                           
                              
                           
                           quam
                         uelles? What ſayde we vnto the, other thanne thou woldeſt haue vs to ſay?
                  
                     Sed, but. Sed autem, ye but.
                  
                     Sedenim, all be it.
                  
                     Sedentarius, ria, rium, that whiche is doone ſyttynge.
                  
                     Sedeo, ſedi, ſedêre, to ſytte, to be ydelle, to content, to tarye or abide, to take council.
                  
                     Sedes, a ſeate or place to ſytte on, Alſoo a manſion houſe. ſometyme a ſepulchre.
                  
                     Sedicula, a ſetle. Sedile, idem.
                  
                  
                     Seditio, a ſedition or diſcorde amonge the people.
                  
                     Seditionarius, a ſeditious perſon.
                  
                     Sedo, are, to mitigate, to pacifie, to aſſwage, to reſtrayne, to extincte.
                  
                     Sedatio, a mitigation.
                  
                     Seduco, xi, cere, to leade aſyde, or leade away ſometyme to deceyue.
                  
                     Cicer. pro 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                     Seducere arrogantiam, to lay aparte pryde.
                  
                     Seductilis, he whyche maye be deceyued.
                  
                     Sedulo, in deede, dyligentely, withoute faynynge.
                  
                     Sedulitas, dylygence, with moche care.
                  
                     Sedulus, dylygente, he that playnely without crafte dothe a thynge diligently.
                  
                     Sedum, an herbe callydde Syngreene or howſeleke.
                  
                     Seges, ſegeris, corne, whan it ſtandeth. ſome tyme the grounde falowed, and redye to receyue corne.
                  
                     Segeſta, a towne in Italye.
                  
                     Segeſtria, was the ſtrawe that was layde in a lyghter, wherin greate men were borne by their ſeruantes.
                  
                     Segmenta, be certayne lynes ymagyned, by the whiche Coſmographers doo deuyde the worlde into porcions, whiche be callid alſo Paralleli, wherby the diſtance of places are founden.
                  
                     Segmenta, the cuttynges of, of any thynge, ſometyme the partes of the worlde diuyded by the ſonne. alſo gardis, or other like thynges ſowed to garmentes.
                  
                     Segmentarius, he that maketh cloth of gold
                  
                     Segmentum, a piece cutte of frome anye thinge, be it mettall or ſtone. It is alſoo a bee or colar, whiche is aboute womennes neckes. Some doo take it for the purfyll of a womannes gowne. It maye as welle be taken for a garde or border aboute any garmente.
                  
                     Segmentatus, ta, tum, may be ſayde of anye thinge, whyche hathe borders or trayles ſynely wroughte, with ſmall peces faſtned theron, be it of mettall or tymber.
                  
                     Segmentatae ueſtes, garded or pourfylled garmentes.
                  
                     Segnis, ſlowe and bulle wytted, barayne.
                  
                     Segnitas pro ſegnitia, ſlouthfulneſſe.
                  
                     Segniter, ſlowely.
                  
                     Segnities, ſlowneſſe, dulneſſe, baraynnes.
                  
                     Segrego, are, to ſeuer or ſeparate.
                  
                     Segobriga, a towne in the parte of Spaine, whiche is nowe called Byſkay.Plautus i
                           •
                         Trin. & i
                           •
                         Aſinar. Plautus i
                           •
                         milite.
                  
                  
                     Segregare ſuſpitiones, to put away ſuſpition
                  
                     Segregare ſermonem, to ſpeake no wordes. Si quis ibi eſt odioſus, abeo domum, ſermonem ſegrego: If any man be there, whom I loue not, I gette me home, and ſpeake neuer a worde. Segrega ſermonem, taedet,
                     Plautus i
                           •
                         paenulo. Holde thy peace, I am weary, or it irketh me to here the.
                  
                     Segullum, is a vayne of erth in mynes,Plin. li. 33 cap. 4. whiche declareth, that therein golde maye be founde.
                  
                     Segor, a cytie, whyche was preſeruyd by the prayer of Loth, whan Sodoma was dyſtroyed by the vengeance of god.
                  
                     Seir, a mountayne in the countrey of Edon, where Eſau the brother of Iacob the patriarche dwellyd.
                  
                     Seiugi & ſeiuges, a teme of ſyxe horſes.
                  
                     Seiungo, xi, gere, to ſeparate.
                  
                     Selectio, a cheſynge out.
                  
                     Selectus, ta, tum, choſen amonge other. alſo chiefe amonge other.
                  
                     
                        Selecti Iudices,
                        Cicero.
                      amonge the Romans were iudges appoynted of the ſtate of gentylmen, callyd ordo equeſtris.
                  
                  
                     Selenetes, a ſtone, wherin is a whyte, whiche decreaſeth and increaſethe, as the mone dothe.
                  
                     Seleucia, the principall cytie of Siria, whiche is .xxx. furlonges from Babylonia.
                  
                     Seleucus, kyng of Siria, next after Alexā
                     der the greatte.
                  
                     Selibra, halfe a pounde.
                  
                     Seligo, legi, ſeligere, to gather a part, or the chiefe thynges amonge many.
                  
                     Selinus, a ryuer.
                  
                     Selinon, an herbe called alſo Apium, wherof be dyuers kyndes, as Hippoſelinon, Petroſelinon. Seke for them in their places.
                  
                     Seliquaſtra, a ſtole to ſytte on.
                  
                     Sella curulis, a Chayre, whereon the chiefe officers of Rome ſate in a charyotte, and were ſoo caried, whanne they came from their houſes. ſome do ſuppoſe that it was callid curulis, bicauſe the fete were crokid

the iugement therof, I remit to the reders.
                  
                     Sellaria, places, wherin were fourmes and ſtooles for men to ſytte on.
                  
                     Sellularii, artificers, which wrought ſittyng.
                  
                     Semel, ones, alſo at one time, ſhortly, brefely, ſummaryly.
                  
                     Semele, the daughter of Cadmus.
                  
                     Semen, ſeminis, ſede, ſommetyme ſettes of yonge trees, or nurſgardeynes, ſommetime the kynde.
                  
                     Sementicus, ca, cum, that may be ſowen.
                  
                     Sementis, the acte of ſowynge, ſometyme ſede, ſede tyme.
                  
                     Sementa facere, to ſowe corne.
                  
                     Sementinae feriae, holye dayes ordeyned to praye, that corne beinge ſowen, moughte come forthe and increace.
                  
                     Semento, tare, to brynge forthe ſede.
                  
                     Semeſtris, tre, of ſyxe monethes.
                  
                     Semeſus, a, um, halfe eaten.
                  
                     Semet, hym ſelfe.
                  
                     Semetra, halfe a meaſure.
                  
                     Semianimis, halfe deade.
                  
                     Semianimus, halfe quycke.
                  
                     Semicadium, halfe a barelle.
                  
                     Semicaecus, halfe blynde.
                  
                     Semicinctum, a ierkyn or ſhorte iackette.
                  
                     Semicirculus, halfe a cyrkle.
                  
                     Semicoctus, ta, tum, halfe ſodden.
                  
                     Semicommeſtus, ta, tum, halfe eaten.
                  
                     Semiconſumptus, ta, tum, halfe conſumyd or waſted.
                  
                     Semideus, halfe a god.
                  
                     Semidoctus, meanely lerned.
                  
                     Semifera animalia, beaſtes ingendred betwene a wyld beaſt and a tame, as betwene a wolfe and a dogge, or betwene a wylde boore, and a tame ſwyne.
                  
                     Semiferus, ſomewhat wylde.
                  
                     Semigro, grare, to goo to dwelle in an nother place.
                  
                     Semihomo, halfe a man.
                  
                     Semihora, an halfe howre.
                  
                     Cicer. pro 
                           ••
                        bi.
                     Semiliſſula, & ſemilixula, a lyttell cake made with meale, cheſe, and water.
                  
                     Semimadidus, da, dum, halfe wette.
                  
                     Semimares, they whyche are not perfytte men, as thoſe, whiche are gelded.
                  
                     Semimortuus, a, um, halfe deed.
                  
                     Seminatio, ſowynge.
                  
                     Seminarium, a place frome whenſe ſettes and plantes be tranſlated or remoued. alſo a tree of the whiche ſettes are taken.
                  
                     Seminex, necis, halfe ſlayne.
                  
                     Seminium, ſede, alſo the gayne of ſede.
                  
                     Semino, are, to ſowe.
                  
                     Seminudus, da, dum, halfe naked.
                  
                     Semiobolus, the .xii. part of a greke drāme.
                  
                     Semipes, pedis, halfe a foote.
                  
                     Semipaganus, halfe an huſbandeman, halfe a carle of the countrey.
                  
                     Semipedalis, le, halfe a foote in quantitie or heyghte.
                  
                     Semipedaneus, a, um, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Semiplagium, a lyttell nette.
                  
                     Semiplenus, not full.
                  
                     Semiplotia, were ſhowes, whyche couered but halfe the fote: whiche the Romaines did weare on, whan they went in hunting.
                  
                     Semiquinarius, a, um, that whyche is halfe fyue in numbre.
                  
                     Semiramis, midis, the wyfe of kyng Ninus, and queene of Babylon, a woman of incomparable power.
                  
                     Semirutus, partly decayed:
                  
                     Semi, halfe.
                  
                     Semiſenex, uel ſemiſeneus, halfe olde.
                  
                     Semiſomnis, & ſemiſomnus, halfe a ſlepe.
                  
                     Semiſopitus, he that is halfe ſlepynge, halfe wakynge.
                  
                     Semiſoporatus, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Semiſpathium, a ſhorte ſworde.
                  
                     Semiſsis, half a cubite. It was alſo a certain coyne or money, that was halfe a piece of golde, as the halfe noble or halfe crowne.
                  
                     Semiſsis homo, a vyle perſone.
                  
                     Semiſsis vſura, the gayn of ſyx in a hūdred.
                  
                     Semita, a pathe, alſo a footeway.
                  
                     Semitatus, ta, tum, dyuided in pathes.
                  
                     Semitogium, a ſhorte gowne.
                  
                     Semitogatus, & ſemitogatulus, he that weareth a ſhorte gowne.
                  
                     Semitritaeon, uel hemitritaeon, a feuer, whiche is a tercian and a halfe, and of fourty and eighte houres, and vexeth one .xxxvi. houres.
                  
                     Semiuir, an vnperfecte man.
                  
                     Semiuiuus, halfe a lyue.
                  
                     Semiuncia, halfe an ounce.
                  
                     Semuntialis, le, of halfe an ounce.
                  
                     Semiuſtus, a, um, halfe burned.
                  
                     Semimodius, halfe a buſſhell.
                  
                     Semoueo, uere, to moue or go awaye.
                  
                     Semper, euer, alway.
                  
                     Semperlenitas, the accuſtomed gentyl
                        ••
                     ſſe or myldeneſſe.Terent. in Andria. Donatus.
                  
                  
                     Semperuiuum, an herbe callyd Singrene.
                  
                     Sempiterné, euerlaſtyngly.
                  
                     Sempiternitas, the tyme euerlaſtynge.
                  
                     Sempiternus, a, um, euerlaſtynge.
                  
                     Senaculum, a councylle howſe. Alſo a lyttell Senate.
                  
                     Senarius, a, um, that whyche is of the nū
                     ber of ſyxe. Senarij uerſus, & ſenarioli, verſes hauynge ſixe fete.
                  
                     Senator, toris, a Senatour.
                  
                     Senatorius, a, um, pertaining to Senatours.
                  
                     Senatus, us, a ſenate or councyll.
                  
                     
                     Senatuſconſultum, an acte of councill, or an ordinaunce made by the ſenate.
                  
                     Senecio, onis, an herbe, which groweth on walles, and tyles, and is hore in ſommer, and hath redde ſtalkes, called groūdſwel.
                  
                     Senectus, ſenecta, ſenium, age.
                  
                     Seneo, & ſeneſco, ſeneſcere, to be olde.
                  
                     Senex, ſenis, an olde man or woman.
                  
                     Senio, onis, a ſyce, or numbre of ſyxe marked in the dyſe.
                  
                     Seni, nae, na, ſyxe.
                  
                     Sennaar, the fielde, where the towre of Babylon was buylded.
                  
                     Senogallia, a cytie in Italy.
                  
                     Senones, people in Fraunce.
                  
                     Senſa, the ſenſes, or thoſe thynges, whiche we do meane.
                  
                     Senſibilis, bile, that whiche may be felte.
                  
                     Senſiculi, the diminutiue of ſenſa.
                  
                     Senſificus, ca, cū, that which cauſeth feling.
                  
                     Senſilis, le, that maye be felte.
                  
                     Senſim, lyttell and lyttell.
                  
                     Senſus, us, ſenſe, or feelyng, or perceiuyng.
                  
                     Senta, was called Fauna, or Bona dea, the good goddeſſe.
                  
                     Sententia, ſentence, iudgement, opinion, or councill ſpoken or writen concernynge the lyfe of man.
                  
                     Sententiola, a lyttell or ſhorte ſentence.
                  
                     Sententiam dicere, to ſhewe his opinion.
                  
                     Sententiā ferre, to giue ſentence or iugemēt.
                  
                     Senticetum, a place full of bryers.
                  
                     Sentina, the pumpe of a ſhyp, a place where all fylthe is receyued.
                  
                     Sentinatia, a countrey in Italy.
                  
                     Sentino, are, to auoyde peryl: alſo to pumpe vp water out of a ſhyppe.
                  
                     Sentio, ſenſi, ſentire, to perceyue, to vnderſtande, to fele, to iuge, to ſuppoſe, to know.
                  
                     Sentio tecum, I am of thyn opinion.
                  
                     Sentis, a bryar or bremble.
                  
                     Ter. in An.
                     Senticoſus, a, um, ſharpe as a bryer.
                  
                     Sentus, hearye, roughe.
                  
                     Senum, the ſyxte.
                  
                     Senumdenum, the ſyxtenthe.
                  
                     Seorſum, a parte. alſo namely, or ſpecially. Omnibus gratiam habeo, & ſeorſum tibi praeterea Demea,
                     Terent. in Ad
                           •
                        lph. I thank you al, but namely the Demea.
                  
                     Seorſum a te ſentio, I am of an nother opinion than thou arte.Plautus in cap.
                  
                  
                     Seorſus, 
                     idem,
                  
                  
                     Separatio, ſeparation.
                  
                     Plautus in Ruden.
                     Separatus, ta, tum, ſeparate or diuided from an other thynge.
                  
                     Separo, rare, to putte aparte, or departe one from an nother.
                  
                     Separatim, aparte.
                  
                     Sepedes, emotes.
                  
                     Sepelio, ſepeliui, lire, to burye.
                  
                     Sepes, ſepis, an hedge.
                  
                     Sepia, a fyſhe callyd a Cuttell.
                  
                     Sepimentum, an incloſure.
                  
                     Sepio, ſepiui, ſepite, to hedge or incloſe.
                  
                     Sepius, piuntis, & Sipus, puntis, & Sipontum,
a citie in the royalme of Naples.
                  
                     Seplaſiarius, a maker of ſoote oynementes.
                  
                     Seplaſium, uel ſeplaſia, a ſhop, where ſwete oynementes are ſolde. It was a ſtrete in the citie of Capua, wherin were dyuers delicate oynementes.
                  
                     Sepono, poſui, ponere, to putte or lay apart.
                  
                     Seps, a venymous worme, of whoſe ſtroke or bytynge the fleſhe rotteth.
                  
                     Septa, the generalle name of all places incloſyd.
                  
                     Septangulus, a figure, hauing four corners.
                  
                     Septem, the numbre of ſeuen.
                  
                     September, bris, the .viii. moneth.
                  
                     Septemdecim, ſeuentene.
                  
                     Septempedalis, le, of ſeuen feete.
                  
                     Septimus, ma, mum, the ſeuenth.
                  
                     Septenus, na, num, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Septemuir, an officer, hauynge equall auctoritie with ſeuen other.
                  
                     Septennis, of ſeuen yeres.
                  
                     Septentrio, the northe coſte.
                  
                     Septentriones, the ſeuen ſterres, which are ſene by Charles wayne, or Vrſa maior.
                  
                  
                     Septemuiratus, the offyce, wherin be ſeuen ioyntely.
                  
                     Septennium, the ſpace of ſeuen yeres.
                  
                     Septicollis, by that name Rome was called, bycauſe of the ſeuen hylles, whiche were in it, Palatinum, Quirinalis, Auentinus, Coelius, Viminalis, Exquilium, & Ianiculum.
                  
                  
                     Septies, ſeuen tymes.
                  
                     Septifariam, ſeuen maner of facions or wais
                  
                     Septifarius, a, um, ſeuen dyuers.
                  
                     Septimatrus, was a holyday kepte the daye folowynge the ſixt Idus of euery month.
                  
                     Septimana, a wieke.
                  
                     Septimontium, a place hauyng ſeuen hilles.
                  
                     Septingeni, & ſeptingenti, ſeuen hundred.
                  
                     Septingenties, ſeuen hundred tymes.
                  
                     Septingentenus, & ſeptingenteſimus, the ſeuenth hundred.
                  
                     Septingentuplus, ſeuen hundred folde.
                  
                     Septuagies, thre ſcore and ten tymes.
                  
                     Septuaginta, thre ſcore and ten.
                  
                     Septuoſé, darkely.
                  
                     Septum tranſuerſum, the mydrefe,No. Mar. whyche dyuydeth the ſtomacke frome the lower. bowelles.
                  
                     Septunx, uncis, a poyſe of ſeuen ounces.
                  
                     Septus, ta, tum, incloſed.
                  
                     Sepulchrum, a ſepulchre or tombe.
                  
                     Sepultura, ſepulture or burienge.
                  
                     
                     Sepultus, ta, tum, buried or hydde. alſo lyke as it were deade.
                  
                     Sepum, talowe.
                  
                     Sepatius, a, um, as it were of talowe.
                  
                     Sequana, a ryuer in Fraunce called Sein.
                  
                     Sequani, Burgonions of high Burgoyne.
                  
                     
                        Sequan
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                           , for ſeorſum quan
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                           ,
                      euerye woman aparte.
                  
                     Sequax, acis, that whiche foloweth.
                  
                     Sequela, the acte of folowynge, ſequele.
                  
                     Sequeſter, tris, tre, indifferent to both partis.
                  
                     Sequeſter, an arbitrer. Alſo he, with whom money is lefte.
                  
                     Sequeſtro, are, to lay or ſette a thynge indifferently, or in the kepynge of an indifferent perſon.
                  
                     Terent. in Adelph.
                     Sequi lites, to ſue at the lawe.
                  
                     Sequor, eris, ſequi, to folowe.
                  
                     Sera, a locke.
                  
                     Serapis, idis, a god of the Egiptians,
                  
                     Serenitas, fayreneſſe of wether, drythe.
                  
                     Sereniſsimus, is a terme appropried nowe adayes to kinges onely, and is vſurped for moſte famous, or moſte renoumed.
                  
                     Sereno, are, to make fayre and clere.
                  
                     Serenus, a, um, faire, clere, without cloudes.
                  
                     Seres, a people in Aſia, hauyng great plentie of ſylke.
                  
                     Sericae veſtes, ſylken garmentes.
                  
                     Sereſco, ſcere, to be fayre and drie. alſo to be tourned into whay.
                  
                     Seria, erneſt wordes, and graue or ſadde.
                  
                     Seria, an erthen veſſell, whiche is longe.
                  
                     Sericarius, a weauer of ſylke.
                  
                     Sericatus, apparayled in ſylke, or he that weareth a garment of ſylke.
                  
                     Sericeus, a, um, of ſylke.
                  
                     Sericum, ſylke.
                  
                     Sericus, ca, cum, of ſylke.
                  
                     Series, order.
                  
                     Feſtus.
                     Serilla, botes or ſhyppes calked with towe.
                  
                     Seriola, a diminutiue of ſeria.
                  
                     Serio, in erneſte.
                  
                     Seriphus, an Ile by Grecia in the ſee called Aegeum.
                  
                     Serius, a, um, erneſte, graue, of importance.
                  
                     Sermo, monis, a ſpeche, a fourme of ſpeakynge: ſommetyme an oration, alſo communication.
                  
                     Sermocinor, aris, ari, to talke, to commyn.
                  
                     Sero, are, to ſhutte or locke.
                  
                     Sero, ſeui, ſerere, ſatum, to ſowe, to plant, to ingender.
                  
                     Sero, an aduerbe, ſignifyeth late, to late, after the tyme that it ought to be, Alſoo in the euenynge.
                  
                     Seropta, a citie in Phoenicia.
                  
                     Serotinus, a, um, that whiche is in the euennynge. ſometyme late or latewarde. Serotini fructus, latewarde fruites.
                  
                     Serpens, pentis, a ſerpente.
                  
                     Serperaſta, a ſwathynge or ſwadlyng band.
                  
                     Serpillum, an herbe, whiche growethe on olde walles aboute welles or pondes, and in ſome places it ſmelleth lyke tyme, and in ſome places lyke to ſauery.
                  
                     Serpo, pſi, pere, to crepe.
                  
                     Serpula, of olde wryters was vſed for ſerpens, a ſerpent.
                  
                     Serra, a ſawe.
                  
                     Serra praeliari, is to ſyght in battayle, ſometyme marchynge forwarde, ſometyme reculinge, as a ſawe goth, whā it is drawen.
                  
                     Serrata, & ſerratula, an herbe, which is callyd Germander.
                  
                     Seruilis, le, of ſeruyle or bonde condycion or propertie.
                  
                     Serratus, ta, tum, lyke a ſawe. alſo ſawed.
                  
                     Serro, are, to ſawe.
                  
                     Serrula, a lyttell ſawe.
                  
                     Sertor, he that ſoweth ſeedes, or ſettethe herbes.
                  
                     Serrum, a garlande of floures.
                  
                     Sertus, ta, tum, ſette with flowres, as in a garlande.
                  
                     Sertula campana, an herbe callid Melylote.
                  
                     Seruo, are, to kepe, to preſerue, to poſſede,Vergil. or dwelle in a place.
                  
                     Seruare fidem, to kepe touch, to be faithful.
                  
                     Seruare de coelo, to obſerue tokēs or ſignes in the heuen or firmament.
                  
                     Seruaueris, take good hede what thou doſt.Plautus, in Amph.
                  
                  
                     Seruator, toris, he that preſerueth or delyuereth one from harme.
                  
                     Seruiliter, lyke a bondman or ſlaue.
                  
                     Seruire auribus, to flatter.
                  
                     Seruio, uiui, uire, to ſerue.Caeſ. in cō.
                  
                  
                     Seruitium, ſeruyce.
                  
                     Seruitia, bondmenne.
                  
                     Seruitus, bondage.
                  
                     Serum, the laſte parte of the daye, the euen tyde. It is alſo whay of mylke.
                  
                     Serus, a, um, late, ſometyme great.
                  
                     Serum bellum, great warre.
                  
                     Seruus, a ſeruant, proprely whiche is compellyd to ſerue, as bondemen or apprentyſes doone.
                  
                     Seruum poecus, is a prouerbe applied to him whiche in ſpeakynge or writyng, dare not digreſſe from an other mannes ſteppes or fourme of writynge.
                  
                     Seſama, & ſeſamum, a whyte grayne, whyche growith in Inde, wherof oile is made whiche is called oleum Seſaminum.
                  
                  
                     Seſcunx, cuncis, an ounce and a halfe.
                  
                     Seſcuplum, the hole and the halfe parte.
                  
                     Seſelis, an herbe called alſo Siler.
                  
                  
                     Seſqui, as moche and half as moche. ioyned

to an nother worde, ſygnyfyeth halfe as moche more.
                  
                     Seſquialtera, ſo moche and halfe ſo moche, a proportion in muſyke.
                  
                     Seſquihora, an houre and an halfe.
                  
                     Seſquilibra, a pounde and a halfe.
                  
                     Seſquimenſis, a moneth and a halfe.
                  
                     Seſquimodus, a buſſhell and a halfe.
                  
                     Seſquiopera, one iourneye in tyllage and a hal
                        •
                     e.
                  
                     Seſquipes, a foote and a halfe.
                  
                     
                        Seſquipedalia ue
                              •
                           ba,
                      great and ſtoute wordes, as ſome noble men do ſpeake to their inferiours, whan they are diſpleaſed.
                  
                     Seſsio, a ſyttynge.
                  
                     Seſtans, et ſexſtans, that whiche is alſo callyd obolus, the ſyxt parte of a dramme.
                  
                     Seſtertius, was two pounde weighte and a halfe of copper, whiche amonge the auncient Romayns was alway eſtemed to the value of the fourthe parte of their ſyluer coyn called Denarius and Dragma, of the whiche .viii. went to an ounce.
                  
                     
                        Seſ
                              •
                           ertium,
                      contained .ii.li and a half weight of ſyluer, eſtemed to two hundred & fyfty grotes, wherof .viii. went to an ounce, that is to ſay iiii li.iii.s.iiii.d.
                  
                     
                        Seſ
                              •
                           ertius nummus,
                      the fourthe parte of the ſyluer coyne of the auncient Romaynes, called Denarius and Dragma, amonge vs it may be named a ſterlynge peny.
                  
                     
                        Set
                              •
                           ,
                      bryſtell heares.
                  
                     Setia, a citie in Campania.
                  
                     
                        Se
                              •
                           igerum,
                      a beaſte whiche hath bryſtelles.
                  
                     Setinum uinum, wyne made aboute the cytie of Setia.
                  
                     Setim, a tree, lyke to whyte thorne, whyche doth neuer rotte: wherof moch of the tymber in the temple of Salomon was.
                  
                     Setoſus, ſa, ſum, full of bryſtels.
                  
                     Setuoſus, a, um, olde writers vſed for obſcurus, darke.
                  
                     Setuoſe, darkely.
                  
                     
                        Seu, for ſiue,
                      eyther, or.
                  
                     Seuerè ſharpely, cruelly.
                  
                     Seueriter, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Seueritas, tatis, grauitie, conſtantneſſe, proprelye in mynyſtrynge Iuſtyce.
                  
                     Seueritudo, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Seuerus, ra, rum, graue, conſtaunt, cruelle, ſharpe, daungerous to meddle with.
                  
                     Seuoco, care, to calle aparte or away, to call aſyde from other.
                  
                     Seuoſus, a, um, lyke to talowe.
                  
                     Seuo, are, to make candels of talowe.
                  
                     Seuum, talowe of beaſtes.
                  
                     Sex, ſy
                        •
                     e in numbre.
                  
                     Sexcenti, ſyxe hundred.
                  
                     Plautus in cap.
                     Sexcentoplagus, he that receyueth a hundred ſtrypes.
                  
                     Sexcuplus, a, um, ſyxe double, or ſyxe tymes ſo moche.
                  
                     Sexennis, of ſyxe yeres olde.
                  
                     Sexies, ſyxe tymes.
                  
                     Sextans, tis, the ſyxte parte of a pounde.
                  
                     Sextarius, a veſſell amonge the olde Romanes, whiche contayned .xx. ounces of water or wyne.
                  
                     Sextilis, is the monthe nowe callid Auguſt.
                  
                     Sextula, the ſyxte parte of an ounce.
                  
                     Sextus, ta, tum, the ſyxte.
                  
                     Sexus, us, a kind. ſexus uirilis, the male kind, ſexus muliebris, the woman kynde.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶S ANTE I.
                  
                     SI, yf, although, I wolde god.
                  
                     Si dijs placet, If god wyl, or on goddis name: a worde ſpoken eyther in dyſdayne, or in mockage, for any thynge not well doone. Etiam latini, ſi dijs placet,
                     Ci. in 
                           •••
                        tore. 
                     hoc biennio, magiſtri dicendi extiterunt, Ye and alſo the latines, on goddis name, haue ben theſe two yeres maiſters of eloquence. Quinetiam, ſi diis placet, nephas aiunt,
                     Ti. Li
                           •
                        i
                           ••
                        
                      
                     conſulem plebeiū fieri, They ſay alſo, on goddis name, that it is vnleful for a communer to be made Conſul.
                  
                     Si ſapis, yf thou be wyſe.
                  
                     Siambis, an Ile in the brytyſſhe occean ſee, on the northe parte.
                  
                     Sibaris, an old towne .xii. miles from Rome. Alſo a citie in Calabria▪ ſometyme it is taken for delycate and wanton lyuynge.
                  
                     Sibariticus, ca, cum, wanton or delycate.
                  
                     Sibi, to hym.
                  
                     Sibilo, are, to whyſtell.
                  
                     Sibilus, a whyſtlynge.
                  
                     Sibilla, a woman prophete, of the whyche were eyght, as Varro writeth.
                  
                     Sic, ſo, in lykewyſe, accordyngly, ſo lightly. Mirabar hoc, ſi ſic abiret,
                     Terent. i
                           •
                         A
                           ••
                        ria. I wolde haue meruayled, if that it ſhoulde haue paſſed ſoo lyghtly.
                  
                     Sibus, a ſharpe wytted felowe.
                  
                     Sic ago, ſo am I wont to do.
                  
                     Sic ſum, ſuche a one am I.
                  
                     Sica, a ſhorte ſworde.
                  
                     Sicambri, the people of Naſſon, and Heſſen in Germanye.
                  
                     Sicani, a people in Spayne.
                  
                     Sicania, a countrey in the Ile of Sicile.
                  
                     Sicarius, a murdrer.
                  
                     
                        Sica
                              •
                           eus, a, um,
                      drye of nature.
                  
                     Sicceſco, ſcere, to drye.
                  
                     Siccine, of that facion, in ſuche facion.
                  
                     
                        Siccine tu illam?
                        Plaut
                              ••
                           . 
                        Siccine nos habes ludibrio omnes?
                      Wylte thou handelle her of that

faſſhyon? Wylte thou in ſuche faſſhyon moc
                        •
                     e vs all.
                  
                     Siccitas & Siccitudo, drythe.
                  
                     Sicco, care, to drye or be dryed.
                  
                     Siccus, ca, cum, drye, wythered.
                  
                     Sicera, all maner of drynke made of corne or frutes.
                  
                     Sicileo, cilui, cilire, to cut agayne that whiche was not wel cut afore, proprely graſſe in a medowe.
                  
                     Sicilia, the Ile of Sicile.
                  
                     Siciliences, people dwellyng in Sicile, whiche were borne els where.
                  
                     Sicilis, lidis, of Sicile.
                  
                     Sicilides Muſae, the Muſis of Sicile.
                  
                     Siciliſſo, are, to ſpeake the language of Sicile.
                  
                     Siciliqua, uel Sicilicus, a poyſe or wayght, wayinge two drammes: and is the fourth parte of an vnce.
                  
                     Sicilites, the heed of a Iauelyn.
                  
                     Siclus, the ounce of the iewes, which is the fourth part of our ounce.
                  
                     Sicinnium, a kynde of daunſynge, wherein they that daunſed dyd ſynge, as they doo in Chriſtmaſſe, whan they ſynge Carolles: and as maydens do nowe vſe to doo in the ſtreates.
                  
                     Sicubi, whereſoeuer.
                  
                     Siculi, men of Sicile.
                  
                     Siculum mare, the ſe by Sicile.
                  
                     Sicundé, of any place.
                  
                     Sicut & Sicuti, as, lyke as.
                  
                     Sicyonia, an Ile in the ſe of Aegeum.
                  
                     Sideratio, a ſickeneſſe, which in ſuche wyſe taketh ſome part of a mannes body, that it ſodaynly becometh drye, ſo that he felith it not, women do cal it takynge, or benummynge.
                  
                     Sideratus, he that is ſo taken in any membre or part of his body, that he can not feele it or ſtere-it, the homely people calleth benummed.
                  
                     Siderites, an herbe, which groweth on tyles and olde walles.
                  
                     Sidereus, a, um, of the ſterres.
                  
                     Sideror, ari, to be blaſted, or taken, that a man maye not ſtere or moue his membres.
                  
                     Sido, dis, ſedi, ſidere, to ſettyll.
                  
                     Sidon, a citie in Phenicia.
                  
                     Sidonius, a, um, of that citie.
                  
                     Sidus, a numbre of ſterres gathered, which do make a ſygne or celeſtiall figure: ſometyme it is taken for one ſterre.
                  
                     Sifilare, to whyſtell.
                  
                     Sifilator, oris, a whyſtler.
                  
                     Sigaeum, a great mountaygne in the ſee by Troye.
                  
                     Sigillaria opera, warkes wherein were ſet ſmall ymages.
                  
                     Sigillatim, one after another.
                  
                     Sigillo, are, to ſeale, ſometyme to cloſe or ſhut.
                  
                     Sigillum, a lytle ymage.
                  
                     Sigma, tis, a lytle table.
                  
                     Signaculum, a ſeale.
                  
                     Signatorius anulus, a ſignet.
                  
                     Signatus, ta, tum, notable.
                  
                     Signa infeſta, Standardes and baners aduaunced in batayle, in marchinge againſte enemyes.
                  
                     Signia, a citie in Campania.
                  
                     Signa coeleſtia, the twelue ſignes, by the whiche the ſonne and other planettes doo paſſe.
                  
                     Signifer, he that beareth ſtandard or baner in a felde.
                  
                     Significo, ficare, to ſignifye or gyue knowledge.
                  
                     Signinum opus, a warke made with ſhelles and mortar, or tyles and mortar.
                  
                     Signo, are, to make a ſigne, to ſigne or ſeale, to ſignifie or ſhewe by a ſigne or token, to wryte.
                  
                     Signum, a ſigne, token, or marke, a miracle.
                  
                     Signa, be alſoo ymages of metall, ſtone, or woode.
                  
                     Silanius, an hyghe hill in Irlande.
                  
                     Silatum, brekefaſt.
                  
                     Sila, an helmet.
                  
                     Silenta loca, quiete places, wherein is no noyſe.
                  
                     Silentium, ſylence, quietneſſe.
                  
                     Silenus, the foſter father of Bacchus.
                  
                     Sileo, lui, lere, to kepe ſylence, to ſpeake nothinge.
                  
                     Siler, a kynde of wythy growing in water: it is alſo a ryuer in the royaulme of Naples.
                  
                     Sileſco, ſcere, to be in ſilence, or quyete.
                  
                     Silex, ſilicis, a flynt ſtone.
                  
                     Silicatus, ta, tum, made with flynt ſtones.
                  
                     Silicernius, & Silicernium, a certayne puddynge, eaten onely at the tyme of funeralles, ſome doo take it for a feaſte or dyner made at the funeralles or termēt of a man or woman.
                  
                     Senem ſilicernium, is named of Terence for an olde Cryppel, redy to haue ſuche a dyner made for him.
                  
                     Siliceus, a, um, of a flynt ſtone.
                  
                     Silicia, ſiue Silicula, an herbe called Fenugreke.
                  
                     Siligo, ginis, a grayne called Rye.
                  
                     Siligineus, a, um, of Rye.
                  
                     Siliqua, the huſke or codde of any thinge, alſo a certayne fruyt in Italy, which is in length of a mannes fyngar, and brode, & ſomewhat hooked, the wayght of ſixe of

them made a poyſe called Scrupulus, a ſcruple: wherof thre do make a dramme. It is now called a Characte, and is vſed among fynars of golde and ſyluer, and alſo coyners in the fynynge and alayinge therof.
                  
                     Siliquaſtrum, an herbe.
                  
                     Siliquor, quaris, quari, to growe in huſke or codde.
                  
                     Silura, a chuntraye in the more Britayne.
                  
                     Silo, onis, he which hath great browes.
                  
                     Siloſontis chlamis, is ſpoken in a prouerbe of hym, whiche boſtith hym ſelfe of ryche garmentes.
                  
                     Silus, a camoyſed noſe, or a noſe whiche is tourned vpwarde.
                  
                     Silphion, an herbe.
                  
                     
                        Silu
                              •
                           us,
                      a fiſſh called a Stourgeon.
                  
                     Simia, & Simius, an Ape.
                  
                     Simila, fyne mele of corne.
                  
                     Similago, ginis, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Simillimus, a, um, moſte lyke.
                  
                     Similitas, lykeneſſe.
                  
                     Similiter, lykewyſe, alſo.
                  
                     Similis, le, lyke.
                  
                     
                        Simil
                              •
                           is habent labra lactucas,
                      a prouerbe applyed to theym, whiche beinge of lyke yll condicions, be matched togither, as a lewde ſeruaunt with an yll maſter, an vnruly people to a negligent gouernour, a ſhrewde wife to a frowarde huſbonde &c. Lyke maſter lyke man. Lyke will to lyke.
                  
                     Similitudo, dinis, lykeneſſe.
                  
                     Similo, are, to be lyke.
                  
                     Simitu, pro ſimul, togither.
                  
                     Simiolus, a lytle ape.
                  
                     Simois, oentos, a ryuer by Troye.
                  
                     Simonia, Symony, that is to ſaye, ambitiō in ſpirituall thinges.
                  
                     Simplariae, ſymple thinges or of lytle value.
                  
                     Simplares, they which doo weare hoſtinge harneyſe.
                  
                     Simplex, plicis, that is not double, ſyncere or playne, without deceipt.
                  
                     Simplicitas, playneſſe.
                  
                     Simpliciter, playnly.
                  
                     
                        Simplicitus for ſimpliciter
                     .
                  
                     Simplus, a, um, ſengle in numbre, one only.
                  
                     Simpulum, a chalice or cup of erth, wherwith they ſacrifyced in the olde tyme before that golde and ſiluer were in great eſtimacion It is of Varro taken for a cruet with a Pipe, out of the which wyne came droppynge by lytle and lytle.
                  
                     Simpuuium, a veſſell of tree.
                  
                     Simul, togyther with other, moreouer alſo.
                  
                     Simul ac, ſimul at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , as ſoone as, incontinent as.
                  
                     Simulachrum, an ymage of a manne or woman.
                  
                     Simulo, are, to indeuour, to be lyke to one, alſo to fayne.
                  
                     Simultas, aris, pryuy diſpleaſure or hatered, with diſſemblynge countenaunce.
                  
                     Simulatio, fantaſye, alſo diſſimulation.
                  
                     Simulator, he that diſſembleth.
                  
                     
                        Simulter, for Similiter
                     .
                  
                     Simulto, tare, to be at varyance with one, to hate one pryuyly.
                  
                     Simus, a, um, flat.
                  
                     Sin, or els, if not.
                  
                     Sinapi, & Sinapis, Senuy ſede, wherof muſtarde is made.
                  
                     Sinapium, muſtarde.
                  
                     Sinapodes, people in Affrike, whiche do go as they crept.
                  
                     Sinarum Regio, a countraye beyonde the lyne equinoctiall.
                  
                     Sinciput, the forepart of the hedde.
                  
                     Sindo, donis, a fyne lynen cloth.
                  
                     Sine, withoute.
                  
                     Sine vt veniat, let him come.
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         Liui
                           ••
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Sine fraude mea, my right ſaued.
                  
                     Singillatim, to euery one, or of euery ouche, one after another.
                  
                     Singularis, re, ſynguler, excellēt, one without any mo.
                  
                     Singulariter, ſingulerly, onely.
                  
                     Singulatim, euery thinge by it ſelfe.
                  
                     Singultio, tire, to yexe.
                  
                     Singultiens, he that hath the yexe.
                  
                     Singultiens gallina, a clockinge hen.
                  
                     Singultus, tus, yexinge.
                  
                     Singulus, a, um, euerych.
                  
                     Siniſtra, the lefthande, ſometyme it ſygnifieth, contrary to proſperouſe.
                  
                     Sino, ſini, ſinere, to ſuffre.
                  
                     Sinope, pes, a cite in the contray of Pontus.
                  
                     Sinopis, pidis, a redde ſtone, communely called Sinoper.
                  
                     Siniſtre, vnhappely, vnfortunatly.
                  
                     Siniſtrorſum, on the lefthande.
                  
                     Sinueſſa, a citie in Campania.
                  
                     Sinuo, are, to tourne or winde in the fourme of a ſerpent, makinge holowe boſomes or furrowes: it is alſo applyed to garmentes that are pleyghted or gathered vp: alſo to ſtreames of Ryuers, which do in runnyng make dyuerſe tournynges. alſo to bankes which haue holow creekes or boſomes.
                  
                     Sinuoſus, a, um, that which hath many turnynges and wyndynges.
                  
                     Sinus, us, a boſome. alſo the tournynges or holowneſſe of water bankes: ſomtyme the holowneſſe of eyen: ſometyme a ſayle. alſo a cuppe for wyne: alſo nettes. ſometyme a ſayle, whan the wynde fylleth it.
                  
                     Siparium, a courtayne.
                  
                     Siphones, the pypes of a Cundyt.
                  
                     
                     
                        Siqua, for ſi aliqua,
                      if any.
                  
                     Sipontum, a citie in Apulia.
                  
                     Sipontinus, a, um, of that citie.
                  
                     Siquide, for bycauſe. alſo if.
                  
                     
                        Siremps, for ſimilis res ipſa.
                     
                  
                  
                     Siren, & Sirena, a meremayden.
                  
                     Siri, pittes, wherin corne was layde to be preſeruyd.
                  
                     Sirius, a Sterre, whiche ryſeth the .viii. Calendis of Iune.
                  
                     Sirpea, mattes, or other thinges made of ruſſhes.
                  
                     Sirpices, were inſtrumētes made with teeth lyke to a ſawe, which beinge drawen with oxen, plucked vppe by the rootes flagges and greate weedes, which grewe in medowes.
                  
                     Sirpiculae falces, hookes, wherewith vynes are cut.
                  
                     Sirpo, are, to bynde, or wynde with ruſſhes or oſyars, or other lyke thinge.
                  
                     Sirpus, a ruſſhe. Nodū in Sirpo quaeris, thou fyndeſt difficultie or doubt, where there is none. Sirpi, be alſo warkes or verſes, which be very harde to be vnderſtande.
                  
                     Sirpiculum, a lytell baſket.
                  
                     Siſamum, a maner of poulce or corne.
                  
                     Siſer, a delicate roote to be eaten, whiche ſome men do ſuppoſe to be redde Carettes.
                  
                     Siſara, & Siſarum, an herbe growynge in Euboea, the flower wherof is mooſt pleaſaunt to bees. it is alſo called Erica.
                  
                     Siſto, ere, to make to tarye or ſtande ſtyll, to retayne or kepe backe, to appere, as a mā doeth beinge ſued in the lawe.
                  
                     Siſtas te, appiere thou.
                  
                     Plautus in Cap.
                     Ore ſiſtere. Eminor, interminor
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , ne quis mihi obſtiterit obuiam, nam qui-obſtirerit, ore ſiſtet. I threten, and I menace, that no man let me of my way, for whoſoeuer letteth me, ſhall kiſſe the grounde.
                  
                     Siſtere uadimonium, to bringe in ſuerty.
                  
                     Siſtrum, an inſtrument lyke a horne, whiche was vſed in battayle, in the ſtede of a trumpet.
                  
                     Siſyphus, was a great thefe, whiche was ſlayne by Theſeus, of whom it is fayned, that in hell he tourneth a ſtone vppe to a great hill, but whan it is at the toppe, it falleth downe agayne, and remeueth his labour.
                  
                     Sitanius panis, bred of newe wheate.
                  
                     Sitarchia, a bagge, or gardeuiandes, wherin meat is put.
                  
                     Sithonia, a countraye in Macedonia vppon the ſe ſyde.
                  
                     Siticen, he that dyd blowe in a trumpet whā men were buryed.
                  
                     Sitio, tire, to thyrſt or be a thirſt.
                  
                     Sitiens, he that is a thirſt.
                  
                     Situlus barbatus, a lytle ſkyllet.
                  
                     Sitella, a lytle potte, wherinto lottes were putte.
                  
                     Sitibundus, a, um, very thurſty.
                  
                     Siticuloſus, he that is allwaye a thirſt.
                  
                     Sitis, thirſt, or deſire to drinke.
                  
                     Situla, & Sirella, a lytle cofer, wherin lottes were put, at the cheſinge of officers: alſo a buckat to drawe water.
                  
                     Situs, ta, tum, put or ſet.
                  
                     Situs, tus, fylthyneſſe gathered of moyſture, by lacke of klenſinge. alſo of ſluttiſſhneſſe. alſo the ſettynge or ſtandinge of a place, which is now called the ſyte or ſituatiō of a maner or countraye.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶S, ANTE M.
                  
                     SMaragdus, a preciouſe ſtone called an Emeraude.
                  
                     Smigma, Sope, & all other thinge that doth put awaye ſpottis or vnclenneſſe.
                  
                     Smigticus, ca, cum, the efficacy of klenſing.
                  
                     Smilax, acis, a tree, whiche hath leues lyke an yuy, with beryes, and a whyte floure, and ſmelleth lyke a lyly.
                  
                     Smyntheus, one of the names of Apollo▪
                  
                  
                     Smyrna, a citie in Aſia.
               
            
            
               
                  S ANTE O.
                  
                     SOana, a ryuer of Aſia.
                  
                     Soanes, people of Aſia, dwelling about the extreme part of the mountayne, called Caucaſus.
                  
                     Soboles, iſſue or ſucceſſion of children.
                  
                     Sobrié, ſobrely, aduiſedly, prudently.
                  
                     Sobrini, ſuſters childerne.
                  
                     Sobrius, a, um, ſobre, well aduyſed.
                  
                     Soccus, & Socculus, a ſocke, which women and players in Comedies onely ware.
                  
                     Socer, cri, the wyfes father.
                  
                     Socrus, the mother.
                  
                     Sociale bellum, that warre, whiche is made with confederates.
                  
                     
                        Sociare ſermonem,
                        Qu. Curt. lib. 7.
                      to haue familiar cōmunication with one.
                  
                     Socienus, a companion, or felowe.
                  
                     Societas, tatis, felowſhyp.Plautus.
                  
                  
                     Socio, are, to ioyne or confederate.
                  
                     Socius, a felowe or companyon. alſo Socij, be confederates, they whiche in all counſayles and actes doo participate one with another. Loke for Comites and Sodales, in their places.
                  
                     
                        Socors, for Secors,
                      luſkyſſhe, apte to no goodneſſe.
                  
                     
                        Socordia, for Secordia,
                      luſkiſſheneſſe, ſomtyme

it ſignifyeth ydelnes.
                  
                     Socrus, my wyfes mother.
                  
                     Socraticus, he that folowethe the doctrine of Socrates.
                  
                     Sodales, they that kepe company togither, at meales or paſſetyme. they be alſo they, whiche be of one fraternitie or company, or gylde.
                  
                     Sodalitas, tatis, a fraternite or brotherhode. Alſo a company incorporate of any miſterie or crafte, generally al felowſhyps priuately aſſemblynge amonge the people.
                  
                     Sodalitium, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Sodes, If thou dare.
                  
                     Sodoma, orum, & Sodomum, a citie in Iudea, whiche for ſynne, done agaynſte nature, was by almyghty god conſumed by celeſtiall fyre.
                  
                     Sodomito, tare, to commytte or vſe the ſyn of Sodoma, agaynſte nature.
                  
                     Sogdiana, a countrey in Aſia, extendyng to the northe parte of Scithia.
                  
                     Sol, ſolis, the ſonne.
                  
                     Soles, ſygnifyeth ſometyme the day, ſometyme the beames of the ſonne.
                  
                     Solamen, minis, ſolace.
                  
                     Solanum, an herbe callyd nyghtſhade.
                  
                     Solanum ſoporiferū, an herbe callid dwabe.
                  
                     Solaris, re, of the ſunne.
                  
                     Solarium, a place where by the ſunne, houres are knowen. Alſo a ſoler of a houſe. Alſo a pencion payde to the prince, to liue out of commune buſyneſſe.
                  
                     Solati, they whych be dyſeaſed or ſycke by the heate of the ſonne.
                  
                     Solatium, ſolace or comforte.
                  
                     Solea, a ſhowe, callydde a galage or paten, whiche hath nothyng on the fete, but only lachettes. Alſo a fiſhe, called a ſole. alſo a ground ſoyl, wheron ſtandeth the wall of a houſe. It is alſo a ſhoe, wherwith horſes and oxen be ſhodde.
                  
                     Solearius, a paten maker.
                  
                     Soleatus, ta, tum, ſhodde.
                  
                     Suetonius in Auguſt. Plautus in caſtel.
                     Solemne, accuſtomed.
                  
                     Solemnia, feaſtes or holydayes.
                  
                     Solemniter, ſolemnely.
                  
                     Solennis, ne, annuall or yerely, that whiche is done euery yere.
                  
                     Soleo, ſolitus ſum, uel ſolui, ſolére, to be wōt.
                  
                     Solere, to kepe companye.
                  
                     Solet, it was wont, or the vſe hath ben.
                  
                     Plautus in epidico.
                     
                        Solens, for ut ſoleo, Ego abceſsi ſolens paulum ab illis,
                      I went a lyttell from them, as I was wont.
                  
                     Solers, tis, wytty, cunnyng.
                  
                     Solertia, ſharpenes or quyckenes of wytte, craftyneſſe or ſubtiltie in practyſynge, or wyttyneſſe.
                  
                     Solicito, tare, to ſhewe both hope and feare. Alſo to inquiete, or make ſorye, to ſolicite or procure by meanes: ſommetyme to labour the erthe.
                  
                     Solicitudo, dinis, care.
                  
                     Solicitus, ta, tum, carefull.
                  
                     Solido, dare, to make fyrme, to conſolidate.
                  
                     Solideſco, ſcere, to cloſe togither, as a woūd dothe, whan it healeth.
                  
                     Solidè, hole, perfytely.
                  
                     Solidarij, they whiche do ſelle in groſſe.
                  
                     Solidipes, that hath fete hole without toes.
                  
                     Solidus, da, dum, hole, contynuall, not holowe, not broken or cutte.
                  
                     Solifuga, he that keepeth hym oute of the ſonne, or fleeth from the heate of the ſon.
                  
                     Solipunga, a flye, whiche in the heat of the ſonne prycketh moſte ſharply.
                  
                     Soliloquus, he that talketh beinge alone.
                  
                     Soliloquium, communication, which a man beinge alone, hathe with god in contemplation.
                  
                     
                        Solinunt, for ſolent,
                      they are wonte.
                  
                     Solitarius, ſolitarie, alone without company
                  
                     Solitas, ſolytaryneſſe.
                  
                     Solitaurilia, an offryng of thre thynges of ſondrye kyndes, as a bulle, a ramme, and a boore.
                  
                     Solito, tare, to be wonte often.
                  
                     Solitudo, deſerte, where no man dwelleth.
                  
                     Solitus ſum, I was wonte.
                  
                     Soliuagus, he that wandreth alone.
                  
                     Solium, a place of aſtate, where a kyng ſytteth: it is alſo a great veſſell, whiche ſerueth to dyuers vſes, as to tranſlate lycour from one to an other, to waſhe linnen clothes, and for men and women to be bathed in. It ſygnyfyeth alſo a coffin, where deed bodies are put.
                  
                     Soloeciſmus, a vyce in ſpeakynge, wherein the trewe congruitie and ryght ſpeche is peruerted.
                  
                     Solo, all in the oſke tunge.
                  
                     Solon, lonis, one of the ſeuen wyſe men of Grecia, which made lawes for the Athenienſes.
                  
                     Solor, aris, ari, to recreate.
                  
                     Solox, courſe woulle, or lockes.
                  
                     Solſtitialis herba, an herbe, whyche dothe beare floures onely at the tyme, whan the ſonne is at the hygheſt, or as ſome menne ſuppoſe but one daye.
                  
                     Solſtitium, the ſtay of the ſonne, whan he can not be eyther hygher or lower, which is twyſe in the yere, that is in wynter, the eyght calendes of Ianuarie, and is callyd Solſtitium hyemale, and in ſommer, the .viii. calendis of Iulye, & is callid Solſtitium aeſtiuale.
                  
                  
                     
                     Solſtitialis uita, a lyfe whyche dureth but a lyttell ſpace.
                  
                     Plautus.
                     Solſtitialis morbus, a ſyckneſſe whiche kylleth men ſhortly.
                  
                     Solſtitialis aegritudo, is of ſomme men taken for the burnyng feuer▪ whiche happeneth aboute the canicular dayes, of excedynge heate of the ayre.
                  
                     Soluendo non eſt, he i
                        •
                      not able to pay.
                  
                     Solum, the ſoyle or grounde, generally it ſignifieth all thynge, whiche doth ſuſteyne or beare any other thyngs on it. It is alſo the ſole of the fote, alſo the ſole of a ſhoe. Natale ſolum, a mannes naturall countrey.
                  
                     Soluo, ui, uere, to lowſe, to paye, to recompenſe, to put a way, to delyuerꝭ, to reſolue or melte. Soluere fidem, to breake promiſe. Soluere uenas, to open the veynes.
                  
                     Soluere uotum, to performe an auowe.
                  
                     Soluere uita, to ſlee one.
                  
                     Solummodo, onely.
                  
                     Soluté, wantonly, incontynently.
                  
                     Solutus riſus, a great laughter.
                  
                     Solus, alone, one onely, ſolytarie.
                  
                     Solutilis, le, that whiche wyll be ſoone lowſed or vndone.
                  
                     Solutus, ta, tum, louſed or louſe, alſo payde.
                  
                     Somniator, a dreamer.
                  
                     Somnorinum, a dreame.
                  
                     Somniculoſus, ſlepy, a ſluggarde.
                  
                     Somniculoſus, a, um, that whyche cauſeth one to ſleepe.
                  
                     Somnifer, feri, that which induceth or bryngeth ſlepe.
                  
                     Somniſicus, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Somnio, ſomniare, to dreame.
                  
                     Somnolentus, diſpoſed to ſlepe.
                  
                     Somnus, ſlepe.
                  
                     
                        
                           ••
                         Mar.
                     Sonere, to ſounde or make a ſounde.
                  
                     Sonito, to ſounde often.
                  
                     Sonipes, pedis, a lyght or ſwyfte horſe.
                  
                     Sonitus, tus, a ſounde.
                  
                     
                        Soniuit, for ſonuit
                     .
                  
                     Sono, ſonare, to ſounde or make a noyſe.
                  
                     Sonor, noris, a great ſound or noyſe.
                  
                     Sonore, ſhyll or lowde.
                  
                     Sonoritas, a ſhylleneſſe, or lowdeneſſe.
                  
                     Sonorus, ra, norum, lowde, or makynge a great ſounde.
                  
                     Sons, tis, gyltye.
                  
                     
                        
                           ••••
                        mꝰ in 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                     Sontica cauſa, a great cauſe.
                  
                     Sonticus, ca, cum, noyfull.
                  
                     Sonticus morbus, a contynuall ſyckeneſſe▪ or wherwith all the body is greued.
                  
                     Sonus, all that may be harde.
                  
                     Sophaci, people of Affrica.
                  
                     Sophiſtice, ces, the parte of logyke, whyche is capciouſe and ſubtylle.
                  
                     Sophia, wyſedome.
                  
                     Sophiſma, ſophiſmatis, a craftye and deceytefull ſentence, 
                        •
                     n Oracyon or inuention, whiche ſeemeth to be trewe, whan 
                        〈◊〉
                      falſe.
                  
                     Sophiſta, & ſophiſtes, a diſſemble
                        •
                      of wyſedome, a deceyuer vnder an eloquente or crafty ſpeakynge.
                  
                     Sophocles, a wryter of tragedies.
                  
                     Sophron, in Greke, is Temperance in englyſhe, wherby carnall appetites and luſtes be refrayned.
                  
                     Sophos, aut ſophus, a wyſe man.
                  
                     Sopio, piui, pire, & ſopior, to ſette at reſt, to brynge aſlepe.
                  
                     Sopitus, brought aſlepe, or to reſts, or into a ſowne with a ſodayne ſtroke.
                  
                     Sopor, oris, deed ſlepe.
                  
                     Soporifer, ſoporiferi, & ſoporiferum, that bryngeth ſlepe.
                  
                     Soporo, rare, to brynge or induce ſlepe.
                  
                     Soporatus, faſte aſlepe.
                  
                     Sora, an hyll in Italy.
                  
                     Sorbeo, buſ, bere, & ſorbo, pſi, bere, to ſuppe, as one ſuppeth potage.
                  
                     Sorbici uncula, a thynne brothe.
                  
                     Sorbitio, onis, ſuppyage.
                  
                     Sorbities, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Sorbillo, lare, to ſyppe.
                  
                     Sorbillum, a cawdell.
                  
                     Sorbum, an harryſhe pere.
                  
                     Sordeo, & ſordeſco, dui, dêre, to be fowle,Plautus in Penulo. or vnkleanly.
                  
                     Sordes, fylthe, or vncleanneſſe.
                  
                     Sordeſco, ſordeſcere, to be vncleane or ſluttyſſhe.
                  
                     Sordide, vncleanly, ſluttyſhely.
                  
                     Sordidior, dius, vnclenlyer.
                  
                     Sordidiſsimé, moſte vnkleanly.
                  
                     Sordidiſsimus, ma, mum, vnclenlyeſt.
                  
                     Sorditudo, fylthynes, ſluttyſhenes.
                  
                     Sordido, dare, to make fowle.
                  
                     Sordidus, da, dum, fylthy, vnclenly, ſluttiſhe.
                  
                     Sorex, ricis, a ratte, or a fielde mo
                        ••
                     .
                  
                     Sorech, the Iewes do calle vynes, whiche contynually do brynge forthe moſte pleaſant and dilectable fruyte.
                  
                     Soriantes, ſworne bretherne.
                  
                     Soriceus, a, um, of a ratte.
                  
                     Soricinus, of a mouſe.
                  
                     
                        Soriculata ueſtis,
                        Plaut.
                      a garmente of chaungeable ſylke.
                  
                     Sorita, a ſubtil & captious forme of arguing.
                  
                     Soritae, people whyche are diuyded frome Inde by the ryuer callyd Arabis.
                  
                     Sorilla, ſhyppes whiche are calked or ſtopped with hempe or flaxe.
                  
                     Sororiari, is proprely of may dens breſtes, whan they begyn to be imboſed.
                  
                     
                     Soror, ris, a ſyſter.
                  
                     Sororiae, maydens pappes.
                  
                     Sororius, my ſyſters huſbande.
                  
                     Sorracus, a cofer or baſkette wherein are caried the inſtrumentes or apparayle ſeruynge for comedies or interludes.
                  
                     Sors, ſortis, chaunce, lotte, portion in enherytaunce: the hole ſomme in a commune banke or ſtocke, wherin many haue parte. It is alſo deſtyny, iudgement.
                  
                     Sortes, were alſo the aunſweres of Idols.
                  
                     Sorticula, the ſcrowe, wherein the lotte is wrytten.
                  
                     Sortilegium, dyuynation by lottes.
                  
                     Sortilegi, ben they, whiche do tell mennes deſtenies by rakynge of lottes or verſes of holy ſcripture.
                  
                     Sortior, tiris, tiri, & ſortio, tire, to make lottes, to take or haue any thynge by lotte or chaunce. Alſo to diſpoſe or order.
                  
                     Sortiri prouinciam, to receyue the rule of a countray by lottes. It is vſurped to haue auctoritie by election.
                  
                     Sortitò, an aduerbe, ſygnyfyenge by lotte or chaunce.
                  
                     Sortitus, ta, tum, taken by lotte. alſo chaungynge to haue a thynge.
                  
                     Soſpes, hole or ſaulfe. alſo he that gyueth helthe.
                  
                     Soſpitalis, le, cauſe of helthe.
                  
                     Soſpito, tare, to kepe in helthe.
                  
                     Sos, olde wryters vſyd for eos.
                  
                     Soſia, a mannes name.
                  
                     
                        Soſ
                              •
                           ratus,
                      a mannes name.
                  
                     
                        So
                              •
                           adicum carmen,
                      metre hauyng .vii. fete.
                  
                     Soticena, one of the names of Iuno.
                  
                     Soter, a ſaluyour.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶S ANTE P.
                  
                     SPadicus, ca, cum, of ſcarlette colour.
                  
                     
                        Spad
                              ••
                           , dicis,
                      a date with the braunche plucked from the palme tree. It is alſo ſcarlette colour.
                  
                     Spado, donis, a geldyng, be it man or beeſt.
                  
                     Spadonia, a kynde of laurell.
                  
                     Spargo, ſi, gere, to ſcatter or caſte abrode.
                  
                     Cor. Tacitus lib. 3.
                     Spargere bellum, to make warre in ſondrye partes of a countrey.
                  
                     Spartam nactus es, hanc orna, a prouerbe ſignifienge the aſtate or office, whiche thou haſte, order or applye it welle.
                  
                     Sparganon, the roote of an herbe called cynquefoyle.
                  
                     Spargapiſes, the ſonne of Thomiris the quene of Maſſagetes.
                  
                     Sparta, the chiefe citie of Lacedemonia.
                  
                     Spartacus, was a famouſe ſworde player, whiche gathered an hoſt of ſlaues, & made battayle agaynſte the Romayns, and was vanquyſhed by Craſſus.
                  
                     Sparteum, a money bagge.
                  
                     Spartiata, & Spartanus, na, num, of Sparta.
                  
                     Spartum, & Spartus, an herbe called brome.
                  
                     Spara, be callyd caltroppes, ſowen in tyme of batayl, to woūd the fete of men & horſis.
                  
                     Sparus, a clubbe.
                  
                     Sparum, a lyttell darte.
                  
                     Spaſtici, out of the whyche any thynge is plucked.
                  
                     Spatha, a two handed or baſtarde ſworde. it is alſoo an inſtrumente of the kytchen, to tourne meate that is fryed.
                  
                     Spathalion, an ornamente, pertaynynge to women.
                  
                     Spaticus, vexed with an yll ſpirite.
                  
                     Spatiator, a wanderer.
                  
                     Spatioſus, a, um, large, ſpacious.
                  
                     Spatioſé, & ſpatioſius, largely, more large.
                  
                     Spatior, aris, ari, to walke.
                  
                     Spatium, a ſpace as wel in tyme, as in place.
                  
                     Specere, among olde writers was taken for Inſpicere, to looke in.
                  
                     Specialis, le, ſpeciall, peculiar, propre.Cicero de reditu ſu
                           •
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Speciatim, ſpecially, peculyarly, proprely.
                  
                     Species, ei, a fygure or image, a forme, kind, beautie, fauour. It is defyned by Logicyens, to be that, whiche is ſayde of many thynges varienge in noumbre: as Homo, whiche is ſpoken of Plato, Socrates, Cicero, whyche doo not varye in fygure but in noumbre. Sommetyme ſpecies, doo ſygnyfye ſpyces. Alſoo it is apparaunce. alſoo a ſyghte or thynge ſene, ſpices.
                  
                     Per ſpeciem legationis in Aſiam ablegatus eſt. Vnder the coloure of ambaſſade,Plin. de 
                           〈◊〉
                         ri
                           •
                         illuſtr. he was banyſhed into Aſia.Plautus.
                  
                  
                     In Speciem eſſe, to be to the honour.
                  
                     Specificus, ca, cum, partycular.
                  
                     Specificé, particularly.
                  
                     Specillum, a ſmalle Inſtrumente, wherewith Sourgeons doo ſerche the deepeneſſe of woundes and ſoores. Alſoo to annoynt ſore eyes. It is alſo a Spectakle to loke with. alſo an eare pycker.
                  
                     Specimen, ſpeciminis, an example, a profe, alſo beautie.
                  
                     Specimen aedere, to ſhew a proufe of a mannes counnynge.
                  
                     Specioſus, a, um, beautyfull.
                  
                     Spectabilis, le, worthy to be ſene.
                  
                     
                        Spectaculum,
                        Bude
                              ••
                           .
                      a thynge to be ſene or looked on. Sometyme the ſelfe beholdynge. alſoo the place from whens menne doo beholde thynges.
                  
                     Spectamen, a Sygne or token.Plautus in Men
                           •
                        . 
                     Spectame
                           •
                         bono ſeruo, id eſt qui rem l
                           •
                        erilem procurat, uidet, collocat, It is a token of a good

ſeruant, that is to ſaye, whiche attendeth aboute his maiſters buſyneſſe, and dothe ſuruey all thynge, and ſette it in order.
                  
                     Spectatores, beholders, triers of money:
                  
                     Spectatus, ta, tum, approued.
                  
                     Specto, tare, to behold, to approue, to tende to ſome concluſion, to compare.
                  
                     Spectatio, a tryall or proufe of money.
                  
                     Spectrum, an ymage or fygure in a mannes ymagynation.
                  
                     Specula, an hygh hylle or towre, whereon thynges be eſpyed far of. alſo lyttel hope, a diminutiue of ſpes.
                  
                     Specularia, ſpectakles.
                  
                     Specularis, re, any thynge, wherby a manne may ſee the better.
                  
                     Speculatio, a beholdynge.
                  
                     Speculator, an eſpyall in warres.
                  
                     Speculor, aris, ari, to ſee farre, to conſyder, to eſpye, to ſerche out.
                  
                     Speculum, a lookynge glaſſe.
                  
                     Specus, cus, & ſpecoris, a denne.
                  
                     Speluncha, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Spelaeum, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     
                        Spepondi, for ſpopondi,
                      I haue promyſed.
                  
                     Sperchius, a ryuer of Theſſalia.
                  
                     Speres, olde wryters vſed for ſpes, hope.
                  
                     Sperma, ſpermatis, ſeede, mooſte commonly vſed for the naturall humoure, whereof all lyuynge thynges be ingendred and fourmed.
                  
                     Sperno, ſpreui, ſpernere, to deſpiſe.
                  
                     Spero, rare, to hope.
                  
                     Speratá uirgo, a mayden aſked in mariage.
                  
                     Spes, ſpei, hope.
                  
                     Speutici panes, looues of breadde made in haaſte.
                  
                     Speuſippus, a noble phyloſopher couſyne to Plato.
                  
                     Sphaeca, a waſpe.
                  
                     Sphaera, a fygure in al partes equally round a ſpeere.
                  
                     Sphaeriſterium, a rounde place in a bayne, where men are exercyſed, a tenyſe play.
                  
                     Sphaeromachia, playenge at tenyſe.
                  
                     Sphennida, a balle made of lether or cloth, greatter than a tenyſe balle.
                  
                     Sphragide, a ſtone whiche printeth perfitly.
                  
                     Sphinx, gis, a monſter, whiche had the heed and handes of a mayden, the bodye of a dogge, wynges lyke a byrde, nayles lyke a lyon, a tayle lyke a dragon, the voyce of a man, which purpoſed to men ſubtyl queſtions. It is alſo a beaſte lyke an ape, but more rough, & with a longer tayle, I ſuppoſe it to be a munkay or babyon.
                  
                     Sphondilium, a ioynt or knotte of the backe bone .xii. of them do make the chyne, and the .v. reſydue do make the loynes.
                  
                     Spica, & ſpicus, the eare of corn. alſo a ſpice called Spikenarde.
                  
                     Spica mantica, an eare of corne, hauynge no berde.
                  
                     Spicatus, ta, tū, eared, or in care, as corne is.
                  
                     Spiceus, ca, cum, that whyche hathe eares lyke to corne.
                  
                     Spicifera, the ſurname of Ceres callid goddeſſe of corne.
                  
                     Spicilegium, glemynge of corne.
                  
                     Spicilegium facere, to gleme.
                  
                     Spicio, cire, to ſhute out in eare.
                  
                     Spiculatores, they whiche be called of the kynges garde. Some men do take Spiculator, to be a hangeman, or other perſone, whiche putteth men to deth by execution of the lawes.
                  
                     Spiculo, culare, to make any thynge ſharp
                        •
                      atte the poynte.
                  
                     Spiculum, a darte, alſo an arrowe.
                  
                     Spilumenes, a ſluttyſhe drabbe.
                  
                     Spina, a thorne, alſo the backebone.
                  
                     Spineus, a, um, of thorne.
                  
                     Spineoli, a wylde fruite callyd Sloes.
                  
                     Spinoſus, a, um, full of thornes.
                  
                     Spinther, a pynne, alſo a tache, ſometyme a braſelette.
                  
                     Spinturnix, a byrde whyche was wonte to comme to the aulters, and carye awaye a burnynge cole, whyche was taken for an vnlucky byrde.
                  
                     Spinus, a plumme tree or damſyn tree.
                  
                     Spio, onis, idem quod Nimpha.
                  
                  
                     Spirabilis, le, liuely, or that wherby we liue.
                  
                     Spiritabile, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     
                        Spiraculum, & ſpiramentum,
                        Cicero.
                      out of whyche the ayre or brethe paſſeth.
                  
                     Sprarchus, a capitayne in the fore warde.
                  
                     Spirae, thynges whyche doo tourne and wynde in dyuers cerkles lyke a trendell, or an adder lyeng rounde. Alſo ſpira, is an ornament of a womans heed. alſo the turning of cables or ropis, whā they be woūd vp. alſo the band or lace, wherwith a cappe or hat is made faſt vnder a mans chyn. alſo the baſe of a pyllar. Alſo a cake made like a trendell. alſo a multitude of people.Ennius.
                  
                  
                     Spirillum, a gotes berde.
                  
                     Spiritus, ſpirite, brethe, wynde.
                  
                     Spirituale, & ſpiritale, idem quod ſpiritus.
                  
                  
                     Spiro, ſpitare, to blowe as wynde dothe, to ſende forthe odoure.
                  
                     Spiſſe, an aduerbe, ſignifienge thicke.
                  
                     Spiſsigradior, gradi, to go thycke, or make many feete.
                  
                     Spiſsigradus, he that gothe thycke.
                  
                     Spiſsitas, thyckeneſſe.
                  
                     Spiſſo, are, to make thycke.
                  
                     Spiſſus, a, um, thycke, ſlowe.
                  
                     
                     Spiſsitudo, thyckeneſſe.
                  
                     Spithama, a meaſure of .xii. fyngers brode.
                  
                     Splen, ſplenis, the ſplene.
                  
                     Splendeo, dui, dere, to ſhyne.
                  
                     Splendeſco, ſcere, to ſhyne ofte.
                  
                     Splendidè, an aduerbe ſygnifienge clere or bryghte. alſo rychely.
                  
                     Splendidus, da, dum, bryght, clere. Alſo he whyche vſeth to haue his houſe rychelye decked with abundaunce of all thynges, is called Splendidus, contrarye to Sordidus & auarus.
                  
                  
                     Splendor, oris, lyght, bryghtneſſe, ſomtyme honour or nobleneſſe in lyuynge.
                  
                     Spleneticus, he that is ſycke in the ſplene.
                  
                     Splenium, a plaiſter of cloth or lether made to lay to the body of him, whiche is ſicke.
                  
                     Spoletium, a citie in Italy.
                  
                     Spoletini, people of the citie Spoletium.
                  
                     Spolio, are, to robbe or diſpoyle.
                  
                     Spolior, ari, to be robbed.
                  
                     Spoliarius, ria, um, that whiche receyueth ſpoyle or thynges taken by robberie.
                  
                     Sponda, the ſyde of a bedde.
                  
                     Spondeo, ſpopondi, ſpondêre, to promyſe.
                  
                     Spondeus, a foote in meeter of two longe ſyllables.
                  
                     Spondilus, a whe
                        •
                     ue, whyche is a rounde thynge of ſtone, or wodde, or leadde, put on a ſpyndell to make it runne rounde. It is alſo a whyte harde thynge in an oyſter, whyche is couered with the fyſhe.
                  
                     Spondium, that whiche cometh of lead like to ſoote, whiche is about veſſels of braſſe, that do hange ouer the fyre.
                  
                     Spongia, a ſpounge, or that wherwith any thynge is wyped.
                  
                     Spongiare, to wype cleane a ſponge.
                  
                     Spongioli, mouſherons.
                  
                     Spongioſus, a, um, lyghte, and full of holes lyke a ſpounge.
                  
                     Spongites, a ſtone lyke a ſpunge.
                  
                     Sponſa, a woman deſpouſed or affianced.
                  
                     Sponſalis, le, pertaynyng to ſpouſage.
                  
                     Sponſalia, the ſpouſage, or betrouthyng of a man and womanne, before that they be wedded.
                  
                     Sponſio, onis, a promyſe, a bargayne.
                  
                     Sponſus, us, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Sponſo, ſare, to affyance or betrouthe.
                  
                     Sponſor, oris, he that promyſeth or bargaineth. Sometyme a ſuretie, whiche vndertaketh an other mans acte.
                  
                     Sponſus, ſa, ſum, promyſed.
                  
                     Spontè, naturally, willingly, of his free wyl.
                  
                     Spontalis, le, voluntaryly.
                  
                     Spontaneus, ea, eum, that whiche dothe, or is done willyngly, naturally, without conſtraynt or helpe.
                  
                     Spopondi, I haue promyſed.
                  
                     Sporades, yl
                        •
                     s nygh to Crete or Candy.
                  
                     Sporta, & ſportula, a baſket or maunde, ſometyme money or meate diſtributed by pryncis vnto the people.
                  
                     Sportula, & ſportella, a littell gyft or almes, alſo lyuerey of courte, callydde bowge of courte, was callyd Sportule.
                  
                     Spretus, refuſed.
                  
                     Spuma, the fome or frothe of any thynge lyquyde.
                  
                     Spumeus, a, um, fomy or frothye.
                  
                     Spumo, are, to fome or gather vnto fome.
                  
                     Spumoſus, a, ū, that wherof cometh a fome.
                  
                     Spuo, ſpui, ſpuere, to ſpytte.
                  
                     Spurce, vnkleanly, fylthyly.
                  
                     Spurcidicus, ca, cum, that whiche ſpeaketh diſhoneſtly or vnclenly.
                  
                     Spurcificus, ca, cum, that maketh thynges vncleane or fylthy.
                  
                     Spurcitia, & ſpurcities, vncleanneſſe.
                  
                     Spurco, care, to defyle or make vncleane.
                  
                     Spurcum uinum, wyne myngled with water.
                  
                     Spurcus, ca, cum, vncleane, fylthye, vnpure, ſtynkynge, blouddy.
                  
                     Spurij verſus, verſes fayned, the authour beinge falſe named or vnknowen.
                  
                     Spurius, a baſtarde. alſo it was the ſurname of dyuers Romaynes.
                  
                     Sputo, tare, to ſpytte.
                  
                     Sputor, tari, to be ſpytte on.
                  
                     Sputum, ſpyttell.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶S ANTE Q.
                  
                     SQualla, olde wryters vſed for ſqualida.
                  
                     Squalleo, lui, lêre, to be filthy, ſhuttiſhe, ſoiled or ſtainid with ſom vnclene thing
                  
                     Squallidus, da, dum, ſluttiſhe, filthy, cauſing one to abhorre the ſight therof. Somtime it ſignyfieth ſpotted. alſo carrayne leane.
                  
                     Squallidus ager, grounde out of tylthe. alſo ſhynynge.
                  
                     Squalor, loris, ſluttyſhenes, fylthynes.
                  
                     Squalido, dinis, & ſqualliditas, the ſame.
                  
                     Squalus, a fyſhe.
                  
                     Squama, the ſcale of a fyſhe.
                  
                     Squammoſus, ſkaly.
                  
                     Squatina, a ſole fyſhe with a rough ſkynne, wherwith fletchers doo make theyr arrowes ſmothe.
                  
                     Squaroſus, a, um, rough and ſharpe, lyke to a thynge whiche is ſkalye.
                  
                     Squilla, a certayne herbe, growynge in the ſee, alſo a fyſhe.
                  
                     Squinitij, people in Italy callydde Sabelli and Samnites.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶S ANTE T.
                  
                     ST, a voyce of him that commandeth ſilence, as we ſay in engliſhe, buſht, whā we wold haue one to holde his peace.
                  
                     
                     Stabilimentum, that whiche kepeth a thing ſtedfaſte.
                  
                     
                        Sabilio, l
                              ••
                           i, lire,
                      to make ſtedfaſte or ſtable.
                  
                     Stabilis, le, ſtable or ſtedfaſte.
                  
                     Stabularae mulieres, women whiche keepe vyttaylynge houſes, for to refreſſhe wayfarynge men.
                  
                     Stabularius, an inholder. Alſo he that hath the charge of the howſe, where cattayle is kepte.
                  
                     Stabulari damas aut ceruos, falowe deree or redde dere to be lodged or harborowed.
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        udeus.
                     Stabulo, bulare, to ſtande as cattayle dothe in a ſtable.
                  
                     Stabulatio, ſtandynge or lyenge of cattelle, alſo harborowynge or lodgynge of d
                        •
                     re.
                  
                     Stabulum, an inne, where men do lodge or bayte. Alſo it is the generalle name of the place, where cattelle doo abyde, whanne they come from their paſture. alſo a ſtable wherin horſes or mules are kepte.
                  
                     Stactis, & ſtacte, the floure of myrre, or fatneſſe, whiche fyrſte diſtilleth out of it.
                  
                     Stadium, a place, wherin runnynge is exercyſed, as welle of men as of horſes. It is alſo a furlonge or the eight part of a mile.
                  
                     Stacteus, a, um, gummye.
                  
                     Stadiodromos, the place ordeined to run in.
                  
                     Stadiodromas, he that rounneth in a cours of rounnynge.
                  
                     Stagma, an oyntement.
                  
                     Stagno, are, proprely of water is to ſtande and not to flowe.
                  
                     Stagnum, a ſtandynge water, a poole. alſoo a certayne mettall called tynne.
                  
                     Staloginum, a thyng to hange at ones care, as Egyptians haue.
                  
                     Stamen, clothe, whanne it is in the lome or frame. Alſo ſlaxe or woulle, whan it is on the dyſtaffe. alſo ſtamyne or worſtede.
                  
                     Stanneus, a, um, of tynne.
                  
                     Stannum, mettall callyd tynne.
                  
                     Stapedes, ſtyroppes.
                  
                     Staphyle, a vyne.
                  
                     Staphylus, he that dyd fyrſte myngle water with wyne.
                  
                     Staphis, a kynde of vynes, whiche hathe a blacke ſtemme and ſtrayt, and hath a fruite more lyke to a lyttelle bladder, than to a grape, which be grene, within the which is a kernelle thre cornerde.
                  
                     Staphilinus, wylde parſhyppe.
                  
                     Staphis agria, Stafeſagre.
                  
                     Stata ſacrificia, ſacrifyce cuſtomably doone at certayne days of an olde ordynance.
                  
                     Statae matris ſimulachrum, an ymage, whyche was ſette vp by the people in euerye ſtrete at Rome.
                  
                     State, ſometyme ſygnyfieth to abyde.
                  
                     Stat mihi, I am determyned.
                  
                     Status, ta, tum, fyrme, or ſtable, alſoo ordeyned or decreed.
                  
                     Statarius, a, um, ordynarie.
                  
                     Stater, teris, a certayne coyne, whiche was in value foure drammes.
                  
                     Statera, a beam to way without the balācis.
                  
                     Staticulum, a certayne wanton meuynge in daunſynge. ſomtyme a lyttell cart.
                  
                     Stati dies, dayes ordynarie, dayes in banke, for apparance, or for the parties to plede.
                  
                     Statilinus, was callyd a priuate god, whiche men ſuppoſed to be alway with them.
                  
                     Statina, an Ile.
                  
                     Staticulum, a lyttell ymage.
                  
                     Statiuncula, 
                     idem, or a lyttell reſtyng place.
                  
                     Statius, a noble poete.
                  
                     Statim, anon, conſtantly, contynually.
                  
                     Statio, onis, a place, where eyther menne of warre or ſhyppes doo abyde or reſte for a certayne tyme.
                  
                     Stationalis, le, that whyche ſtandeth faſte or abydeth.
                  
                     Stationarij milites, ſouldiours, whiche are aſſigned to abyde ſtylle in one place, or to kepe a towne or fortreſſe, or the marches of a countrey.
                  
                     Statiua, & ſtatiuum, a certayne place fortyfyed, where men of warre lay at the ſiege of a fortreſſe.
                  
                     Stator, toris, a ſernaunt, whyche is alwayes redye attendynge aboute an offycer, to be at commandement. wherfore in that word be included purſyuantes, poſtes, ſergeantes, baylyffes, and catchepolles. Alſo Iupiter, was called Iupiter ſtator of Romulus, bycauſe he ſuppoſed that he made the Romaynes to tarye whan they fledde, the Samnites purſuynge them.
                  
                     Statua, an ymage of mettalle, yuorie, ſtone, or tymber.
                  
                     Statuaria, the crafte of caruynge or yetting of ymages.
                  
                     Statuarius, he that carueth or yetteth imagꝭ.
                  
                     Statuarius, a, um, pertaynynge to ymages.
                  
                     Statuere ex aequo & bono, to iudge or determyne. accordynge to equitie, laſſe than the rygour of the lawe wolde requyre.
                  
                     Statuere pretium, to ſette a price on thynges vendible.
                  
                     Statumen, minis, that whiche is ſette vp to ſuſtayne or beare a thynge, a proppe.
                  
                     Statumino, nare, to proppe vp, to vnderſet, to make ſure.
                  
                     Statuo, tui, tuere, to ordayne, to determyne, to ſet faſte, to ſtable a thinge, to dedicate, to beate one thynge to an nother. Sublim
                           •
                         illum arriperem, & caput primum in terram ſtatuerem, ut cerebro diſpergam uiam,
                     
I wolde lyfte hym on highe, and beate his heed to the grounde, that I mought ſcatter his brayne abrode in the hygh waye.
                  
                     Statura, the ſtature of a man.
                  
                     
                        Statu
                              •
                           us, a, um,
                      the particyple future of ſto, ſtas, ſtare, to ſtande.
                  
                     Status, tus, ſtate, it is amonge oratours and lawyers the caſe, whiche ryſethe in contention, wherin the matter reſteth, whiche muſte be replyed vnto, and eyther be denyed, confeſſed, or trauerſed: of Tullie it is callyd Conſtitutio cauſae.
                  
                  
                     Status, ſtata, ſtatum, firme. Stati dies, dayes appointed.
                  
                     Steatoma, a gatherynge of greace or fatte in ſome place agaynſte nature.
                  
                     Stechades, thre lyttell yles by Marſiles.
                  
                     Stega, a cabyn of a ſhyppe. alſoo a cote or cotage.
                  
                     Stegnae febres, feuers in the whiche a man maye haue neyther ſyege, nor vryne, nor ſweate, nor none other euacuation.
                  
                     Stelae, lyttell pyllars.
                  
                     Stella, a ſterre, alſo a ſterrefyſſhe, alſo the name of a poete.
                  
                     Stella crinita, a blaſynge ſterre.
                  
                     Stellatus, ta, tum, full of ſterres.
                  
                     Stellatura, was an extorcion of capytaynes in takynge from the ſouldiours the porcions of vyttayle appoynted vnto them by the Emperour.
                  
                     Stellio, a beaſte lyke a lyſarde, hauynge on his backe ſpottes lyke ſterres.
                  
                     Stellionatus crimen, a dyſceyte in dyſſemblynge a thynge, to take profyte of an other iniuſtely.
                  
                     Stellis, a kynd of byrdlyme made in Euboea.
                  
                     Stello, are, to ſhyne or glyſten lyke ſterres, or be made lyke ſterres.
                  
                     
                        St
                              •
                           mma, matis,
                      a garlande of floures, alſoo the ſtocke or bloudde of a gentylle houſe. ſometyme the degrees in kynrede. Alſoo an inſcription grauen in a ſtone.
                  
                     Stemo, was ſyſter to Meduſa.
                  
                     Stenoboea, the wyfe of Pretus kynge of Ephyri, whiche loued Bellorophon, that vanquyſſhed the monſter callyd Chimaera.
                  
                     Stentor, toris, was a man, whiche hadde a voyce as lowde as .xx. men.
                  
                     Stephanoma, euery herbe that ſeruethe for garlandes.
                  
                     Stephanoplocus, a maker of garlandes.
                  
                     Stephanus, in greke is a crowne.
                  
                     Stercoratio, dungynge.
                  
                     Stercorarius, ria, rium, pertaynyng to dunge or mucke.
                  
                     Stercoratus, ta, tum, dunged or mucked, or compaſſed.
                  
                     Stercoro, are, to dunge or compaſſe.
                  
                     Stercus, ſtercoris, dunge, mucke, compaſſe.
                  
                     Stercutius, the ſurname of Saturnus, bicauſe he fyrſte founde and vſed doungynge of grounde.
                  
                     Stereſis, priuation.
                  
                     Sterila, olde writers vſed for ſteril
                        •
                     s.
                  
                     Sterileſco, rileſcere, to be barrayne or waxe barrayne.
                  
                     
                        Sterilia for ſterilitas.
                     
                  
                  
                     Sterilis, le, barrayne.
                  
                     Sterilis amator, a louer, whyche lacketh
                        •
                      money.
                  
                     Sterilitas, barraynes, ſterilytie.
                  
                     Steriliter, barraynely.
                  
                     Sternax, nacis, a ſteerynge or ploungynge horſe.
                  
                     Sterno, ſtraui, ſternere, to throwe downe, to ſpreade, to couer, to lay the table, to make playne or ſmothe, to lye downe to reſte.
                  
                     Sternere lectum, to make a bedde.
                  
                     Sernunt ſe ſomno, They layde them downe to ſlepe.
                  
                     Sternuto, tare, to ſneſe often.Vergi
                           •
                        ius
                  
                  
                     Sternuo, nuere, to ſneſe.
                  
                     Sternutamentum, ſneeſynge.
                  
                     Sternutatio, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Sterquilinium, a dungehylle or myxen.
                  
                     Sterogonia, a kynde of frankincenſe callyd cōmonly olibanū, or in latin thus maſculus.
                  
                     Sterto, tui, tere, to route whan one ſlepeth.
                  
                     Steſichorites, is the numbre of eight in diſe, ſo called of the ſepulchre of Steſichorus the poete, whiche was made in figure like to eyght dyſe.
                  
                     Steſichorus, a famouſe poete, of whome it is writen, that whanne he was an infant in his cradelle, a Nyghtyngale ſatte on his mouthe, and dyd ſynge, ſygnyfienge that he ſhulde be the ſweeteſt poete, that euer was afore hym. Alſo he founde fyrſte ſyngynge of ſonges in a daunſe.
                  
                     Stibadium, a chaire or couche made of herbes wounde togyther: ſomme doo calle it an herber or ſommer parler.
                  
                     Stibium, a whyte ſtone founde in ſyluer mines, which ſtoppeth the runnyng of eies, and dothe make them ſeme very fayre.
                  
                     Stichos, a verſe or an order in a thynge.
                  
                     Stigo, are, to pricke forthe.
                  
                     Stigma, matis, a marke made with fyre, or with a hotte yron. Sometyme it ſygnyfieth infamy and reproche obiected openly.
                  
                     Stigmatici, perſones infamed.
                  
                     Stilla, a droppe.
                  
                     Stilbo, was a philoſopher. Vide ſtilpo.
                  
                  
                     Stilbon, the ſterre of Mercury.
                  
                     Stillicidium, the droppynge of a houſe.
                  
                     Stillo, are, to droppe.
                  
                     Stilpo, a phyloſopher borne in the cytie of

Megara in Grece, whiche his countreye beinge burned, and his wyfe and childern loſte in the fyre, eſcaped, and departynge alone, whan the kynge Demetrius aſked of hym, yf he had loſte any thynge, he anſwered, I haue loſte nothyng: for all that is myne, I carie with me, meanynge therby, that vertue, whiche is onely the propre goodes of a wyſe mā, and may not be taken from hym, he toke away with hym.
                  
                     Stilpones, dwarfes.
                  
                     Stimulo, are, to prycke.
                  
                     Stimulatio, a pryckynge or feruent mouing to doo a thynge.
                  
                     Stimulator, he that prycketh.
                  
                     Stimuleus, a, um, that whyche is done with pryckynge.
                  
                     Stimulus, a gode, wherwith oxen ar driuen.
                  
                     Stingo, & ſtinguo, guere, to put out lyght.
                  
                     
                        Stipa, for ſtupa,
                      towe.
                  
                     Stiparius, ia, ium, pertaynynge to ſtoppyng or beatynge harde togyther.
                  
                     Stipatores, they whiche do frayte the ſhyp, or lay in ſuche fardelles or burdeynes as are to be caryed. Alſo they whiche be of the kynges gard, alway about his perſon.
                  
                     Stipatus, enuyronned with men, to be defended, as princis are with their garde.
                  
                     Stipendialis, le, pertaynynge to wages.
                  
                     Stipendiarius, a, um, whiche payeth tribute, of ſome callyd contributarie, to the fyndyng of an army, or defence of a contray.
                  
                     Stipendiatus, he that taketh wages.
                  
                     Stipendioſus, he that hath bene oftentymes hyred or retayned in warres.
                  
                     Stipendior, diari, to be hyred or retayned in warres.
                  
                     Stipendium, wages proprely gyuen to ſouldiours, Alſo ſubſidie payde to princis.
                  
                     Stipes, pitis, a ſtake, alſo a ſtycke.
                  
                     Stipo, are, to ſtop chynkes or clyftes, proprely in ſhyppes or botes, with towe and pytche. alſo to enuyronne to the intent to defende one.
                  
                     Stipendia facere, to ſerue in warres, as a ſouldiour.
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         Liuius. 
                           〈◊〉
                        . 34.
                  
                  
                     Stips, uel ſtipis, pis, wages to men hyred: alſo money gyuen to beggars.
                  
                     Stiptica medicamenta, medycines that doo bynde or reſtrayne.
                  
                     Stipula, holme, erige, or ſtraw, apt to thatch houſes. it is of ſome taken for the huſke that cloſeth in the ſtrawe.
                  
                     Stipulatus, tus, & ſtipulatio, a bargayne or promyſe, or obligation to pay money, or to perfourme a thynge, whiche is requyred.
                  
                     Stipulor, aris, ari, to make a bargayn, to promyſe effectually that whiche he is requyred to do. It hath both the actiue and paſſiue ſignification. Stipulor abs te, I require of the, or I am requyred of the.
                  
                     Stiria, an yſykle or droppe of yſe.
                  
                     Stiricidiū, & ſtillicidiū, the droppīg of a hous
                  
                     Stirpices, w
                        •
                     eders in gardeynes.
                  
                     Stirpitus, vp by the rote.
                  
                     Stirpo, are, to pull vp by the rote.
                  
                     Stirps, ſtiripis, in the femynyne gender ſygnyfyeth a ſtocke in kynrede, beinge the maſculyne gender it ſygnifieth the ſtemme of a tree or herbe.
                  
                     
                        Stitiſſe vadimonium,
                        Gell. li. 2.
                      to haue brought forth ſuretie or pledges.
                  
                     Stiua, is that in a plough, which the plough man holdeth, whan he dothe eare.
                  
                     Stlata, a brode ſhyp or bote, callid an hulke.
                  
                     Stlembus, ſlowe and heuye.
                  
                     Stlatariū, any thyng that is borne on the ſee.
                  
                     Stlatarius, a maker of hulkes or botes.
                  
                     Stlitem, old writers vſed for litem, variance.
                  
                     
                        Stlitibus iudicandis, for litibus iudicandis.
                     
                  
                  
                     Stlopus, a ſowne made with the mouth, whā the chekes are blowen.
                  
                     
                        Stlotium, for lotum.
                     
                  
                  
                     Sto, ſteri, ſtare, to ſtande, to indure or abide. Stare promiſſo, to abyde by his promyſe. To be full. Stat ager ſentibus,
                     Caecilius. Vergil. the felde is full of brembles. Iam puluere coelum ſtare uident, Nowe ſawe they the ſkye fulle of duſte. To boſe oute.Lucilius. 
                     Hic corpus ſolidum inuenies, hic ſtare papillas Pictor marmoreo, Here in this marble ſtone ſhalt thou fynde paynted, the body ſounde, and the pappes imboſed. Alſo to be immouable, or alway certayne. Sic ſtat ſententia, ſo the ſentence abydeth immouable, or is determyned. Alſo Stat, my mynde is.Vergilius. 
                     Stat conferre manum Aeneae, my mynd is to fight with Aeneas Stat, is ſette. Omnis in Aſcanio chari ſtat cura parentis,
                     Vergilius. All the care of the render louynge father was ſette on Aſcanius. Alſo ſtare, to coſte, Neque ipſe hoc periculum ignoro, expertus non leui documento, quanti ſteterit mihi, quod ſemel imperata non feci, Nor I am ignorant of that daunger, hauyng experience of no lyght warnyng, howe moch it coſt me, that I dyd not thoſe thynges, that I was commaunded.
                  
                     Stare firmum, to ſtande faſte.
                  
                     Stat per me, per te, per illum, whanne I, or anye other is the cauſe, that a thynge is not done. Si poterit fieri, ut ne pater per me ſteriſſe credat, quo minus hae fierent nuptiae, uolo. I wolde if it may be, that my father ſhulde thynke, that it was not long of me, that this mariage toke none effecte.
                  
                     Stara me, he is of myne opinion.Plautus in pſeudo. Ter. in E
                           •
                        .
                  
                  
                     Stat apud te fides parum, Thou arte of a

ſmall credence.
                  
                     Statur, I ſtande here.
                  
                     Stoecades, foure Iles in the frenche ſee agaynſte Languedocke.
                  
                     Stoici, a ſecte of philoſophers, which affirmed, that no griefe moughte happen to a wyſe man: and that felicitie was onely in vertue.
                  
                     Stola, a womans gowne, It was alſo a long garment, whiche the prynces of Perſia dyd vſe, and was the only garment of honour, as we do cal ſuche apparell a robe.
                  
                     Stolatus, he that weareth ſuche a robe. alſo it may be callyd honourable.
                  
                     Stolidè, foolyſhely, lewdely.
                  
                     Stoliditas, foolyſhenes, lewdenes.
                  
                     Stolidius, more foolyſhely.
                  
                     Stolidus, da, dum, foolyſhe, lewde of condicions, odyouſe.
                  
                     Stolones, braunches whiche do ſpryng out of the ſtemmes or rootes of trees.
                  
                     Stomachicus, he that is ſick in his ſtomake.
                  
                     Stomachor, aris, ari, to haue indignation, to be vexed in mynde.
                  
                     Stomachoſé, angerly, hatefully, diſdainouſly
                  
                     Stomachoſus, dyſdaynous.
                  
                     Stomachus, is the pipe, wherby meate goth downe. It is alſo that which is called Vē
                        triculus, wherevnto we haue none other name but the ſtomacke. ſometyme it ſygnifyeth indignation, vehemente wrathe, hatrede, and abhorrynge of a thynge that lyketh not vs, Sommetyme facylytie or gentylneſſe.Plinius.
                  
                  
                     Storax, racis, a ſwete incenſe or gumme, whiche is alſo called ſtyrax, whereof be two kyndes, the one is callyd Storax calamita, the other is callyd Storax liquida.
                  
                  
                     Storea, any thynge that is ſpredde on the grounde. It is alſo a matte.
                  
                     Strabo, he that looketh a ſquynte, or gogle eyed.
                  
                     Strages, a ſlaughter of mē, or a diſcomfiture.
                  
                     Stragulum, euery ouermoſte garment. Alſo a counterpoynte or couerlyd.
                  
                     Stramen, minis, ſtrawe, lytter.
                  
                     Stramentum, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Stramentitius, a, um, that whyche is made of ſtrawe.
                  
                     Stramineus, a, um, of ſtrawe.
                  
                     
                        Strangulo, ar
                              •
                           ,
                      to ſtrangle.
                  
                     Stranguria, dyffycultie to pyſſe.
                  
                     Stratagema, a polycie or wyſe councille in warres.
                  
                     Strategus, a generall captayne of an armye.
                  
                     Stratia, an hoſte or armye.
                  
                     Stratiotes, a man of warre.
                  
                     Stratiotes, an herbe, whiche groweth on waters without any roote.
                  
                     Stratioticus, ca, cum, warlyke, pertainynge to warres.
                  
                     Stratius, 
                     idem. Alſo the name of one of the ſonnes of Neſtor.
                  
                     Stratumino, are, to paue.
                  
                     Strator, toris, he that helpeth his mayſter to horſebacke, yeman of the ſtyrope.
                  
                     Stratum, any thinge that is ſtrawed, Alſo a bedde. Strata, all that is layde on the bed.
                  
                     Stratum, a horſe harneyſe, a ſtreate or caulſey, paued with ſtone.
                  
                     Strebula, in the olde tunge of Vmbri was a piece of the fleſſhe that was offered in ſacrifyce.
                  
                     Strena, a newe yeres gyfte, or preſent.
                  
                     Strenué, valyantly, quyckely, boldly.
                  
                     Strenuitas, tatis, actiuitie.
                  
                     Strenuus, a, um, valiant, prompt, actife, bold.
                  
                     Strepito, tare, to make a noyſe often.
                  
                     Strepitus, tus, a noyſe made with the handes or fete.
                  
                     Strepo, pui, pere, to make a greatte noyſe, proprely in goinge or clappynge of handrs, ſometyme generally.
                  
                     Strepſiceroti, certayne beaſtes in Affryke, hauynge croked hornes.
                  
                     Stria, a rabat or ſmal furrowe made in ſtone or tymber.
                  
                     Striata, be alſo creuyſes or ſmall lines, whiche are ſene in herbes.
                  
                     Stribligo, ginis, a viciouſe fourme in ſpeking where the wordes agree not, and the partes of ſpeche be out of order.
                  
                     Striblita, breade made lyke to ropes or cordes wounden.
                  
                     Stricte, ſtraightly.
                  
                     Strictim, ſhortly touched one after an other
                  
                     Strictim referre, to reporte moche in fewe wordes.
                  
                     Strictim attondere, to clyppe all at ones.
                  
                     
                        Strictior, 
                              •
                           ius,
                      more ſtrayte▪
                  
                  
                     Strictiſsimus, a, um, moſte ſtrayte.
                  
                     Strictiuella, a foule yll fauoured hoore.
                  
                     Strictiuae, olyues gathered with māe hand.
                  
                     Stricturae, ſparkes whiche doo iſſue frome mettall whan it is taken oute of the fyre, and beaten with hammers.
                  
                     Strideo, dui, dére, & ſtrido, dis, dere, to craſhe or make a noyſe lyke to cordes, whan they be drawen.
                  
                     Stridon, a towne in Dalmacia, where ſaynct Hierome was borne.
                  
                     Striga, a rewe of thynges whanne they be layde in lengthe. Alſoo a ridge of lande, wherof commeth ſtrigatus ager.
                  
                     Striges, ſhrycheoules, alſo women whyche are ſuppoſed to come by nyghte into houſes, and ſucke the bloudde of chylderne, ſome calle them hegges.
                  
                     
                     Strigia, wyde garmentes made of lether vſed in warres.
                  
                     Strigil, gilis, an horſecombe, alſoo a thynge wherewith wraſtelers bounde theyr bodyes, whan they had wraſteled. Alſoo a certayne veſſell.
                  
                     Strigiles, were rubbynge combes made of ſwete wodde, wherwith in India the men were rubbed for an exerciſe. Alſo kerchifes, wherewith wraſtelers after their labours wyped their bodyes. alſo certayne veſſels.Budeus. alſo pieces of fyne golde founde in mynes, vnmyxt with any other matter. alſo lyttell fyſhes moſte commonly taken in wynter tyme.
                  
                     Strigilecula, a diminutiue of ſtrigil.
                  
                  
                     Strigillo, are, to ſtrayne harde.
                  
                     Strigium, a ſpanyſhe garment.
                  
                     Strigmenta, fylthyneſſe, whiche commethe from a mans bodye, whan he is waſſhed. alſo the corruption of oyle.
                  
                     Strigo, gonis, a well pightman, or well compacte or ſtronge.
                  
                     Strigoſus, a, um, carrayn leane, it is proprely ſpoken of horſes or routher beaſtes.
                  
                     Strimon, onis, a ryuer in Thracia.
                  
                     Stringo, xi, gere, to ſtrayne or wrynge. Alſo to ſtryke, to make thynne in curtynge, to gather, to ſhaue, to wounde. Stringere enſem, to drawe a ſworde.
                  
                     Strio, ſtriare, to make rabattes in ſtoone or tymber. Alſoo to make furrowes. It is proprely whanne beaſtes in carynge atte the ende of a furrowe tournethe to make a newe furrowe. Somme doo calle hit, to wende.
                  
                     Striare, is alſo to plane or to polyſhe.
                  
                     Stritare, to abyde or tarye with an yll wyll, or with moche payn.
                  
                     Stritauum, olde writers vſed for Tritauo, my grandfathers grandfather.
                  
                     Stritomellus, a ſparowe, whiche hauntethe the ſee coſtes.
                  
                     Strix, ſtrigis, a ſhryche oule, a wytche that chaungeth the fauour of chylderne.
                  
                     Striges, groſſe herbes or wortes.
                  
                     Strobilus, a pyne apple tree. ſometyme the kernels, or fruite.
                  
                     Strobus, a tree, wherof ꝑfumes were made, myxte with the wyne of dates, whyche perfume was ſwete, but it made the heed heuy, all be it without any peyne.
                  
                     Stroma, tis, tapiſry.
                  
                     Strombon, a kynde of Labdanum.
                  
                     Strombus, a ſhelle fyſhe of the ſee, whyche hath a kynge, whom they folowe. It was thought ſommetyme that he whyche had ſeene that fyſſhe, ſhulde haue good lucke in his affaires.
                  
                     Strongyle, & Strongylos, an Ile in the ſee called Aegeum, nowe callyd Axos, ſometyme it was callyd Dia.
                  
                     Stropha, ſubtyltie in arguynge.
                  
                     Strophas, a whirlynge or ſodayne turnyng.
                  
                     Strophades, two Iles in the grekyſſhe ſee.
                  
                     Strophia, garlandes whiche prieſtes were wonte to weare.
                  
                     Strophiolum, a lyttell garlande.
                  
                     Strophos, frettynge in the bowelles.
                  
                     Strophium, a maydens neckerchefe or lynnen partlette.
                  
                     Structiles columnae, pyllars made of diuers pieces.
                  
                     Structilis, le, made of many pieces, or of diuers thynges.
                  
                     
                        Structor, to
                              •
                           is,
                      a caruer of meate at a table.
                  
                     Structura, buylding, ſettynge of thinges in good order.
                  
                     Strues, a pyle of wodde, alſo a cake.
                  
                     Struices, an ordynaunce of many thynges togyther.
                  
                     Strufectarij, they whyche dyd carye cakes to the temple to be offred, as they do now carie the holy lofe on the ſondaye.
                  
                     Struferarii, they which dyd ſacrifyce at the trees that were burned with lyghtninge.
                  
                     Strufetani, they whiche broughte meale to be offered.
                  
                     Struma, a ſwellynge within the throte, whiche is gathered matter and bloode. ſome thynke it to be that, whyche is callyd the kynges euyll.
                  
                     Strumoſus, he that hath the kynges euylle.
                  
                     Struo, ſtruxi, ſtruere, to ſette in order.
                  
                     Strumum, a medycyne or playſter for the kynges euyll.
                  
                     Strupearia, holydayes amonge the people callyd faliſci, at the whyche daye, the people do go with garlandes on their heedis.
                  
                     Struppum, is a lyke holydaye amonge the people callyd Tuſculani.
                  
                  
                     Struppi, were lyttell wrethes made of leaues putte on the heedes of ymages in the temples, as nowe ſuperſtitious ſooles do ſette on images heedes in the churches.
                  
                     Strutheus, the priuye membre of a man.
                  
                     Struthia, a certayne kynde of quynces.
                  
                     Struthiocamelus, an oſtryche.
                  
                     Struthio, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Struthopus, a rounde foote lyke a ſparowe.
                  
                     Struthopedes, they whyche haue lyttelle rounde fecte.
                  
                     Strychius, an herbe, whiche maketh hym madde that eateth of it.
                  
                     Strychium bibit, a prouerbe ſygnyfyenge the man is madde.
                  
                     Studeo, dui, dere, to ſtudye, or to applye the mynde, or care for a thynge, to endeuour.
                  
                     
                     Studioſus, ſtudious, dylygent, conſtant, addicte or feruently diſpoſed.
                  
                     Studioſé, ſtudiouſely.
                  
                     Studium, ſtudye. ſometyme exercyſe, wylle, or appetite, deſyre.
                  
                     Stultitia, foly, it is knowen by foure thynges, or if he hath not in remembrance that he ſhulde haue, or if he hath, he dothe not retayn it, or doth not folow good council, or dothe approue yll councill or affections.
                  
                     Stultior moricho, he that neglecteth his owne buſyneſſe at home, and applyeth other mens abrode, It is alſoo a prouerbe touchynge them, whiche do thynges, that cauſe them to be laughed to ſcorne.
                  
                     Stultior Choroebo, a prouerbe applyed to fooles, whiche wyll aſſaye to do a thynge that is aboue their wytte or lernynge: for Choroebus, was a felowe, that aſſayed to number the wawes of the ſee, whā he him ſelf coude not tell any number aboue fiue.
                  
                     Stultè, folyſhely.
                  
                     Stultiloquentia, & ſtultilo quium, a foolyſſhe babblynge.
                  
                     Stultiloquus, he that talketh or ſpeakethe foolyſhely.
                  
                     Stultior, ſtultius, more foolyſhe.
                  
                     Stultiſsimus, ma, mum, moſte folyſhely.
                  
                     Stultius, more folyſhely.
                  
                     Stultorum feriae, was a tyme in the monethe of February, that fooles kepte holy, fooles holy daye.
                  
                     Stultus, he that dothe a thynge vnaduiſedly or without diſcretion.
                  
                     Stupa, towe, the cours part of flaxe.
                  
                     Stuparius malleus, the hammer, wherewith calkers do beate towe into ſhyps or botes
                  
                     Stupefactus, aſtonyed.
                  
                     Stupefio, I am aſtonyed or abaſhed.
                  
                     Stupeo, & ſtupeſco, pui, pere, to be aſtonyed or diſmayde. ſomtyme to meruayle at.
                  
                     Stupefacio, cere, to make aſtonid, or to cauſe to meruayle or be abaſhed.
                  
                     Stupentia, uel ſtupida membra, the membres whiche haue loſte all their ſence or feling.
                  
                     Stupiditas, an abaſhement.
                  
                     Stupidus, dyſmayed, abaſſhed, alſo he that feleth nothynge, or lacketh his ſences.
                  
                     Stupor, poris, abaſhement, the ſodayne priuation of ſence or felynge.
                  
                     Stuprè, diſhoneſtly, ſhamefully.
                  
                     Stupro, prare, to committe auoultrie or rape or to defloure a virgin.
                  
                     Stuprum, auoutrie, or defloration of a virgin
                  
                     Stura, an yle agayne the mouthe of Tyber.
                  
                     Styga, a ſenne in Egypte not farre from the citie of Memphis.
                  
                     Stygeus, ea, um, pertaynynge to Styx, the greate fenne, whiche is fayned of poetes to be by the fielde callyd Elyſius, whiche the paynyms dydde ſuppoſe to be a place of pleaſure, wherein reſted the ſoules of good men.
                  
                     Stylobata, a trowgh of tymber, wherein water rounnethe, or is conuayed into a ceſterne.
                  
                     Stylus, a ſtyle, whyche qualitie of wordes in ſpeakynge, ſometyme harde, ſometyme eaſy, ſometyme in a meane. alſo an elegant fourme or order in writynge or ſpeakinge.
                  
                     Stymphalus, a ryuer in Arcadia.
                  
                     Stymphalide, a coppe of fethers, whyche ſtandeth on the heed of a byrde, as of a larke, an heron, a pecocke, and other.
                  
                     Stipticus, ca, cum, that whiche ſtoppeth or bindeth, or ſtraineth, if it be eaten or dronken. Alſo that whiche in taſtynge ſeemeth to ſtrayne the tunge, as a quynce or redde wyne.
                  
                     Styrax, racis, a ſoote gumme callyd ſtorax, wherof be two kyndes, the one is callyd ſtorax calamita, the other ſtorax liquida.
                  
                  
                     Styx, ſygnifieth ſorowe or heuyneſſe, poetes doo fayne, that it is a fenne, whyche is in helle.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶S ANTE V.
                  
                     SVada, callyd in greke Pitho, was callid the goddeſſe of eloquence or dylectable ſpeche.
                  
                     Suadela, perſuaſion, fayre ſpeche.
                  
                     Suadeo, ſi, dêre, to ſpeake fayre, to intreate with fayre wordes, to indeuour, to induce a man into our opinyon, or to beleue vs.
                  
                     Suadibilis, le, that which may be perſuaded.
                  
                     Suaſibilis, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Sualternicum, a kynde of ambre, whiche is yelowe, whereof beades be made, and is callyd Laumbre.
                  
                     Suapté, of his owne nature.
                  
                     Suarius, a ſwyne herde.
                  
                     Suaſibiliter, an aduerbe ſignifyenge, in maner to perſwade.
                  
                     Suaſio, an exhortation, a mocyon or perſuaſyon.
                  
                     Suaſor, ſoris, he that dothe exhorte.
                  
                     Suaſum, euery colour that may tourne into an nother colour.
                  
                     Suauiatio, a ſwete kyſſynge.
                  
                     Suauiator, he that kyſſeth ſwetely.
                  
                     Suauilo quium, a ſwete ſpeche.
                  
                     Suauiloquus, he that ſpeaketh ſwetely.
                  
                     Suaſorius, a, um, that wherwith a man is or may be perſwaded.
                  
                     Suatim, lyke a ſowe.
                  
                     Suauior, aris, ari, & ſuauio, to kyſſe ſweetely or for ioye.
                  
                     
                     
                        Suauis, ſuau
                              •
                           ,
                      ſweete in taſte, ſoote in odour or ſmelle.
                  
                     
                        Suauita
                              •
                           , & ſua
                              ••
                           tudo,
                      ſweteneſſe.
                  
                     Suauiter, ſweetely.
                  
                     Suauium ſumere, to kyſſe.
                  
                     Suauium facere, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Suauium, & ſauium, ſwere harte.
                  
                     Sub, vnder, by, or aboute. Sub lucem, by daye lyght. Sub idem tempus, In the ſame tyme, or aboute the ſame tyme. Sub horam pugnae. About the time of the battayl. Sub eas autem redditae ſunt, for they were deliuered after theym. Sub ſarcinis, with the truſſis or cariage.Cicer. pro Planco.
                  
                  
                     Sub ueſperum, in the twye lyghte. Subueſperum Caeſar portas claudi, milites
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         ex oppido exire iuſsit,
                     Caeſ. in cō. In the twie lyghte Ceſar commaunded the gates to be ſhutte, and the mē of warre to depart out of the citie.
                  
                     Subacidus, eida, cidum, ſomewhat eygre, or ſowre.
                  
                     Subacidulus, a, um, a lyttell ſowre.
                  
                     Subactus, ta, tum, conſtrayned, ſubdewed, dryuen vnder, kneaded or wrought with handes, as dowe is, laboured, exerciſed.
                  
                     Subaeratus, ta, tum, that which is braſſe with in, and other mettall without.
                  
                     Subaero, rare, to myngle with braſſe.
                  
                     Subagito, tare, to ſolycite. Subagito blandis, & benedicis uerbis,
                     Plautus in 
                           ••
                        ell. I ſolicited with fayre and well ſpoken wordes. It is alſo to cō
                     pany with a woman carnally.
                  
                     Subalaris, ſubalare, that whyche is vnder the wynges.
                  
                     Subalpini, people vnder the Mountaynes called Alpes, called Peemountaynes.
                  
                     Subalternatio, a ſucceſſion by tourne.
                  
                     Subalterno, nare, to ſuccede by tourne.
                  
                     Subaquaneus, a, um, & ſubaqueus, a, um, that whiche lyeth vnder the water.
                  
                     Subaquilus, la, lum, broune of colour.
                  
                     Subare, is ſpoken of women, whyche are as fylthye as ſwyne in the acte of lechery.
                  
                     Subire, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Subareo, & ſubareſco, reſcere, to be or waxe ſomewhat drye.
                  
                     Subaſper, ſomewhat ſharpe.
                  
                     Subaudio, dire, to here or perceyue a lyttel.
                  
                     Subauſculto, tare, to harken a lyttell.
                  
                     Subbaſilicanus, he that walkethe vnder the place, where iugementes are practyſed.
                  
                     Subbibo, bibere, to drynke a lyttell.
                  
                     Subblandior, diri, to flatter.
                  
                     Subcalidus, da, dum, ſomwhat hote, warme.
                  
                     Subcernicula, a lyne bulter, wherwith the floure is ſeuered from the branne.
                  
                     Subcerniculum, a rangynge ſleue.
                  
                     Subcingulum, a bracynge gyrdell.
                  
                     Subcineritius, a, um, roſted or baken vnder the aſhes, or axen.
                  
                     Subciſiua tempora, tymes borowed or ſpared from ſeryous 
                        •••
                     yneſſe.
                  
                     Subciſiua opera, warkes cone at times ſtolē frō ordinarie baſines or labours neceſſary.
                  
                     Subcollo, lare, to lay a thyng on ones necke
                  
                     Subcriſpus, he that hath a curlyd heed.Plautus in milite.
                  
                  
                     
                        Subcu
                              ••
                           os,
                      an vnder keeper.
                  
                     Subcutaneus, a, um, that which is within the ſkynne, betwene the ſkinne and the fleſhe.
                  
                     Subdelego, gare, to commytte to an nother any matter, whiche is commytted vnto vs by the kynge or prynce.
                  
                     Subdialia, thynges whiche doo ſtande or be ſette abrode out of the houſe.
                  
                     Subdialīs, ale, abrode in the ayre withoute the houſe.
                  
                     Sub dio, that is not in a howſe, or vnder a couerynge.
                  
                     Subdititius, ia, ium, whiche is not proprelye his or hirs, whoſe it is fained to be. Partus ſubdititius, a byrthe fayned of an nother mannes chylde. Libri ſubdititij, bokes with fals titles or counterfaite auctours.
                  
                     Subditiuus, a counterfayte chylde.
                  
                     Subditus, a ſubiecte.
                  
                     Subditus, ta, tum, idem quod ſubdititius. alſo put in the place of an other.
                  
                     Subditus iudex, a iudge which is ſette in the place of a iudge departed.Plautus in moſtell. Plautus in epiſtol. & Plin. in epi.
                  
                  
                     Sub diu, in the day tyme.
                  
                     Subdo, dere, to putte vnder, to adde to, to putte in the place of an nother, to putte in daunger or ieoperdie.
                  
                     Subdolus, he that deceyueth craftely, cantelouſe.
                  
                     Subdolé, craftily cantelouſly.
                  
                     Subdubiè, ſomewhat doubtefully.
                  
                     Subdubitanter, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Subdubito, tare, I doubte ſomewhat.
                  
                     Subdubius, ſomewhat in doubte.
                  
                     Subdubitatio, a lyttell doubte.Terent. in Andria.
                  
                  
                     Subducere, to deceyue. Etiam nunc me ſubducere iſtis dictis poſtulas? And yet nowe wylte thou goo aboute with theſe wordes to deceyue me?
                  
                     Subducere, to ſteale.Plautus in Curcu. 
                     Proximò magnum poculum ille bibit, caput ponit, cum dormiſcit, ei ſub duco anulum, At the laſte he dranke a great draught, & layd downe his heed, whiles he ſlepte, I ſt
                        •
                     le his rynge from hym.
                  
                     Subduco, xi, cere, to take awaye, to remoue, to lyfte vp, or drawe vp.
                  
                     Subducere rationes, to make accompt, to go or ſteale away priuily.
                  
                     Subductum omnibus uentis aedificiū, a houſe in the daunger of euery wynde.
                  
                     Subeo, iui, ire, to go vnder or in, to take.
                  
                     Subire mortem, to receyue dethe.
                  
                     
                     Subductio, a drawynge vp of a ſhyppe oute of the water.
                  
                     Subdulcis, ce, ſomewhat ſwete.
                  
                     Subduro, rare, to make ſomewhat harde▪
                  
                  
                     
                        Subduror, ra
                              •
                           i,
                      to be made ſomewhat hard.
                  
                     Suber, corke.
                  
                     Subiaceo, cère, to lie vnder, alſo to be ſubiect
                  
                     Subiacto, tare, & ſubiecto, to caſt vppe, as corne whan it is fanned.
                  
                     Subices, ſubiectes.
                  
                     Subiecto, tare, to caſte vnder often.
                  
                     Subiector, toris, a forger of teſtamentes, or he that bryngeth forthe one teſtament for an nother.
                  
                     Subicito, tare, to cōpany often with a womā.
                  
                     Plautus in perſa.
                     Subiculum flagri, a beatynge ſtocke.
                  
                     Subigo, egi, igere, to conſtrayne, to ſubdue, to dryue vnder, to whet, to beate or ſtāpe, ſometyme to eare or tylle truely, to digge, to meddyll with a womanne,Vergil. ſommetyme to lyfte vp.
                  
                     
                        Subi
                              •
                           cio, ieci, ijcere,
                      to put vnder, to make ſubiecte. ſomtyme to caſt vp, to reherſe. Si meminiſti quod olim dictum eſt, ſubijce, If thou doeſt remembre, what was ones ſpoken, reherſe it.
                  
                     Subinde, more ouer, forthwith or anon, often tymes. Subin, idem.
                  
                  
                     Fe
                           •
                        tus.
                     Subingere arietem, to delyuer a ſhepe to be kylled for hym that doth ſacrifyce.
                  
                     Ci. A
                           •
                        t. 2.
                     Subinnanis, ne, ſomewhat vayneglorious.
                  
                     Subire aleam, to be in daunger or peryll, to entre into peryll.
                  
                     Subire periculum, to entre into peryll.
                  
                     Subijt mihi, it cometh to my remembrance. alſo to ſuccede, to reſiſte, to clymme.
                  
                     Plinius in p
                           •
                        m
                           •
                        gy
                           •
                        i.
                     Subire, to take charge of any thynge. Quis enim curae tuae molem ſponte ſubeat? Who wolde wyllyngly take on hym the greate weight of thy charge.
                  
                     Cicer. off.
                     Subire, to ſuffre or ſuſteyne. Qui retinendi officij cauſa, cruciatus ſubierit vitró, He that wyll for the accomplyſhement of his duetie ſuffre tourmentes wyllyngly. Alſoo to growe or ſprynge vp.Vergil. Alſo to come to remembrance. Sera poenitentia ſubijt regem, Late repentance came to the kynges remembrance. Cogitationi noſtrae nun
                           
                              
                           
                           quam
                         ſubijt, It came neuer to our thought.
                  
                     Subit recordatio, I or he remembred.
                  
                     Vergi. Atnei. x.
                     Subire, to put vnder. Aeneas ſubijt mucronem, ipſum
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         morando ſuſtinuit, Eneas put vnder his ſword, & tarieng, lyfted him vp.
                  
                     Subire, to ſuccede or come in place. In quarum Iocū ſubierunt inquilinae, impietas, perfidia impudicitia, In whoſe place ſucceded newe inhabytauntes, contempt of vertue, diſloyaltie, lechery.
                  
                     Cic. in diuinatione.
                     Subire, to aunſwere or reſyſte. Poteris ne orationem eius ſubire? Moughteſt not thou make anſwere to his oration?
                  
                     Subire, to clymme or mount vp. Hemi excelcitas, ſex millibus paſſuū ſubitur, the height of the mountayne of Hemus is clymmed or mounted in ſyxe thouſande paces.
                  
                     Subliaſto, tare, to ſell any thynge in tyme of warres that was prayſed. Haſta, a yerde, whiche was delyuered to hym that was appoynted to ſelle anye thynge taken in warres.
                  
                     Subfibulum, was a whyte ornamente, foure ſquare and long, which the nunnes, callid Veſtales, ware on their hodes, whan they dyd ſacrifyce.
                  
                     Subitò, ſodaynly.
                  
                     Subitaneus, & ſubitarius, a, um, & ſubitus, ta, tum, ſodayne.
                  
                     Subiugalis, le, vſed to the yoke.
                  
                     Subiugo, gare, to make ſubiecte.
                  
                     Sub iugum mittere, to brynge in ſubiection.
                  
                     Subiungo, gere, to adde or ioyne to.
                  
                     Sublabor, beris, lapſus ſum, labi, to ſlyppe awaye.
                  
                     Sublabro, brare, to put into the mouthe.
                  
                     Sublatior, tius, hygher.
                  
                     Sublatus, ta, tū, lifted vp, mounted, aduāced.
                  
                     
                        Sublegere ſermonem, Clam noſtrum hūc illae ſublegerunt ſermonem,
                        Plautus in milite.
                      Priuily they harkned, and bare away all that we cōmuned.
                  
                     Sublego, are, to ſubſtitute.
                  
                     Sublego, legi, legere, to ſteale. alſo to cheſe an other into the place of him that is deed.
                  
                     Subleſtus, ta, tum, feble, faynt, lyght, of noo force or value.
                  
                     Subleuo, are, to helpe, or ayde, to defende, to lyfte vp, to ſuſtayne.
                  
                     Sublica, a proppe, a ſhore, a poſte, or other lyke thynge, to ſuſtayn or kepe a thing vp.
                  
                     Sublicius, a briege at Rome.
                  
                     Subligaculum, a nether coyfe or brieche.
                  
                     Subligar, garis, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Subligo, gare, to vnderbynde.
                  
                     Sublimis, me, high, that which is aboue vs.
                  
                     Sublimitas, heyght.
                  
                     Sublimiter, highly, on height.
                  
                     Sublimo, mare, to ſette on high.
                  
                     Sublino, liniui, nire, to annoynt or touche, to paynt or ſtayne.
                  
                     Sublinitio, the fyrſte colour that is layde or dyed. alſo ſtaynynge with colours.
                  
                     Sublitio, onis, the grounde colour, wheron the perfyte colour is layde, in cloth dyed, it is callyd graſynge.
                  
                     Subluceo, cère, to ſhyne ſommewhat, or to gyue a lyttell lyght.
                  
                     Sublucidè, ſomewhat lyght.
                  
                     Sublucidus, da, dum, ſomewhat lyght.
                  
                     Subluco, care, to vnderſhrede boughes, that

that the lyght may come vnder the tree.
                  
                     Subdialia, places without the houſe to walk in without couerynges.
                  
                     Subducere, to go away by ſtelthe, that noo man do perceyue.
                  
                     Sub iugum mitti, to be ſubdued, it was proprely whan a battayle was vanquiſhed, the vanquiſhers cauſed thre ſpeares to be ſet vp lykes galowes, and conſtrayned them that were vanquyſhed to go vnderneth it, in token that they were ſubdued, whyche was the greatteſt reproche that moughte be deuyſed.
                  
                     Subluere, to vnderwaſhe, as water, whyche runneth lowe vnder a banke or hylle,Caeſar de 
                           •
                        ell. galli. lib. 2. and waſheth the foote thereof. Alſo to waſhe ſomewhat cleane.
                  
                     Subluſtris, tre, that hath ſome lyght.
                  
                     Subluines, a diſeaſe of cattell, whiche is betwixte the cleys of their fete.
                  
                     Cice. pro Planco.
                     Sub manu habere, to haue at hande.
                  
                     Sub manu eſſe, to be at hande or redy.
                  
                     Sub manu, after hande, forthewith.
                  
                     Sub manus, eaſily, handſomly. Bono animo es,
                     Plautus in melite. 
                     negotium omne iam ſuccedit ſubmanus, Be of good chere, all the matter is come to paſſe handſomly. Lepidè hoc ſuccedit ſub manus negotium, This mattier commeth well and eaſily to paſſe.
                  
                     Sub merum, almoſte pure.
                  
                     Subminia, a womans garment.
                  
                     Subminiſtro, are, to do ſeruice vnder one, to gyue or delyuer any thing that is aſked for.
                  
                     Subminiſtrator, he that ſerueth vnder an other man, he that delyuereth any thynge that is callyd for.
                  
                     Submiſsim, & ſubmiſſè, ſoftely, proprely in ſpeakynge. alſo humbly.
                  
                     Submiſſus, a, um, humble.
                  
                     Submitto, tere, to ſende priuily or by ſtelth.
                  
                     Cae. de bel. gall. lib. 5.
                     Submittere, to ſende or brynge in the mean tyme. Alſo to put or ſet vnder proprely, as a calfe, a lambe, or a fole, is ſette vnder the damme to ſucke.
                  
                     Submittere ſe, to humble hym ſelfe.
                  
                     Submittere capillum, to let heare to growe.
                  
                     Submoneo, nére, to warne one priuyly.
                  
                     Submordeo, dére, to bite ſoftely, or priuily.
                  
                     Colum. 5. Plin.
                     Submoueo, uère, to remoue or carie a thing farre of. alſo to dryue out of a place. alſoo to diſcharge a man of his offyce.
                  
                     Subnecto, tere, to bynde to, or hange to, alſo to ſubſcribe.
                  
                     Subnego, gare, to denye ſomewhat.
                  
                     Subneruo, are, to cut ſynewes.
                  
                     Subnexio, a byndynge or hangyng to.
                  
                     Subniger, gra, grum, ſomewhat blacke.
                  
                     Subnitor, nixus, niti, to leane agaynſt a thing to be ſuſtayned vp.
                  
                     Subnodo, are, to make a knot vnder a thing.
                  
                     Subnoto, tare, to note or marke.
                  
                     Subo, are, to brymme as a bore dothe whan he getteth pygges.
                  
                     Suboffendo, dere, to offende ſommewhat,Cic. ad. Q. ſtratrem. or a lyttelle.
                  
                     Suboleo, lère, to ſauour or ſmelle a lyttell.
                  
                     Subopto, tare, to deſyre a lyttell.
                  
                     Subordior, dire, to begynne.
                  
                     Suborno, nare, to prayſe or honour. alſo to ſuborne or brynge in a falſe. wytneſſe, or meſſanger, or fayne one perſone for an other, to deceyue with.
                  
                     Suborior, riris, riri, to begynne to ſprynge or aryſe, as the ſonne dothe, to prayſe or honour one with wordes. alſo to deceyue pryuylye.
                  
                     Suppudeo, dère, to be ſomewhat aſhamed.
                  
                     Subremigo, are, to rowe vnder.
                  
                     Subrepo, pſi, pefe, to ſteale away or runne awaye priuyly.
                  
                     Subrepere animo, to entre ſodaynly or pryuyly into the mynde.
                  
                     Subreptio, theft, or a fals ſuggeſtion.
                  
                     Subreptitiae literae, letters ſtollen oute by a fals ſuggeſtion.
                  
                     Subreptitius, a, um, ſtollen or falſly come by.
                  
                     Subrideo, tiſi, dêre, to ſmyle or laugh priuily
                  
                     Subripeo, to ſteale, to take away ſecretely. ſometyme to lyfte vp haſtily.
                  
                     Subriſio, & ſubriſus, a ſmylyng.
                  
                     Subrogo, gare, to ſubſtitute or ſubrogate, to make a deputie in an office, to put in an nother mans roume.
                  
                     Subrufus, a, um, & ſubrubeus, a, um, ſomwhat redde. Subrumi, lambes that do ſucke.
                  
                     Subrumor, ari, to be ſouckeled, or putte to ſucke as calfes, lambes, &c.
                  
                     Subruo, ere, to enter with force, or priuily by litle and lytle. alſo to dygge the erthe.
                  
                     Subſanno, are, to ſcorne or mocke.
                  
                     Subſannatio, a mocke with bendynge the browes, and ſnuffynge vp of the noſe.
                  
                     Subſannator, a mocker.
                  
                     Subſarcinis, with truſſes or burdeyns.
                  
                     Subſcribo, ſcripſi, ſcribere, to write vnder, to ſubſcribe, to fauour a matter,Ci. in Ver. Aſco. Ped. to aſſynge a cauſe why, to affirme.
                  
                     Subſcriptores, they whiche in cauſes iudyciall do fauour the parte of the accuſer or playntyfe.
                  
                     Subſcudes, the vtter table, whervnto other tables are faſtned.
                  
                     Subſeco, care, to cutte vnder or cut a lyttell.
                  
                     Subſellia, bēches, which were vnder higher ſeates, they were alſo benches, on the whiche Iudges byd ſytte.
                  
                     Subſentio, ſenſi, ſentire, to perceiue ſomwhat
                  
                     Subſequor, queris, ſequi, to folow forthwith.
                  
                     
                     Subſero, ſerere, to ſowe or ſet vnder a thing
                  
                     Subſeuio, ſeuire, to ſerue, to accord, or agre.
                  
                     Subſeſſae, ſcoutwatches, wherby hoſtes of men are intrapped as they paſſe.
                  
                     Subſideo, ſedi, ſubſedêre, to ſytte vnder, to ſaye in awayte for one.
                  
                     Subſidium, ayde.
                  
                     Subſido, dere, to fall downe, to auale.
                  
                     Subſigno, nare, to ſubſcribe or write vnder.
                  
                     Subſilio, liui, lire, & ſubſulto, ſultare, to leape a lyttelle.
                  
                     Subſilles, lytle plates belonging to ſacrifice.
                  
                     Subſimus, he that hath a camyſe noſe.
                  
                     Subſipere, to ſauour ſomwhat.
                  
                     Subſiſiuum, that which foloweth or is next.
                  
                     Subſiſto, ſtiti, ſiſtere, to reſyſte, to abyde, to be by hym ſelfe.
                  
                     Subſolanus, the eaſte wynde.
                  
                     Subſono, are, to ſowne a lyttell, to make a lyttell noyſe.
                  
                     Subſortido, a deputation, whan one maketh an other his deputie.
                  
                     Subſortitus, a ſubſtytute.
                  
                     Subſtantia, ſubſtance. alſo matter. ſomtyme goodes, whyche is alſo commonly callyd ſubſtaunce.
                  
                     Subſterno, ſtraui, ſternere, to ſtrawe or laye vnder any thynge, as ruſſhes, carpettes, and flowres.
                  
                     Subſtillum, a ryme or fallynge myſte, or a droppynge before and after rayne. It 
                        •
                     s alſo a ſicknes, whā a man may not piſſe wel
                  
                     Subſtituo, tui, tuere, to ſubſtitute in the place of an nother.
                  
                     Subſto, ſtiti, are, to ſuſtain or abide conſtātly.
                  
                     Subſtratus, a, ū, ſtrawed vnder, or layd vnder
                  
                     Subſtrepo, pere, to make a lyttell noyſe.
                  
                     Subſtringo, xi, gere, to ſhrinke vndernethe.
                  
                     Subſtruo, truere, to vnderpynne a houſe.
                  
                     Subſtructio, vnderpynnynge or groundyng of a houſe.
                  
                     Subſtupeo, & ſubſtupeſco, ſcere, to be ſome what diſmayde.
                  
                     Subſtupidus, ſomwhat diſmayde or abaſhed.
                  
                     Subſulto, tare, to ioumpe.
                  
                     Subſultim, by iumpes.
                  
                     Subſuo, ſuere, to ſowe vnderneth.
                  
                     Subſum, ſubeſſe, to be vnder, or within.
                  
                     Subtal, the holownes of the fote. alſo the paulme of the hande.
                  
                     Subtegmen, minis, the threede, whyche in weauynge is callyd the woufe.
                  
                     Subtegulanea, places vnder the eueyſe of howſes.
                  
                     Subtendo, dere, to purpoſe or diuyſe anye thynge, to deceyue an nother manne, or to laye any thynge in a mannes waye for the ſame purpoſe.
                  
                     Subtento, tare, to eſpye.
                  
                     Subtepeo, pere, to be ſomwhat warme.
                  
                     Subtepidus, da, dum, ſomewhat warme.
                  
                     Subter, vnder.
                  
                     Subterraneus, ea, eum, that whiche is vnder the grounde.
                  
                     Subtercludo, dere, to ſhutte vnder.
                  
                     Subterduco, cere, to wtdrawe, to ſcape away.
                  
                     Subterfluo, xi, fluere, to runne or flowe vnder a thynge, as water vnder a brydge.
                  
                     Subterfugio, gere, to eſcape.
                  
                     Subtergredior, di, to go vndernethe.
                  
                     Subtero, riui, terere, to broyſe, or weare.Plaut.
                  
                  
                     Subticeo, cui, cere, to aunſwere nothynge to that which is ſpoken. Subtice ſco, ſcere, idē
                     
                  
                  
                     Subtondeo, dere, to clyppe vnder.
                  
                     Subtralio, xi, trahere, to take away, to ſteale,Pli
                           •
                        . 
                     Subtrahere ſe, to draw vnto quietnes. Subtrahere famae, to withdrawe from bruyte. Subtrahere inuidiae, to eſchewe enuy.
                  
                     Subtriſtis, te, ſomewhat heuy or ſorye.
                  
                     Subturpis, pe, ſomewhat foule, in part foule or diſhoneſte, the matter or thinge diſhoneſte, couered with cleane wordes.
                  
                     Subucula, a ſhyrte. alſo a cake.
                  
                     Subueho, uexi, uehere, to beare.
                  
                     Subuecto, tare, to beare or cary often.
                  
                     Subuenio, ueni, uenire, to helpe.
                  
                     Subuerbuſta, meate burned on the ſpytte.Feſtus
                  
                  
                     Subuerto, tere, to tourne vp ſo downe. alſoo to diſtroy, to ſubuerte.
                  
                     Subuerſo, ſare, to ſubuerte often.
                  
                     Subueteribus, was a place in Rome.
                  
                     Subula, an aulle, that cordyners doo vſe for a bodkyn.
                  
                     Subulcus, a ſwyneherde.
                  
                     Subulo, an harte hauynge hornes without tynes, callyd as I ſuppoſe, a ſpyttarde.
                  
                     Subuolo, lare, to flee away.
                  
                     Suburbanum, a maner or ferme without the walles of the citie.
                  
                     Suburbia, the ſuburbes of a citie or towne.
                  
                     Suburrana regio, the ſtrete in Rome where the brothell houſes were.
                  
                     Subuulturius, a, um, that whiche apprehendeth men lyke as rauynes do carrayne.
                  
                     Succedaneus, a, um, that whiche ſuccedeth.
                  
                     Succedere, to entre. Et noſtris ſuccede penatibus hoſpes, And enter thou my frende into my howſe.
                  
                     Succedere, to go vnder a thyng. Succedere, to ſpede wel, to be at a good poynt. Hac nō ſucceſsit, alia aggrediamur uia, This way it ſpedeth not, let vs go to an other way.
                  
                     Succedo, ceſsi, cedere, to ſuccede.
                  
                     Succendo, dere, to inflame to burne.
                  
                     Succēſeo, ui, ere, to be āgry for a good cauſe.
                  
                     Succento, tonis, was a certayne garmente, whiche onely hoores dyd weare.
                  
                     Succento, tare, to ſynge a baſe.
                  
                     
                     Succentor, toris, he that ſyngeth a baſe.
                  
                     Succenturiatus, he that made vp the number of the bende of men that lacked.
                  
                     Succenturio, are, to make vp the number of a hundred ſouldiours, or of that company that was callyd Centuria.
                  
                     Succerda, ſwynes dunge.
                  
                     Succerno, creui, cernere, to raunge meale in a ſyeue.
                  
                     Succeſsio, ſucceſſyon.
                  
                     Succeſſor, ſoris, a ſucceſſour.
                  
                     Succeſſorē dare, to depoſe a mā of his office.
                  
                     Succeſſus, a, um, that whyche proſperouſlye happeneth, or ſpedeth well.
                  
                     Succeſſus, us, ſucceſſe, be it good or yll.
                  
                     Succida, woulle vnwaſhed.
                  
                     Succidaneae hoſtiae, beaſtes for ſacrifice, whiche were kylled in the ſeconde place, or nexte to the fyrſte.
                  
                     Succidaneus, a, um, that whyche folowethe the fyrſte.
                  
                     Succidia, a piece or flyche of bakon ſalted. alſo larde.
                  
                     Succido, cidi, cidere, to felle or cutte downe. alſo to falle vnder.
                  
                     Plautus in Curcu.
                     Succiduus, a, um, that whiche dothe ſuccede or folowe. alſo lowe, redy to falle downe.
                  
                     Succidusda, dum, moyſt, or full of iuyſe.
                  
                     Succingo, xi, gere, to gyrde. Alſo to enuyron or compaſſe. Fruſtra ſe terrore ſuccinxerit, qui ſeptus charitate non fuerit, armis, n. arma irritantur, In vayne ſhall he enuyron hym ſelfe with terribleneſſe, which is not wallyd aboute with the loue of his countreye. For with vyolence, vyolence is ſtyred.
                  
                     Succingulum, a ſwordegyrdell.
                  
                     Succino, cinere, to make a ſoft noiſe, to ſinge a baſe or tenour.
                  
                     Succincta oratio, a compendiouſe or ſhorte Oracyon.
                  
                     Succincté, compendiouſely.
                  
                     Succinctorium, a ſhorte iackette or ierkyn.
                  
                     Succinctus, ta, tum, gyrte.
                  
                     Succinum, aumbre, whereof ſomme beade ſtones are made.
                  
                     Succinus, na, num, of aumbre.
                  
                     Succiſiuum tempus, tyme of leyſure, vacant from buſyneſſe.
                  
                     Succlamo, are, to crye ſoftely.
                  
                     Succollo, are, to putte vnder the necke or ſhulders, to beare a thynge.
                  
                     Succortrila, a ſmall voyce and a ſhryll.
                  
                     Succreſco, ſcere, to growe vnder, or lowe, or a lyttell and lyttell.
                  
                     Succubo, bare, to lye vnder.
                  
                     Succubonium, idem quod ſuccuba, ſhe that lyeth vnder.
                  
                     Succubi, deuylles, whiche in the fourme of women, do company with men.
                  
                     Succulentus, ta, tum, full of iuyſe.
                  
                     Succiplenus, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Succumbo, cubui, cumbere, to be ſubdued, to be ioyned to, to falle downe vnder an heuy burdeyn, to fayle for febleneſſe.
                  
                     Succurro, ere, to help, to com to remēbrāce.
                  
                     Suctus, tus, ſuckynge.
                  
                     Succus, cus, cui, the ſuckynge of mylke.
                  
                     Succus, iuyce or humour, whiche the body receyueth of meate and drynke, alſo generally all maner of iuyſe.
                  
                     Succuſſarius, & ſuccuſſor, a trottyng horſe.
                  
                     Succuſo, nis, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Succuſſo, are, to ſhake as a horſe doth whan he trotteth. alſo to trotte.
                  
                     Succuſſatio, ſuccuſſura, & ſuccuſſatura, the trottynge or ſhakynge of a horſe.
                  
                     Succutio, cuſsi, tere, to ſhake a thynge.
                  
                     Succula, a ſowe pygge, alſo a certayn inner garment. alſó a certayne company of ſterres, callyd the .vii. ſterres, whiche do appiere the .xii. Calendes of Iune, and be callyd ſucculae & Hiades.
                  
                  
                     Sudarium, a napkynne.
                  
                     Sudes, a certayne ſpeare, whiche is burned at the ende.
                  
                     Sudo, dare, to ſweate, to laboure ſoore, to haue moche to do.
                  
                     Sudor, doris, ſweate.
                  
                     Sudum, the clere parte of the firmamente betwene cloudes. Alſo the clere fyrmamēt without cloudes.
                  
                     Suefacio, & ſuefio, fieri, to be wont.
                  
                     Suere aliquid capiti, to get a ſhrewde turne. Metuo lenonem, ne quid ſuo ſuat capiti, I am aferde of the bawde, leſte he gette a ſhrewde tourne.
                  
                     Sueſco, ſueui, ſueſcere, to be wonte.
                  
                     Sueui, a people in high Germany.
                  
                     Sueuia, a countrey in Germanye.
                  
                     Suffarcinatus, nata, natum, laded, truſſed.
                  
                     Suffarcino, nare, to lade or bourdeyne, to truſſe vppe.
                  
                     Suffarrancus, he that carieth meale or floure to any place to ſelle in lyttell quantytie.
                  
                     Suffectus, is he, whyche an offycer beynge deed, or remoued, is ſette in his place.
                  
                     Suffes, was amonge the Carthaginenſis, as the Conſul was at Rome.
                  
                     Suffibulum, was an attyre, whiche the nunnes of Veſta dydde weare on theyr heedes, whan they dydde ſacrifice, and was lyke to the tyres, whiche wyues of London dydde weare, and becamme theym moche better than bonettes of veluette doo nowe, wherwith they mocke ladyes and gentyllwomenne, and thereby onely doo gette the name to be callydde Maſkynge ladyes.
                  
                     
                     Suffero, ſufferre, to ſuſtayne, to put vnder, to ſuffre.
                  
                     Sufficio, feci, ſufficere, to ſuffyſe, to indure, to miniſter, to ſubſtitute, to ſtayne.
                  
                     Sufficit, it ſuffyſeth.
                  
                     Suffimentum, perfume, or fumigation.
                  
                     Suffio, fiui, fire, to perfume.
                  
                     Suffiſcus, the codde of a ramme, which was made for a purſe, to conteyne money.
                  
                     Suffitio, & ſuffitus, tus, a perfume or fumigacyon.
                  
                     Suffitor, toris, he that bloweth the fyre.
                  
                     Suffitus, ta, tum, perfumed.
                  
                     Sufflamen, that wherwith a whiele is retained or ſtopped of his courſe.
                  
                     Sufflatio, a blowynge.
                  
                     Sufflator, toris, he that bloweth
                  
                     Sufflatus, ta, tum, blowen.
                  
                     Sufflo, are, to blowe.
                  
                     Suffocatio, a ſtranglynge.
                  
                     Suffocator, he that ſtrangleth.
                  
                     Suffoco, care, to ſtop the breth, to ſtrangle.
                  
                     Suffodio, foſsi, dere, to dygge vnder.
                  
                     Suffoſſus equus, a ſtumblynge horſe.
                  
                     Suffragator, toris, a ſupporter or maintener.
                  
                     Suffragium, the voyce of people aſſemblyd in gyuyng their conſent. alſo helpe or ſuccour. alſo a wrecke in the ſee.
                  
                     Suffragines, the iointes of the hinder legge of a beaſte, callyd the how
                        •
                     , ſometyme it doth ſignifie the paſternes, they be alſoo the yonge ſprynges of vynes.
                  
                     Suffraginoſi equi, horſes, whyche haue the paynes or ſcratches.
                  
                     Suffragor, gatis, gari, to beare ſauour.
                  
                     
                        Suffulcio, 
                              ••
                           , cire,
                      to proppe vp.
                  
                     Suffulcior, cire, to be proppid vp or vnderſet
                  
                     Suffundatum, vnderlayde.
                  
                     Suffundo, dere, to caſte downe or poure lycour on a thynge, to caſte abrode.
                  
                     Suffundo, dare, to buylde or ſette vppon a foundation.
                  
                     Suffuror, rari, to ſteale priuily.
                  
                     Suffuſio, a webbe in the eye.
                  
                     Suffuſus, a, um, ſprynkled, indewed.
                  
                     Suggero, geſsi, gerere, to mynyſter or gyue a thynge, to ſende ſorthe thynges, wherof are plentie.
                  
                     Suggerere ſumptus, to alowe expenſes.
                  
                     Suggeſtus, uel ſuggeſtum, a pulpitte or high place, oute of the whyche Oratours or Capytaynes made propoſytions vnto the people.
                  
                     Suggrundia, the euyſe of a houſe, whyche defendeth the walles from rayne.
                  
                     Suggrundaria, buryals of yonge infantes.
                  
                     Suggrundario, the eueyſynge of a houſe.
                  
                     Suggillo, lare, to make a blacke ſpotte in the ſkynne with beatynge. It is alſoo to ſcorne, to detracte, or infame, to reproue, to condempne.
                  
                     Suggillatus, ſpotted, mocked, detracted, infamed, condemned.
                  
                     Suggillatio, is a a marke in the viſage black or blue, made by ſome ſtroke, a mocke, a detraction, an infamation behynde one, a condemnation.
                  
                     Sugo, & ſugeo, ſuxi, ſugere, to ſouke.
                  
                     Suinus, a, um, & ſuillus, a, um, of a ſowe.
                  
                     Sulcatim, in furrowes.
                  
                     Sulco, care, to falowe.
                  
                     Sulcus, cus, a furrowe. Serere tertio quarto quinto ſulco, To ſowe in the thyrde, the fourthe, the fyfthe falowe. Sometyme it is put of a dyche. Alſo any maner of cuttynge of the erthe. proprely it ſignifyeth any thynge that is longe and ſharpe edged. Biſulcum animal, A beaſte that hath the fete clouen with two talons.
                  
                     Sulla, was a cruell tyrant of the Romayns callyd alſo Sylla.
                  
                  
                     Sulmo, monis, a towne in the countraye of Peligna, where Ouidius the poete was borne.
                  
                     Sulmonenſis, a manne or woman of the citie of Sulmo.
                  
                     Sulphuraria, a place where brymſtone is boyled.
                  
                     Sulphur, phuris, brymſtone.
                  
                     Sulphur eus, ea, eum, of brymſtone.
                  
                     Sulphuratus, ta, tum, dreſſed with brimſtone.
                  
                     Sultanus, a ſowdane, whiche was the name of the kynge of Egipte and Siria.
                  
                     Sum, I am, es, thou arte, eſt, he is.
                  
                     Sumanus, he that alway taketh.
                  
                     Sū Amphitrionis, I am Amphitrions ſeruāt.Plaut.
                  
                  
                     Sum mihi bis ſeptem praeſtanti corpore nymphae, I haue fouretene maydens of excellent beautie.
                  
                     Sum in mora illi, I make hym to tarie.Terentius
                  
                  
                     Sum in moetu, I am aferde.
                  
                     Sum in noxia, I am put in the blame.
                  
                     Sum, olde wryters vſed for eum, hym.No. Mar. Plautus in milite.
                  
                  
                     Sit ueſtra benignitas ad audiendum? Pleaſith you to here?
                  
                     Sum ſeptem dies, It is ſeuen dayes agone. Howe this verbe Sum, ſhulde be ſette and conſtrued, rede Calepines vocabuler, alſo loke for Eſt, fuit, and ſuch other partes of ſum, in their letters before.
                  
                     Sumanalia, a great cake made lyke a whele, ſuche as is made at brydales and churche goinges.
                  
                     Summam facere, to ſumme a booke of accompte.
                  
                     Sumen, minis, is made of the pappes of a ſowe, cutte from hir the day after that ſhe hath varowed, ad is powdred with ſalt.
                  
                     
                     Cicero.
                     Sumere, to hyre. Quoad enim peruentum, quo ſumpta nauis eſt, non domini nauis eſt, ſed nauigantium, Vntylle they come to the place whither the ſhyppe was hyred, the ſhyppe is not the owners but theyrs, whiche are paſſagers.
                  
                     Terent. in phormi.
                     Sumere, to borowe.
                  
                     Sumere, to ſpende or beſtowe on one. In mala vxore, at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         inimico, ſi quid ſumas, ſumptus eſt, On a ſhrewd wyfe, and an ennemy, what ſo euer thou beſtoweſt, is waſte.
                  
                     Plautus in milite. Plautus in cap. Plautus in Bacch. Terentius
                     Sumere aquam è puteo, to drawe water out of the welle.
                  
                     Sumere confidentiā, to truſt, to take corage.
                  
                     Sumere mutuum, to borowe.
                  
                     Sumere obſequium animo, to reioyce, to take comforte.
                  
                     Sumere operam fruſtra, to labour in vayne.
                  
                     Sumere optionem, to chuſe.
                  
                     Sumere perſonam, to counterfaite an other.
                  
                     Sumere ſupplicium, to punyſhe.
                  
                     Summa, is a collection of thinges or wordꝭ. alſo the principall poynte of a matter.
                  
                     Sūmates, the chief ꝑſons of a realme or cite.
                  
                     Summatim, & ſummatè, compendiouſely by euery parte of the matter, ſummarily. Ad ſummum duo, two at the moſte.
                  
                     Summé, excellently, chiefly.
                  
                     Summenianae uxores, hoores kepte in the ſtede of wyues.
                  
                     Summenium, a place where bawdrye was kepte without the walles of a towne.
                  
                     Summiſsi, murmurers.
                  
                     Summiſsim, & ſummiſſe, ſoftly, not lowde.
                  
                     Summiſſus, a, um, baſe, lowe.
                  
                     Summitas, heyght, or hygheneſſe.
                  
                     Summitudo, dinis, the height of a thynge.
                  
                     Summitto, miſi, mittere, to conuay in priuily, alſo to ſuffre to growe.
                  
                     Summittere barbam, to lette the berde growe, to let to departe.
                  
                     Summoenius, nia, um, that whyche is vnder the walles.
                  
                     Summo, are, to make hygheſt.
                  
                     Summo iure agere, to take the rigour or extremitie of the lawe in ſuite.Cice. pro. A. Caeſina.
                  
                  
                     Sūmum faſtigiū imponere, to finiſhe a thyng perfitely, to brynge a mattier to a poynt.
                  
                     Summam manum addere, idem ſignificat.
                  
                  
                     Summus, a, um, hygheſt, extreme, greatteſt, or very commendable.
                  
                     Summum, at the moſte.
                  
                     Sumo, ſumpſi, ſumere, to take vppon one, to take generally,Varro de 
                           •
                        e ruſt. to hyre, to conſume.
                  
                     Sumptifacio, cere, to ſpende.
                  
                     
                        Sumpti, for ſumptus, plurali numero.
                     
                  
                  
                     Sumptuariae leges, lawes made for reſtraynynge of outragious expenſes.
                  
                     Sumptuarius, a, um, that whyche dothe pertayne to expenſes.
                  
                     Sumptuoſé, ſumptuouſly, chargeably.
                  
                     Sumptuoſus, a, um, ſumptuouſe.
                  
                     Sumptus, ta, tum, taken, or choſen.
                  
                     Sumptus, tus, expenſe.
                  
                     Sunium, a promontorie or elbowe of the countrey of Attica.
                  
                     Suo, ſui, ſuere, to ſowe, to ioyne or make faſt togyther.
                  
                     Suopte ingenio, of his owne propre wytte.
                  
                     
                        Sup, for ſuper,
                      aboue.
                  
                     Supellectilis, le, & ſupellex, houſehold ſtuffe, all thynges mouable within the houſe.
                  
                     Supellecticarius, a bondman or ſlaue, whyche is accompted for chatell.
                  
                     Super, & ſupra, vppon aboue.
                  
                     
                        Super Garamantas & Indos proferet imperium,
                        Vergil.
                      He ſhal aduance his empyre beyond the Garamantians and Indianes.
                  
                     Super Euclionis filiā, of Eucliones daughter
                  
                     Super coenam, at ſupper.Plautus in Aulularia
                           •
                         Plinius epiſt. 87. Epiſt. 91. Vergilius.
                  
                  
                     Super haec, more ouer than this.
                  
                     Super Priamus, ſuper Hectore, of Priamꝰ of Hector. Hac ſuꝑ re ſcribā ad te Rhegio, Of that mater I wil write vnto you frō Regiū.
                  
                     
                        Super for propter. Nec ſuper ipſe ſua molitur laude laborem,
                      Nor he takethe the peyne for his prayſe.
                  
                     
                        Super, for valdé,
                      
                     His accenſa ſuꝑ,
                     Vergilius. with thoſe wordes ſhe beinge kendlyd or ſtyred.
                  
                     Superaddo, dere, to putte or adde to.
                  
                     Superbé, proudely. Superbiter, idem.
                  
                  
                     Superbia, pryde. Superbio, ire, to be proude.
                  
                     Superbiloquens, & ſuperbiloquus, he that ſpeaketh proudely, or hautely.
                  
                     Superbiloquentia, proude or haute wordes.
                  
                     Superbos, olde wryters vſed for mortuos,Plautus in Amphi. deed, bycauſe of the pompe, whiche was at their burienge. Faciam ego hodie te ſuperbum, niſi hinc abis, I wil kyl the, if thou gette the not hens.
                  
                     Superbum bellum, vniuſt or vnhappy warre.Vergil.
                  
                  
                     Superbus, proude, ſometyme magnifyke or noble, alſo hyghe, ornate, or garnyſſhed, ryche, wycked.
                  
                     Supercido, dere, to falle on.
                  
                     Supercilioſus, ſoure in countenance.
                  
                     Supercilium, the ouerbrowe. ſommetyme it ſygnifyeth pride, grauitie. It is alſoo the haunce, whiche is ouer the doore.
                  
                     Superciliū attollere, to be ſtately or proude.
                  
                     Supercilium ponere, to laye aparte pryde or ſtately countenance.
                  
                     Supercreſco, ſcere, to ouergrowe.
                  
                     Supercubo, bare, to lye ouer.
                  
                     Superduco, cere, to put or lay on.
                  
                     Superedo, dere, to eate after a thynge.
                  
                     
                        Supereſsit, for ſupererit,
                      ſhall lyue, or be left on lyue. Supereſt, he lyueth, or is on lyue.
                  
                     
                     Supereſt, there is plentie or more thanne ynough. Aliis quia defit, quod amant, aegre eſt:
                     Terent. in pho
                           •
                        m. 
                     tibi quia ſupereſt, dolet, Some bicauſe they lacke the thynge that they loue, be diſcontent: and thou arte ſorye that thou haſte more than thou nedeſt.
                  
                     Terent. in Hea
                           •
                        t.
                     Supereſſe, to be the reſte or reſydue. Porro auſculta quod ſupereſt fallatiae, But yet here what was the reſydue of that craft or deceyte. To defende or pleade for one. Cū
                        ctariſe, ne ſi ſupereſſet, eriperet legibus reū, He wolde tary, leſte yf he came and ſpake for hym, he ſhulde delyuer an offender.
                  
                     Superexto, tare, to remayne ouer.
                  
                     Superficiariae aedes, houſes buylded on the lande of an nother man than buylded them.
                  
                     Superficiarius, he that hathe a houſe of his owne buylded on an other mans grounde, and payeth therfore a quyte rent.
                  
                     Superficies, the ouermoſt part of any thing.
                  
                     Superfoetatio, oone conception of a chylde after an other.
                  
                     Superfluo, fluxi, fluere, to abounde, or be ſuperfluouſe.
                  
                     Superfluè, ſuperfluouſely. Superfluo, idem.
                  
                  
                     Superfluus, a, um, ſuperfluous.
                  
                     
                        
                           •••
                        onius.
                     Superforaneus, a, um, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Superfundo, dere, to poure vppon.
                  
                     Supergredior, gredi, to go aboue.
                  
                     
                        Supera, for ſupra.
                     
                  
                  
                     Superiacio, ieci, iacere, to caſte on or lay on.
                  
                     Superiiceo, ſuperieci, iicere, to caſt vpon, to laye vppon.
                  
                     Superi, they whiche ben in heuen.
                  
                     Superincido, dere, to falle on.
                  
                     Superior, hygher.
                  
                     Superior aetas, the tyme or age paſſed.
                  
                     Superlachrimo, to wepe or droppe vpon.
                  
                     Supermeo, are, to go ouer, or ſlyppe ouer.
                  
                     Supernato, natare, to ſwymme ouer.
                  
                     Supernati, they which haue the hinder part of the thighes next the buttockes cut away
                  
                     Supernè, a hygh, aboue.
                  
                     Supernia, the inwarde part and hindermoſt parte of the thyghes nexte the buttockes cutte of.
                  
                     Supernus, na, num, high, or ouer. Superna regio, the high countrey.
                  
                     Supernumerarius, that whiche is in ſurpluſage, aboue the true number.
                  
                     Supero, rare, to go ouer. Alſo to vanquiſhe or ouercome. alſo to ouerlyue. ſomtyme to kylle. Quod ſuperat, whiche is more, or is lefte in a ſurpluſage.
                  
                     Superpondium, ouerweight, that whiche is added to the iuſte weight.
                  
                     Superſedeo, dêre, to omytte or leaue to doo a thynge.
                  
                     Ci. Seruio
                     Superſedeas hoc labore itineris, take not the peyne to come nowe, or forbeare the peyn takyng in this iourney.
                  
                     
                        Superſede iſtis rebus,
                        Plautus in Epidico. Plautus in perſa. Plin. epiſt. 102.
                      let theſe thinges alone
                  
                     Superſede iſtis uerbis, let theſe wordis paſſe, holde thy runge.
                  
                     Superſedi ſcribere, I forbare to wryte, I left vnwriten.
                  
                     Superſtes, ſtitis, he that ouerliueth or remaianeth alyue afterthat other be deed, alſo alyue. ſometyme preſent, olde writers callyd Superſtites, wytneſſes.
                  
                     Superſtes, he that is ſaulfe. Deos quaeſo, ut ſis ſuperſtes, I beſeche god ſaue you, longe mought you lyue. alſo preſent. Superſtitem utrun
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         monui, ne inuiſi abeant, I aduyſed them both, that they ſhoulde not departe with dyſpleaſure.
                  
                     Superſtitio, a ſuperfluous or vayne religion or deuotion, an honouryng of that which ought not to be honored, a vaine reuerēce or feare towarde that thing, wherin is no efficacye or power, but by the illuſyon of the dyuelle: as diuination by the cryenge or fleinge of byrdes, obſeruation of times, and dreames, and other lyke vanites.
                  
                     Superſtitioſi, they which be tymorous without cauſe, fearinge that god is diſpleaſed, where there is none offence done: They were at the fyrſte ſoo callyd, bycauſe they contynually prayid and offred to the goddis, to preſerue theyr chyldern, that they mought ouerlyue them. Finally euery vndiſcrete or vnreaſonable deuocion or religion, may be callyd Superſtition.
                  
                     Superſtito, ſtirare, to make hoole or recouer frome deathe.
                  
                     Superſto, ſtare, to ſtande vppon.
                  
                     Superſtruo, ſtruxi, ſtruere, to buylde on.
                  
                     Superſum, Supereſſe, to abounde, to remain, to vanquiſhe, to be ſuperfluous, to indure.
                  
                     Superuacaneus, a, um, ſuperfluous.
                  
                     Superuacuus, a, um, not neceſſarie.
                  
                     Superuaganea auis, was of the diuinours or ſothſayers callyd that byrde, which cried from the toppe of any thynge.
                  
                     Superuenio, nire, to com vnloked for, to com vpon or after an other thynge.
                  
                     Superuiuo, uixi, uiuere, to recouer from peryll of dethe, or whan a man ſemeth to be deade.
                  
                     Superus, a, um, the higheſt or ouermoſt.
                  
                     Superum mare, the ſee, which is callid Mare Hadtiaticum, wherin ſtandeth the Citie of Venyce.
                  
                     Supinus, na, num, vpryghte,Horation. the bealye vpvpwarde. ſomtyme it ſygnifieth on an hyll or hygh place.
                  
                     Suppar, almoſte euen.
                  
                     Supparaſitor, taris, tari, to folowe and flatter

for a mans dyner.
                  
                     Supparium, a clothe or curtayne hanged vp where interludes were playde.
                  
                     Supparus, uel ſupparum, a ſmocke. it is alſo a topſayle of a ſhyppe.
                  
                     Suppedaneum, a foote ſtoole.
                  
                     Suppedito, tare, to ſubdue, to minyſter ſufficiently, alſo to oppreſſe.
                  
                     Plautus in Aſinar.
                     Suppedito, tare, to endure. Ac ſtomacho nō queo labori ſuppeditare, My ſtomake wyll not lette me indure the laboure. Alſoo to furnyſhe expenſes, to gyue as moche as a man wolde haue.Terent. in Brautont. 
                     Nam ſi illi pergam, ſuppeditare ſumptibus Menedeme, mihi illaec uero ad raſtros res redit, Surely Menedemus, yf I wold gyue hym as moche as he wolde ſpende, that thynge wolde brynge me to the poynt to rake for my lyuynge.
                  
                     Suppeditare, to ſubdewe or treade vnder. Nunc, uideo, in iudicio mecum contendere non uis, ubi ſuppeditari turpiſsimum, ſuperare pulcherrimum eſt, Nowe I perceyue thou wylte not contende with me before iudges, where it were a great ſhame to be ſubdued, and very moche honeſtie to haue the better.
                  
                     Suppetiae, & ſuppetias, ayde or ſuccours.
                  
                     Suppeto, tii, tere, to aſke priuily or craftily.
                  
                     Suppetit, it is in a redyneſſe.
                  
                     Supperior, ari, to ſuccour or ayde.
                  
                     Plautus in Aſinar.
                     Suppetunt dictis data, aut facta. Non ſuppetunt dictis data, He perfourmeth not that, that he promyſed. Vtinam quae dicis dictis facta ſuppetant, wold god thou woldeſt do as thou ſayeſt, or wolde god thy dedes did agree with thy wordes.
                  
                     Plautus in Ruden. Plautus in Amphit.
                     Suppetit lucrum, there is gayne ſufficiente. Res ita ſupperit, the matter ſo requireth.
                  
                     Suppetias mihi, Brynge to me ſuccoures, ayde me.
                  
                     Suppetias adueni, come and helpe me.
                  
                     Suppetias ferre, to ayde or ſuccour.
                  
                     Suppilo, are, to ſteale vnderhand or craftily.
                  
                     Supplanto, tare, to putte vnder the foote, to ouerthrowe, to ſupplant or deceyue, in preuentynge one to his hynderance or dammage, to vnderplante or ſet a tree or vyne.
                  
                     Supplaudo, ſi, dere, to reioyſe priuely.
                  
                     Supplementum, that whiche ſupplyethe or maketh vp that whiche lacketh in quantitie or numbre.
                  
                     Suppleo, plere, to make vp that whiche lacketh, to make euyn.
                  
                     Supplex, plicis, he that deſyreth any thynge knelynge or proſtrate.
                  
                     Supplicatio, a prayer, a requeſte.
                  
                     Supplicaſsis pro ſupplicaueris.
                  
                  
                     Supplicans, tis, he that deſyreth a thynge.
                  
                     Suppliciter, humbly knelynge.
                  
                     Supplicium, payne, tourmente,Saluſt. in bell. ca
                           •
                        . Iugurt. or execution of dethe. ſometyme ſupplicia, are prayers.
                  
                     Supplitia pendere, to be put to execution.
                  
                     Supplico, care, to beſeche humbly.
                  
                     Supplimentum, a makynge vp of a number, whiche lacketh or is miniſhed.
                  
                     
                        Supplodo, ploſi, ere,
                        Cor. Tacitus lib. 13.
                      to ſtampe or make noiſe with the fete. alſo to reiecte or caſte away.
                  
                     Supploſio, a ſtampynge or noyſe made with the feete.
                  
                     Suppono, ſui, nere, to put vnder, to put into the place of an nother, to ſette a falſe or fayned thynge in the place of that whiche is the very true thynge.
                  
                     Supportare, to brynge or carie priuily.Caeſar de bell. Gall. lib. 7.
                  
                  
                     Suppoſitio, the puttinge or ſettyng of a fained or fals thyng in the place of the thing ſelfe, as one chylde for an nother.
                  
                     Suppoſtrix, ſhe that cōmytteth that falſhod.
                  
                     Suppoſitus parius, whan the chylde of one woman is layde with an nother womanne, whiche is not the very mother, as though ſhe had borne it.
                  
                     Subpraedes, counterſureties, they whyche are bounden to the ſureties, to ſaue them harmeleſſe.
                  
                     Suppreſsus, ſa, ſum, drowned, beaten vnder.Iuſtinus. 
                     Victi Perſi in naues confugerunt, ex quibus multae ſuppreſsae, multae captae, The Perſians fledde vnto their ſhyppes, whereof many were drowned, and many taken. Alſo hyd or concyled.
                  
                     Supprimo, preſsi, ſupprimere, to kepe downe to kepe ſecrete, to kepe in ſylence.
                  
                     Supprimere iter, to ſtay or omitte a iourney.Caeſ. in cō. de bello ciuili. li. 1. Plautus in milite.
                  
                  
                     Suppromo, pſi, mere, to drawe out drynke.
                  
                     Suppromus, a butlar. Bono cella ſuppromo credita, The cellar or buttrie was cōmytted to a good butlar.
                  
                     Suppudet, I am halfe aſhamed, thou art half aſhamed, or he is halfe aſhamed.
                  
                     Suppurantia, & ſuppuratio, matterynge of a ſoore.
                  
                     Suppuratorius, ria, um, that whyche pertaynethe to impoſtumes, or to make a ſoore to matter.
                  
                     Suppuro, are, to matter or be an impoſtume.
                  
                     Suppuratio, an impoſtume or ſore that hath matter.
                  
                     Supra, aboue, or ouer.
                  
                     
                        Supra 
                              
                                 
                              
                              quam
                           , for ſupra id quod.
                     
                  
                  
                     Supremè, hygheſt of all, or aboue all.
                  
                     Supremus, ma, mum, the higheſt or greateſt of all other.
                  
                     Supus, olde wryters vſed for ſupinus.
                  
                  
                     Sura, the cauſe of the legge. ſometyme the hole ſhanke or legge from the kne downe.
                  
                     Surculaceus, & ſurcularis, re, that which bringeth forth yonge ſettes or ſpringes of trees
                  
                     
                     Surculus, a yonge ſet or ſlyppe, a nurſegarden, alſo a ſlyppe of a tree or yong greffe.
                  
                     Surcus, a ſtake.
                  
                     Surculoſus, a, um, full of ſlyppes.
                  
                     Surdaſter, he that is ſomwhat deafe and can not here.
                  
                     Surdé, deafely.
                  
                     Surdeo, dui, dère, to be deafe.
                  
                     Surdeſco, ſcere, to waxe deafe or be deafe.
                  
                     Surditas, deafeneſſe.
                  
                     Surdo, dare, to make deafe.
                  
                     Surdus, da, dum, deafe, alſo that which hath no ſauour.
                  
                     Surrentum, a towne in Campania.
                  
                     Surrentinus, na, num, of that towne.
                  
                     Surregit, olde writers vſed for ſurgit, wherof commeth ſurrectio, a ryſynge.
                  
                     Surrepo, pere, to crepe vnder.
                  
                     Surreptitius, a, um, that whiche is doone by ſtelthe that none other man knoweth it.
                  
                     Surgo, ſurrexi, ſurgere, to ryſe, alſo to growe or ſprynge.Vergil.
                  
                  
                     Surrigo, ſurrexi, ſurrigere, to lyfte vp.
                  
                     Plautus in Amphit.
                     Surrigere aures, to laye his eare to a thyng, to harken.
                  
                     Surripere operam, Clanculum abij a legione, operam hanc ſurripui tibi, I departed pryuyly from the hoſte,Plautus in 
                           〈◊〉
                        . this tyme haue I borowed to do you pleaſure.
                  
                     Surripere ſe, to ſteale his away. Vt ſurripuiſti te mihi dudū de foro? O, how diddeſt thou ſteale away frō me late out of the market?
                  
                     Surripio, ripui, pere, to ſteale or take awaye priuily. alſo to lyft vp on hygh, to preuent.
                  
                     Surpiculus, a baſkette or hamper.
                  
                     Surrogo, gare, to ſubſtitute, or put in an nother mannes place.
                  
                     Ci in par
                        
                           ••
                        tiōe oratoria.
                     Surrogatio, a ſubſtitution.
                  
                     Surſum, aboue. Surſum uerſum, vpwarde.
                  
                     Surſum deorſum, vp and downe.
                  
                     Sus, for ſurſum.
                  
                  
                     
                        Suſcio, ſcire, for ſcio, ſcire,
                      to knowe.
                  
                     Suſcipere fidem, to promyſe. Quas partes impleturum te, ſecundum ſuſceptam fidem confido, Whyche parte I truſte thou wilt perfourme, according to the promyſe that thou madeſt.
                  
                     Plautus in milite. in Ruden.
                     Suſcito, tare, to awake one out of his ſlepe, to call one to his warke.
                  
                     Sus, ſuis, a ſowe.
                  
                     Sus Mineruam, a prouerbe applyed vnto hym, whyche preſumeth to teache or correcte one, of whome he rather oughte to be taught or corrected.
                  
                     Suillus, la, lum, of a ſowe.
                  
                     Suſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         de
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         fero, & ſuſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         de
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         habeo, I force not, I recke not, I care not.
                  
                     Suſa, a great citie in Perſi
                        •
                     .
                  
                     Suſcipio, ſcepi, ſcipere, to take. Suſcipere liberos, to gette chylderne.
                  
                     Suſcitabulum, a prouocation or ſterynge.
                  
                     Suſcito, tare, to ſtyre or prouoke.
                  
                     Suſpecto, tare, to beholde aboue.Mart. ſometyme to ſee benethe, or to loke downe.
                  
                     
                        Suſpendeo, dere,
                        Columel. Cicero.
                      to be hanged ouer or an high, alſo to appere a lyttell.
                  
                     Suſpendioſus, he that is hanged.
                  
                     Suſpenſus, a, um, hanged vp.
                  
                     Suſpenſus, he that douteth to ſpeake or do.
                  
                     Suſpenſa manu, timorouſly, doubtefully.Plin. epi
                           ••
                         98. li. 6. Terent. in phor
                           •
                        .
                  
                  
                     Suſpenſo gradu, Haec ubi ego audiui, ad fores ſupenſo gradu, placidé ire perrexi. Whan I harde thoſe wordes, I went to the doore fayre and ſoftly.
                  
                     Suſpendium, hangynge. ſuſpenſio idem.
                  
                  
                     Suſpendo, dere, to hange vp, to be doubteful or ſorowefull. Suſpenſus animo, hauynge doubte, or beinge adradde.
                  
                     Suſpenſo gradu incedere, to go ſoftely without makynge noyſe.
                  
                     Suſpicio, ſpexi, ſpicere, to loke vp, alſo to honour, to anſwere.
                  
                     Suſpicans, he that hath ſuſpicion, ſuſpecting
                  
                     Suſpicor, cari, to haue ſuſpicion, to ſuſpecte. alſo to ſuppoſe.
                  
                     Suſpectus, ta, tum, ſuſpected.
                  
                     Suſpicio, onis, ſuſpicyon.
                  
                     Suſpicioſus, ſuſpecyouſe.
                  
                     Suſpiratus, tus, a ſyghe.
                  
                     Suſpirioſus, ſhorte wynded, or he whyche fetcheth his brethe paynfully.
                  
                     Suſpirium, a ſyghe.
                  
                     Suſpiro, are, to ſygh. alſo to deſyre feruētly.
                  
                     
                        Suſsilio, lire, for ſubſilio.
                     
                  
                  
                     Suſtendere inſidias, to lay watche.
                  
                     Suſtentaculum, that whiche ſuſtayneth or beareth vp a thynge.
                  
                     Suſtento, tare, to ſuſtayne or beare vp.
                  
                     Suſtineo, nui, nere, to holde vp, to ſuffre, to forbeare, to fede, to refrayne.
                  
                     Suſtollo, tuli, tollere, to lyfte vp.
                  
                     Suſtollere animos, to be proude, or to haue an hygh courage.
                  
                     Suſtollere aes alienum, to pay dettes.Plin. de 
                           •
                        
                        ris illu
                           ••
                        r.
                  
                  
                     Suſtollere puerum, to brynge vp a chylde.
                  
                     Suſtulit, is proprely of the father, as peperit, is of the mother.
                  
                     Suſtuli, I haue had, I haue broughte vp. I haue lyfte vp.
                  
                     Suſurratio, a whyſterynge.
                  
                     Suſurro, are, to whyſter.
                  
                     Suſurro, ronis, a whyſterer. alſo he whyche with fals and ſecrete reporte maketh diſſencyon betwene men.
                  
                     Suſurrus, & ſuſurrium, a whyſtrynge, or ſofte murmurynge, or ſuche noyſe as trees doo make with the wynde, or a ryuer whan it runneth, or byrdes whan they chatter.
                  
                     
                     Sutatis, a ſeamſter or ſhepſter.
                  
                     Sutela, a ſubtyltie or craftie warkynge.
                  
                     Suterna, ſhowemakers crafte.
                  
                     Sutilis, le, that whyche is ſowen.
                  
                     Sutor, toris, a ſhowemaker.
                  
                     Sutorium attramentum, ſoutars bleche.
                  
                     Sutorius, a, um, pertaining to a ſhowmaker.
                  
                     Sutrina, a ſhowemakers ſhoppe.
                  
                     Sutura, a ſeame.
                  
                     Suturnium, an ewer or lauour.
                  
                     Suum, his owne, his propre goodes.
                  
                     Suus, a, um, his or hirs. But how this word ſhall be moſt aptely and conueniētly vſyd, rede Valla or Calepines vocabularie. For it is more abundantly and proprely declared of thē, than can be expreſſid in engliſh.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶S ANTE Y.
                  
                     SYades, ſterres callid alſo Hyades, ſeuen in number.
                  
                     Syagros, a wylde bore.
                  
                     Sybaris, a citie in Grecia.
                  
                     Sybarita, a man of that citie.
                  
                     Sybaritica menſa, a prouerbe applied to feaſtes and bankettes, whyche doo excede in delycateneſſe.
                  
                     Sybaritici libelli, wanton bokes.
                  
                     Sybaritici ludi, playes whyche are wanton and coſtly.
                  
                     Sybariticum carmen, a verſe or poeme contaynynge wanton matter.
                  
                     Syboti, peple in the north part of the world.
                  
                     Sychaeus, a mans name.
                  
                     Sycion, he that fyrſte founde garlandes.
                  
                     Sycomorus, a great tree lyke a fygge tree, whiche hath abundance of mylke, whoſe fruite commeth not oute of the toppes of the bowghes, as fygges doo, but oute of the ſame boughes, and ſwete like to a wild fygge: the graynes therof be les than the graines of figgis, & they be neuer ripe, except they be ſcrapid wt an inſtrumēt of yrō.
                  
                     Sycophanta, he that falily accuſeth an innocent. Alſo a bearer of tales, or a cōplayner.
                  
                     Sycophantia, a fals accuſation, deceite.
                  
                     Sycophantias ſtruere, to deuyſe, or inuente falſehoode.
                  
                     Sycophantor, tari, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Sycophantiſſo, are, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Sycophantioſe, deceytefully by crafte.
                  
                     Sycon, olde wryters callyd a fygge.
                  
                     Sycoſis, a dyſeaſe in the fundement, which maketh a warte lyke to a fygge.
                  
                     Sycoſis, where within the eie lyd groweth a lyttell wart or other lyke thynge.
                  
                     Sydera, the plurell number of ſydus.
                  
                     Syderatio, a ſpyce of the fallynge euyll in men, but in trees it is taken for blaſtynge.
                  
                     Sydus, ſyderis, a ſterre.
                  
                     Syene, a citie in the confynes of Egypte and Ethiope.
                  
                     Sygeum, a promontorie of Troye.
                  
                     Syla, a mountayne in Lucania, & a wod in it.
                  
                     Sylla, a great tyrant of Rome, whiche was of an vnſaciable crueltie.
                  
                     Syllaba, a ſyllable.
                  
                     Syllabarim, by ſyllables.
                  
                     Syllabicus, ca, cum, pertaynyng to ſillables.
                  
                     Syllanion, a famous maker of images, whiche was neuer taught.
                  
                     Syllepſis, a fygure, where the plurell number and the ſynguler are ioyned togyther, as ſocijs & rege recepto.
                  
                  
                     Syllogiſmus, a perfyte argumente, whyche hath a neceſſarye concluſion.
                  
                     Sylua, a wodde or place ouergrowen with wedes, alſo any matter haſtily writen with oute ſtudye.
                  
                     Syluanus, was callyd the god of woddes.
                  
                     Syluaticus, ca, cum, pertaynyng to woddes.
                  
                     Syluecula, & ſyluula, a lyttell foreſt or wod.
                  
                     Sylueſco, ſcere, to waxe or growe into woddes or buſhes.
                  
                     Sylueſter, ſylueſtris, tre, of a wodde or foreſt, woddy, wylde.
                  
                     Syluicola, he that dwelleth in a foreſte or wodde.
                  
                     Syluius, a mannes name, whiche was borne in a foreſte.
                  
                     Syma, a cytie in Aſia.
                  
                     Symbolum, a collation. alſo a token gyuen by one to an other vpon certayn appointmentes, generally a ſigne or mark to know a thynge by.
                  
                     Symbolus, a ſignet or ſele, or a ſigne manuel.
                  
                     Symbulus, a wyſe and good counſailour.
                  
                     Symmachia, ayde in battaile, or leage made amonge men of ſondry countreys, to fight agaynſt the other parte.
                  
                     Symmachus, a mannes name.
                  
                     Symmetria, a concorde in meaſure, where ſondry thynges be of equall proporcion.
                  
                     Sympathia, a mutuall combination of thynges naturall in the operation of theyr powers and qualities, as water in coldeneſſe dothe participate with erthe, in moyſture with the ayre, the ayre with the fyre in heate, with water in moyſture.
                  
                     Symphitum petreium, an herbe callyd bugle
                  
                     Symphitum magnum, comfrey.
                  
                     Symphonia, a conſent in tune, alſo harmony.
                  
                     Symphoniacus, a ſyngynge boye.
                  
                     Symphonio, are, to agree or accord in one.
                  
                     Symphoneſis, colyſion of vowelles.
                  
                     Sympinaticae, women addicte to ceremonies or deuocion.
                  
                     Sympiniū, a cup ſeruīg for wyne in ſacrifice.
                  
                     
                     Symplator, a frende of hym that is maried, whiche accompanieth hym to feaſtes.
                  
                     Symplega, warkes, in the which wraſtlers, and they whyche contende in fyghtynge, are beholden.
                  
                     Symplegades, two yles in the grekyſhe ſee.
                  
                     Symplegma, an imbracynge togyther.
                  
                     
                        Sympoſ
                              •
                           aſtes,
                      he that makith a feſt or bāket
                  
                     Sympoſium, a bankette.
                  
                     
                        Sympot
                              ••
                           a,
                      a woman whyche kepeth company at drynkynge.
                  
                     Symniſia, a ſecretary, or one of the pryuye councylle.
                  
                     Sympſalma, a concorde in ſyngynge.
                  
                     Sympudcaria, funerals or playes, wherein playes were made.
                  
                     Synada, a cytie in Aſya.
                  
                     Synaereſis, a contraction of two wordes, as Bigae, for b
                           •
                        iugae.
                  
                  
                     Synagoga, a cōgregatiō, ſpecially of iewes.
                  
                     Synalephe, a colliſion of vowels.
                  
                     Synanche, a ſyckeneſſe in the throte, callyd the ſquynce.
                  
                     Synceré, purely, vncorruptly.
                  
                     Syncerus, ra, rum, ſincere, pure, vncorrupted ſymple without diſſimulation.
                  
                     Synchronos, of one tyme.
                  
                     Synciput, ſyncipitis, the forepart of the heed Alſo a ſwynes heed ſoweyd.
                  
                     Syncopa, a fygure, where a letter or ſyllable is taken away, as cōpoſtus, for cōpoſitus.
                  
                     
                        Sync
                              •
                           doche,
                      a fygure, where parte is vſyd 
                        ••
                     r the hole, or the hole for part.
                  
                     Syndicus, an aduocate.
                  
                     Syndipnium, a ſoupynge togyther.
                  
                     Synechon, contynent.
                  
                     Synephites, a ſtone, whyche is callyd alſoo Leucongia.
                  
                     Syngraplia, ſyngraphus, & ſyngraplium, the wrytinge or dede, made or ſigned with the hande of hym that maketh a bargayne or couenaunte.
                  
                     Synochitides, a ſtone, wherwith nygromancers do call vp dyuels.
                  
                     Synodus, an aſſēbly of mē, or general coūcil.
                  
                     Synonimum, whiche in dyuers wordes ſygnifieth one thyng, as Euſis, Gladius, both do ſygnifie a ſworde. Occidit, interfecit, necanit, do ſignifie, he kylled.
                  
                     Synopis, ſynoper or redde leade.
                  
                     Synſtratiotes, companiōs togither in warre.
                  
                     Syntagma, a treatie, an ordinaunce.
                  
                     Syntaxis, order in conſtruction.
                  
                     Syntexis, lacke, or weakenes, whiche hapneth by longe ſyckenes.
                  
                     Syntereſis, the pure parte of conſcience.
                  
                     Synthema, a token gyuen to ſouldiours.
                  
                     Syntheſis, a ſhort cote or ierkyn. alſo a veſſell made of many veſſels.
                  
                     
                        Syntomon, for circūciſum.
                  
                  
                     Sypharium, a curtayne hanged before minſtrels whan they ſynge.
                  
                     Syphax, was the kynge of Numidia.
                  
                     Syracuſae, a famouſe citie in Sycile.
                  
                     Syracuſius, & Syracuſanus, of that citie.
                  
                     Syria, a great realme in Aſia, whiche hathe on the eaſt the ryuer of Euphrates, on the weſte the myddell ſee, and the realme of Egipte, on the northe Cilicia and Cappadocia, on the ſouth Arabia.
                  
                     Syriacum, a kynde of ſwete radyſhe.
                  
                     Syriacus, ca, cum, of Syria.
                  
                     Syrictae, people whiche receyue their meat in oten redes.
                  
                     Syricum, a color mixt with ſinoper & ruddel
                  
                     Syrium, wyne boyled to the thyrde part.
                  
                     Syrinx, a pype or recorder.
                  
                     Syris, corne kepte in holes in the grounde, and couered with chaffe.
                  
                     Syriſca, a woman of Syria.
                  
                     Syriſſus, a, um, of Syria.
                  
                     Syrma, tis, the traine of a womans gowne.
                  
                     Syrnia, a ſhryche oule.
                  
                     Syrophoenix, the ſee coſte of Syria.
                  
                     Syrtes, quycke ſandes or ſhelpes in the water made by the dryfte of ſande or grauel.
                  
                     Syrtites, a lyttell ſtoone founde in the bladder of a wolfe.
                  
                     Syrupus, a ſyrupe.
                  
                     Syrus, a man of Siria, alſo an Iland belongynge to Grece.
                  
                     Syſsitia, feaſtes, and companyes aſſembled at feaſtes.
                  
                     Syſymbrium, an herbe callid winter ſauery.
                  
                     Syzigiae, ſynewes, whyche do come frome the brayne to the eyes, ſo that he, whiche cometh from the lefte ſyde, gothe to the right eye, and that whiche commeth from the right ſyde, goth to the left eye, ſo that the ſynewes do croſſe eche other.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶T ANTE A.
                  
                     
                        TABANVS, a flie, whiche hath foure wingis, & byteth a man or beeſt.
                  
                     Tabefacio, ere, to corrupt
                  
                     Tabella, a lyttell table.
                  
                     Tabellarius, a caryer of letters, an auditour.
                  
                     Tabellio, lionis, a ſcriuener that writeth commune inſtrumentes and dedes.
                  
                     Taberna, euery vyle habytation, alſo a ſhop or tauerne, where wares be ſolde, and all thynge that is vendible, as wyne, oyle, or any other thynge.
                  
                     Taberna meritoria, an ynne.
                  
                     
                     Tabernaria fabula, a comedia or Interlude, wherein are baſe nor ſonages, and no perſones of dignitie or ſtate.
                  
                     Tabernaculum, a pauyllyon or halle.
                  
                     Tabernarius, he that ſellethe any maner of wares alſo a tauerner.
                  
                     Taber, his, corruption in the body, alſo extreme leanneſſe, by a longe conſumynge ſyckeneſſe. It is alſo matter and corrupte blode myxte togither. Alſo the impoſtume of the lunges, procedynge of humoures deſcendynge frome the heed into the ſtomake, and ſo woundynge and corruptyng the lounges.
                  
                     Tabeſco, bui, ſcere, to languiſhe or conſume, to be extremely leane, to be corruptid.
                  
                     Tabidus, da, dum, corrupted, conſumed.
                  
                     Tabiſicabilis, le, that whiche may be corrupted, or falle into a conſumption.
                  
                     Tabificus, ca, cum, that whyche maketh one corrupted, or conſumeth the body.
                  
                     Tablinum, was a wynter parlour, wherein were painted tables and bokes of ſtories.
                  
                     Tabo, a conſumption, waſtynge, or putrifaction of thinges.
                  
                     Tabor, a mountayne in the countrey of Galiles, where Chaiſte was tranſfigurate.
                  
                     Tabula, a table. In the plurell numbre tabulae, dothe ſignifie a teſtament, or any commune inſtrument or writynge. Alſo tabula is a table to play on with diſe or cheſſe mē.
                  
                     Tabulae nouae, were whan detters were not conſtrayned to pay their dettes, that they dyd owe, and the olde oblygations were diſſolued, and newe were to be made for that whiche ſhulde newely be borowed.
                  
                     Tabularia, ar places, where euidences and writynges be layde.
                  
                     Tabularium, a cheſte, in the whiche euidences and recordes are put.
                  
                     Tabulata, walles made of ſquare ſtones, as if they were bourded. They be alſo the boughes of trees and buſhes, whyche do growe ſtreyght forth and not vpwarde.
                  
                     Tabulatus, ta, tum, made of bourdes. Alſo tabulata, are walles ſylded with bourdes. or made of ſtone playne lyke to bourdes. They be alſo the boughes of trees, whyche do leane playne outwarde, and do not growe vpwarde:
                  
                     Tabulo, are, to make a thing with bourdes, or to ioyne bourdes togyther.
                  
                     Tabulatio, a ioynynge or cloſynge of bourdes togyther.
                  
                     Taburnus, an hyll in Campania, wherin do growe many olyue trees.
                  
                     Tace, egomet conueniam iam ipſum, Lette aloone, I my ſelfe wylle commune nowe with hym.
                  
                     
                        Tacan
                              •
                           a,
                      thoſe thynges whiche are not to be ſpoken.
                  
                     Taceo, ta, tui, tacere, to kepe ſylence, to be in reſte, to be quycke, to be ſure.
                  
                     Tacito pede, ſoftely, by ſtel
                        •
                     he.
                  
                     
                        Tacitum 
                              •
                           ſt,
                      not a worde is ſpoken of it.Terent. in Adelph.
                  
                  
                     Taciturnitas, tatis, ſylence.
                  
                     Tacitus, he that holdethe his peace, and is ſecrete.
                  
                     Tacitus, citius audies, be ſtyl, thou ſhalt here the ſooner.
                  
                     Tacite, without ſpeakynge one worde.
                  
                     Tactus, fulmine, ſomwhat burned or blaſted with lyghtnynge.
                  
                     Tactus, tus, feelynge.
                  
                     Taedet, it weryeth me, it yrketh me, I am werye of it.
                  
                     Taedium, werynes, or heuynes of mynde.
                  
                     Taedulus, an olde dotarde, of whom al men are wearye.
                  
                     Taenarus, a darke place at the fote of the hil callyd Malea, by the citie of Sparta, whiche was ſuppoſed to be an entry into hell.
                  
                     Taenia, the edge of a fyllette. alſo a womās fyllette, or that whyche nowe they calle rolles: proprely it is a kerchiefe, whyche maydens do weare on their heedes. Alſo a whyte ſtoone, whyche in the water ſheweth longe lyke a kerchiefe. It is alſoo a vyllage betwene Mirenas & Corinthum.
                  
                  
                     Taenon, a cite in Laconia, an other ī Arcadia
                  
                     Tagaſta, a citie in Affrike.
                  
                     Tagax, acis, a felon, whiche happeneth on a mannes fynger.
                  
                     Tages, was he, whyche taughte fyrſte the Thuſcanes the crafte of diuynation, callyd Aruſpicium.
                  
                  
                     
                        Tago
                              •
                           gere,
                      olde wryters vſed for tango.
                  
                     Tagrus, an hylle in Portyngale, where, as it is wryten, that mares doo conceyue of the wynde.
                  
                     Tagus, a ryuer in Spayne, wherin hath ben founde grauell of golde.
                  
                     Taigete, is the name of oone of the ſeuen ſterres, whiche ſoo appiereth, as it maye ſcantly be perceyued, which ſterre is alſo called Maia, & Electra.
                  
                  
                     Talaria, were ſhowes, whyche Mercurius dyd weare, wheron were ſet whynges.
                  
                     Talaris, re, that whiche commeth downe to the ancley, as Toga talaris, a longe gowne to the ancley.
                  
                     Talarius, ria, rium, pertaynynge to dyſe, as Lex talatia, a lawe agaynſt dyſe playenge.
                  
                     Talaſsio, was a ſonge contayned in certayn verſes, ſungen at weddynges. It was alſo a certayne exclamation or crie vſed at mariages, the begynnynge whereof beganne, whan Romulus and the Romaynes reuyſſhed

the maydens of the Sabines, amonge whom was one of excellent beautie, whom whan many of the Sabines wold haue reſkued, they whyche caried her toward Romulus, to thintent that ſhe ſhulde not be taken from them, cryed Talaſsio, whiche was the name of a noble prynce of the Sabinee, as if they wolde haue brought hyr to hym, and by that meane they eſcaped, & broughte hir to Romulus. And afterwarde they vſed at mariages to crie Talaſsio.
                  
                  
                     Talea, a ſtocke ſette in the erthe, whereon men doo graffe. Alſo a truncheon, a ſtaffe, a byllette.
                  
                     Talentum, was a poyſe, whyche after the countreye, wherein it was, it was dyuers. One was callyd talentum Atticum, whyche contayned .lx. poundes of Athenes, callyd Minas, or Mnas, and, lxxii. poūdes of Rome callyd libras: and this was alſo called talentum minus, the other was callyd Talentum maius, & Euboicum, which contayned .lxxx. poundes of Athenes, callid Minas, & .lxxxiii. poundes & foure ounces of Rome weight. Loke before in Libra, et Pondo. Talentū Atticum, uel minus, was in value after the rate of olde poyſe grotes. Clxvi.li.xiii. s. iiii. d. after .lx. to the pounde, after the newe grotes, tenne to the once .CCviii.li.vi. s. viii. d.
                  
                     Talentum maius, of olde grotes. Clxxxx.li.xiii. s. iiii. d. of newe grotes. CCxvii.li.x. s.
                  
                     Talgae, an Ile in the ſee callyd Hircanum, where groweth plentie of corne and frutes without culture.
                  
                     Talia, the blade of an ony on or chyboll.
                  
                     Talio, onis, an equall peyne in recompence of a hurte, as for the cuttynge of a mans hande, to loſe a hande, or for puttinge out of an eye, to loſe an eye.
                  
                     Talior, ari, to be cutte: it is proprely ſpoken of wodde, whiche we nowe calle tallynge of wodde.
                  
                     Talipedo, dare, to go on the paſternes.
                  
                     Talis, tale, ſuche.
                  
                     Taliter, in ſuche wyſe.
                  
                     Talitrum, a fyllyppe gyuen with ones fynger or nayle.
                  
                     Talpa, a molle or want.
                  
                     Talpa caecior, blynder than a molle, a prouerbe applyed to them, whiche lacke iugement in thinges that are playne.
                  
                     Talum reponere, to refourme that, whiche was negligently done, with more diligēce.
                  
                     Talus, the ankle aboue the foote. It is alſo the paſterne bone of a beaſte, Alſo a dye, or dyce.
                  
                     Tam, as well, alſo, as, ſoo. Tam bonus, as good. Tā ſum amicus republicae, 
                           
                              
                           
                           quam
                         qui maxi mè, I am ſo frendely, or as moche frende to the publyke weale, as he that is moſte.
                  
                     Tama, whan with moche trauelle the blode commeth downe to the legge, and cauſeth it to ſwelle.
                  
                     
                        Tam magis, for tanto magis.
                     
                  
                  
                     Tamarindi, a fruite growynge in India,Vergil. the tree wherof is like to a palme or date tree, the fruite ſower, lyke grene damſins, whiche is medicinable in aſſwagyng the heate of cholere.
                  
                     Tamaritae, people in Aſia, not farre frome the ſee callyd Caſpium.
                  
                     Tamarix, ricis, an herbe, whyche bearethe floures twyſe in one yere.
                  
                     Tamen, not withſtandyng. alſo yet. Tamen a malicia non diſcedis, Yet wylte thou not departe from thy malyce. Sommetyme it ſignifieth forthewith, at the laſte, ſoo that. Quod potero, faciam, tamē ut pietatem eolam, I wyll doo that I maye: ſoo that not withſtandynge I omytte not my duetie to my father.
                  
                     Tametſi, all be it, alwaye.
                  
                     Taminia, a wild grape, growing in woddes.
                  
                     Tam ne, olde wryters vſed for eouſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     , vntyll that.
                  
                     Tanager, a riuer in Lucania, betwene Campania and Calabria.
                  
                     Tanagra, a towne in Perſide.
                  
                     Tanais, a great ryuer in the northe parte of the worlde, whyche dyuydeth Europa from Aſia.
                  
                     Tanaquil, was wife to Tarquinius Priſcus, the kynge of Romaynes.
                  
                     Tanaus, was kynge of Siria.
                  
                     Tandem, at the laſte, ſometyme at the leſte waye, alſo vneth, not withſtandynge.
                  
                     Tandiu, ſo longe.
                  
                     Tango, retigi, tangere, to touthe, to meue, to vnderſtande, or perceyue, to come to.
                  
                     Tangere ulcirs, to rubbe on the gaide place,Turp
                           •
                        ilius to ſpeake to one of a thynge, whiche greueth hym to here it.
                  
                     Tangere, to deceyue.
                  
                     Tetigit aures meas, It came to myn eares.Plautus i
                           •
                         Ruden.
                  
                  
                     Tanis, the principall citie of Egypte, where Moyſes dyd ſhewe meruayles.
                  
                     Tanos, a ſtone of the kynde of Emeralde, grene and blacke.
                  
                     Tanquam, as it were, lyke.
                  
                     Tantalides, the progeme of Tantalus.
                  
                     Tantali horti, a prouerbe ſygnifienge good thynges to be at hande, whiche not withſtandynge a man may not vſe.
                  
                     Tantalus, a kynge, whom poetes do faine to be turmented in hell with hunger & thyrſte.
                  
                     Tanti, for ſo moche. This worde doth pertayne to byenge and ſellynge. Tantidem, at that pryce. Tandidem idem.
                  
                  
                     
                     Tanti aeſtimo, tantifacio, tanti pendo, I ſette ſo moche by, or I ſo moche eſteme i
                        •
                     .
                  
                     Tantillus, la, lum, & tantulus, a, um, the diminutiue of tantus.
                  
                  
                     Tantiſper, ſo longe.
                  
                     Tantopere, ſo moche, ſo vehemently.
                  
                     Tantum, onely.
                  
                     Tantum non, almooſte.
                  
                     Terent. in Heautont.
                     Tantum ſat habes? arte thou content?
                  
                     Tantummodo, all onely.
                  
                     Tantundem periculum, ſo great dangier.
                  
                     Tanuina, a wylde vyne callyd alſo Labruſca.
                  
                  
                     Tantò, an aduerbe, ſygnyfienge ſo moche, as tanto magis, ſo moche more, tanto peior, ſo moche worſe.
                  
                     Tantum abeſt, it is ſoo farre frome, or ſoo moche vnlyke.
                  
                     Plautus in paenulo.
                     Tantundem, euen ſo moche.
                  
                     Tantumnum, alſo, ye alſo.
                  
                     Tantus, ta, tum, ſuche, ſometyme ſo moche, or ſo greatte.
                  
                     Taos, a ſtone of the colour of a pecoke.
                  
                     Tapetia, hangynges of houſes, or clothes wherwith pauementes are couered.
                  
                     Tapetum, tapes, peris, tapiſrye, or clothes, wherin are wrought diuers pictures with thredes of ſondry colours.
                  
                     Taphiae, & taphus, an Ile by Grecia, where dwelled the people called Telebois.
                  
                     Taphius, a citie in Egipt, the people wherof were callyd Taphnii.
                  
                     Taphos, in greke, is a ſepulchre or tumbe.
                  
                     Tapinoſis, a fygure, wherby a great thyng is baſely deſcribed.
                  
                     Tapoſiris, a citie in Egipte.
                  
                     Taprobana, a noble Ile in the Indiane ſee, whiche yle is dyrectly agaynſte this parte of the worlde, and there is abundance of all maner of ſpyces. And the people there lyueth aboue an hundred yeres.
                  
                     Tapſus, an Ile by Sycile not farre frome Syracuſe.
                  
                     Tapulla, a lawe made for feaſtes.
                  
                     I
                           •
                        ſt. pom.
                     Tapyri, people in Parthia, whyche vſe to gyue theyr wyues in mariage to other mē, after that they haue hadde foure or fyue chyldren by them.
                  
                     Taracina, a towne in Campania.
                  
                     Taraconia, a countraye callydde nowe Aragon.
                  
                     Taracon, the chiefe citie therof.
                  
                     Tarandrus, a beaſte in body lyke to a great oxe, hauynge a heed lyke to a harte, and hornes full of branches, the heare rough, of the colour of a beare, I ſuppoſe it to be a rayne dere.
                  
                     Tarantula, a kynde of the beaſtes callydde Stelliones, lyke to a lyſarde, of whoſe bytynge no man dieth, onely it ſtonieth hym that is bytten.
                  
                     Taras, the ſonne of Neptunus, who buylded Tarentum.
                  
                     Taraxis, whan the eyen do bolne out moch, and be redde.
                  
                     Tarcheſius, was a myſcheuous kyng of the people callyd Albani.
                  
                     Tarchon, a duke in Hethruria, whiche was alſo a greate diuinour or ſouthſayer.
                  
                     Tardatio, a tarienge.
                  
                     Tardigradus, that whiche hath a ſlow paſe, or gothe ſlowely.
                  
                     Tardatio, a tarienge. Tardé, ſlowe, late.
                  
                     Tardiloquentia, a ſlowe ſpeche.
                  
                     Tardiloquus, he that draweth his ſpeeche in lengthe.
                  
                     Tardior, ſlower.
                  
                     Tardiſsimus, moſte ſlowe, or ſloweſt.
                  
                     Tarditas, & tarditudo, & tardicies, ſlowneſſe.
                  
                     Tardius, more ſlowely.
                  
                     Tardiuſculè, ſomewhat ſlowely.
                  
                     Tardiuſculus, ſomewhat ſlowe.
                  
                     Tardo, dare, to tary, to be ſlowe.
                  
                     Tardus, ſlowe, rude, ſomtyme well during▪ alſo thycke or groſſe.
                  
                     Tarentinus, a, um, of the citie of Tarent in Calabria.
                  
                     Tarentum, a noble citie in Calabria.
                  
                     Tarentū, a citie within the realm of Naples.
                  
                     Tarmes, a wourme, whiche eareth fleſſhe, a magotte.
                  
                     Tarpeius, an hylle at Rome.
                  
                     Tarquinus ſuperbus, was the laſte kynge of Romaynes, whiche was expellyd oute of Rome for his pride and crueltie.
                  
                     Tarracina, a towne in Campania callydde alſo Anxur.
                  
                     Tarſus, the chiefe citie of Cilicia, where ſaynt Paule was borne.
                  
                     Tarſis, a region in Iudea.
                  
                     Tartaria, a greate countray in the northeſte parte of the worlde.
                  
                     Tartarus, a place in hel. alſo a mā of Tartarie.
                  
                     Tartarum, the lyes of wyne.
                  
                     Tartareus, ea, eum, of helle.
                  
                     Tartarious, rina, num, olde writers vſed for horrible or terrible.
                  
                     Tarteſii, a people in Iberi
                        •
                     , amonge whom be cattes of excedynge greatneſſe.
                  
                     Tarteſſus, a citie in the vttermoſte parte of Spayne, on the ſee ſyde by Gades, nowe callyd Cales, where Columella the moſte 
                        •••
                     quent and perfyte huſband, was borne.
                  
                     Taſtaneum, a whyte claye or marle.
                  
                     
                        Taſ
                              •
                           menes, ſeu taſmenes,
                      one of the ſonnes of duke Neſtor.
                  
                     Tata, dady, which chyldrē call their father.
                  
                     Tatoe, a wanton worde, wherwith one aunſwereth to an nother.
                  
                     
                     Tateus, a kynde of ſalt whyche cometh out of Phrigia, & is medicinable for the eies.
                  
                     Taura, a barrayne cowe.
                  
                     Tatianus, a mans name. Tatius, a mās name.
                  
                     Tautarij, people in Scythia.
                  
                     Tauria, a ſcourge made of neates lether.
                  
                     Taurica Cherſoneſus, a contray in the north parte of Europa.
                  
                     Taurici, people of cruell maners that offered ſtrangers in ſacrifyce.
                  
                     Taurilia, were playes made in the honoure of infernall goddis.
                  
                     Taurinus, na, num, of a bulle.
                  
                     Taurius, one of the goddes of the ſee.
                  
                     Taurominium, a mountayne in Sicile, ſoo callyd for the plentie of neate, whiche fed theron. Alſo ther
                        •
                      was by it a citie of the ſame name.
                  
                     Tauromitutanus, na, num, of the citie of Taurominium.
                  
                     Tauroſcythae, people of Scithia, dwellyng by the mountayne callyd Taurus.
                  
                     Taurus, a bulle, ſometyme a ſtronge oxe, It is alſo one of the .xii. celeſtiall ſygnes, alſo a great mountayne towarde India.
                  
                     Tautologia, a fygure, where one thynge is twyſe ſpoken.
                  
                     Pl
                           •••
                         in 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                     
                     Tax, a ſtroke.
                  
                     Taxa, a kynde of bayes or laurell, wherewith herbars are made.
                  
                     Taxario, a ſettynge of a taxe or ſubſidie.
                  
                     Taxarores, they whiche doo rebuke oone an nother.
                  
                     Taxim, ſoftely, ſcantly touched.
                  
                     Taxis, olde wryters vſed for tetigeris, thou ſhalte touche.
                  
                     Taxilli, a ſmall dyſe.
                  
                     Taxo, nis, a gray or brocke, or badger.
                  
                     Taxo, are, to touche often. alſoo to taxe, or ceſſe a thynge at a certayne value. alſo to reproue one an other.
                  
                     Taxus, a tree lyke to fyrre, whiche beareth bearyes, wherin is mortalle poyſon. It is alſo callyd owe, wherof bowes be made.
                  
                     Taygetus, a hylle, vnder the whiche is ſette the cities of Sparta and Amycle.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶T ANTE E.
                  
                     TEarus, a riuer of Thracia, at the heed wherof Darius kynge of Perſia, whā he went into Scithia, pighte his pauyllyons, and there abode thre dayes. And delytynge at the mooſte pleaſaunt water of that ryuer, he ſette in the ſame place a piller grauē with letters of greke, declaryng his being there, with cōmendatiō of the water.
                  
                     Techna, a craft, alſo a wyle, or ſubtyl meane
                  
                     Techines, were they, whiche alſo were callyd Corybantes, and were feined to be the ſonnes of Minerua and Sol.
                  
                     Technicus, ca, cum, artificiall, inuentiue.
                  
                     Technides, a craftes man.
                  
                     Technophyon, a ſettynge forthe of crafte.
                  
                     Tectorius, a, um, pertaynyng to couerynge.
                  
                     Tecum, with the.
                  
                     Tector, toris, a periettour.
                  
                     Tectorium, the playſtrynge or pariettynge of a houſe.
                  
                     Tectoriū opus, perietting or plaſtring wark
                  
                     Tectum, the roufe of a houſe. ſommetyme all the houſe.
                  
                     Tecum oro & quaeſo, I pray & byſeche the.Plaut. in milite.
                  
                  
                     Tecum ſentio, I am of thyn opinyon.
                  
                     Teda, a tree, out of the whiche ſweateth a lycour, whan it is hette.
                  
                     Taedulus, of whom al men be wery. ſomtime it ſignifieth him, which is wery of ſom thīg.F
                           •
                        ſt. pom.
                  
                  
                     Tegaeum, a citie in Archadia.
                  
                     Tegaeates, men of that citie.
                  
                     Teges, gitis, a courſe blanket or couerlyd,Varro. whiche lyeth on poore mens beddes. It is alſoo a matte.
                  
                     Tegeticula, the diminutiue of teges.
                  
                     Tegillum, a lyttell couerynge.
                  
                     Tegmen, & tegimen, & tegmentum, a couerynge or couer.
                  
                     Tego, texi, tegere, to couer, to hyde, to defende or kepe.
                  
                     Tegula, a tyle. Tegulum, a couerynge.
                  
                     Teium, a citie in Paphlagonia, where Anacreon the poete was borne.
                  
                     Tela, the clothe, whiche is ſpoken as welle of ſylke as of lynnen clothe or wollen.
                  
                     Tellanae, a certayne kynde of fygges.
                  
                     Telamones, ymages, whiche do beare vppe pyllers or poſtes.
                  
                     Telemachus, the ſon of Vliſſes & Penelope.
                  
                     Teleboae, people in Grece.
                  
                     Telephium, an herbe callyd Orpyn.
                  
                     Telephus, the ſonne, whiche was nouriſhed with an hynde. Telina, a certain garment.
                  
                     Telonarius, & telo, lonis, a collectour or gatherer of tributes. Telonium, the place where taſkes or tributes are payde.
                  
                     Telos, in greke is an end, honour, a legion, a tribute or pēcion, it is alſo the name of an ile, where the ointment callid telina is made
                  
                     Telpuſſa, a citie in Arcadia.
                  
                     Tellus, li, a mās name whom the wiſe Solon iuged to be more fortunate thā the rich king Creſus.
                  
                     Tellus, luris, the erthe.
                  
                     Telum, al thynge whiche maye be throwen or caſt with the hand, be it ſtone, wod, or irō it is alſo the generall name of al that, wherwith a man doth fyght, callyd weapon. ſome tyme it is taken for a ſworde.
                  
                     Temerarius, a, um, more hardy than nede, or wyſedome requyreth, folehardy. ſomtime dredefull, or to be dradde.
                  
                     
                     Temeritas, atis, & temeritudo, folehardines
                  
                     Temerè, vnaduyſedly, foolyſhely, aduenturouſly, ſometyme it ſygnifieth almoſte. alſo without cauſe.
                  
                     Temerius, more folyſhe, or vnaduyſedly,
                  
                     Temero, rare, to vyolate.
                  
                     Temetum, wyne.
                  
                     Temulentus, ta, tum, drunkes of wyne.
                  
                     Temulentia, drunkennes.
                  
                     Temno, tempſi, temnere, to ſette lyttell by.
                  
                     Temo, monis, the beame, whiche contayneth the yoke.
                  
                     Tempe, a place in Theſſalia wonderful pleſaunt, hauynge trees and medowes meruaylous delectable, wherin byrdes of dyuers kyndes, doo ſynge contynually with excellent melody. Therof al pleſant woddes haue the name of Tempe.
                  
                  
                     Temperamentum, a moderacion.
                  
                     Temperanter, temperately.
                  
                     Temperantia, temperance, which is a firme and moderate gouernance of reſon againſt ſenſualitie and other vycyouſe affections of the mynde.
                  
                     Temperantior, tēperantius, more temperate.
                  
                     Temperatura, a temperance or moderation, in the mynglynge of thynges togyther.
                  
                     Temperies, temperatenes, proprely in heate or colde▪ ſometyme it is vſurped for temperamentum, and for temperantia.
                  
                  
                     Temperior, oris, more tymely.
                  
                     Tempero, are, to temper or moderate in order or meaſure. Temperamus ſtylum, calamum, appetitum, whan we keepe in cure wrytynge a meane fourme, or do eate noo more than is nedefull.
                  
                     Tempſa, a cytie in the countrey called now Calabria.
                  
                  
                     Tempeſtas, tatis, ſygnifyeth ſometyme the ſame tyme, ſomtyme tempeſt, ſommetyme wether, ſometyme a fayre wether.
                  
                     Tempeſtiuus, ua, um, that whyche is done in conuenyent tyme.
                  
                     Tempeſtiuitas, tatis, ſeaſon or tyme conuenient, oportunitie.
                  
                     Tempeſtiué, in ſeaſon or tyme conuenient.
                  
                     Tempeſtū, olde writers vſed for tempeſtiuū.
                  
                  
                     Tempeſtuoſum, tempeſtuous or ſtormy.
                  
                     Templum, a temple or churche. ſometyme it ſygnifyeth heuen. Alſoo the principall beame of a houſe, alſo a ſepulchre.
                  
                     Temporalis, le, that whiche duryth vntyll a certayne tyme.
                  
                     Temporaneus, a, um, that whyche is doone ſodaynly, and at a tyme.
                  
                     Temporarie, temporanie, & temporaliter, vntylle a tyme.
                  
                     Temporarius, ria, rium, that whiche dureth or contynueth for a tyme. alſo that whiche pertayneth to tyme.
                  
                     Temporius, an aduerbe ſygnifieth in tyme, or by tyme.
                  
                     Tempus, poris, tyme, alſo the ſtate of tyme. ſometyme the temples of the heed.
                  
                     Tenatia, & tenacitas, hardenes in ſparynge of expenſes, nygardſhyp, perſeueraunce, retaynynge, or kepynge.
                  
                     Tenatior, & tenaciſsimus, the comparatiue and ſuperlatiue degree of tenax.
                  
                  
                     
                        Tenaciſsimae memoriae,
                        Colum. 1.
                      of mooſte ſure remembraunce. Tenaciter, faſtly, ſurely.
                  
                     Tenaſmus & teneſmus, a deſyre to go often to the ſtoole, and may do nothynge, with a burnynge and ſometyme a bloody ſiege.
                  
                     Tenax, nacis, that whiche holdeth faſte, as glue. ſomtime ſparyng or nygarde, to moche conſtant, hard to be moued.
                  
                     Tendere, to aſſay, to holde vp. Paruum
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         patri tendebat Iulum, He helde vp lyttell Iulus vnto his father. Alſo to prepare, to go towarde a place.
                  
                     Tendicula, a nette or ſnare to take byrdes or beaſtes.
                  
                     Tendo, tetendi, tendere, to extende or ſtretche, to lay a ſnare, to dwelle, to go. Tendere infidias, to lay in wayte.
                  
                     Tendutes, olde writers callyd them, whych had great teethe.
                  
                     Tenebrae, the lacke of lyght, darkenes.
                  
                     Tenebreſco, ſcere, to be darke.
                  
                     Tenebricor, caris, cari, to make darke.
                  
                     Tenebricoſus, a, um, that maketh darke.
                  
                     Tenebriones, lyers and crafty knaues. Alſo they whiche wyll not be ſeene abrode by day tyme.
                  
                     Tenebroſus, a, um, darke.
                  
                     Tenedos, an Ile in the ſee callyd Aegeum, betwene Mitelene and Helleſpontum, not farre from Troye.
                  
                     Tenedia bipēnis aut ſecuris, a quick or ſharp axe: a prouerbe applyed to iudges, which be haſty and cruell in their ſentences.
                  
                     Tenellus, a, um, tender.
                  
                     Teneo, nui, nuere, to holde, to apprehende, to poſſede, to holde or kepe in, to couer, to vnderſtande, to kepe backe, to performe.
                  
                     Teneor, neris, neri, to be bounden, to be beholden to one.
                  
                     Tener, ra, rum, tender, mercyful. Alſo a geldyd manne.
                  
                     Teneritas, & teneritudo, tendernes.
                  
                     Teneraſco, ſcere, to be tender or mercyfull.
                  
                     Tenere conſilium, to do by councill Praecipe,
                     Plautus in milite. 
                     ut teneat conſilia noſtra, Gyue hym aduyſe that he may do by our counſayle.
                  
                     Tene, tene, tary, tary. Redi, quo iugis nunc? tene, tene, Tourne agayne, whither runnneſt thou nowe? tary, tary.
                  
                     
                     Plinius in p
                           •
                        negyri. Terent. in H
                           •
                        cyra. Plautus in cap.
                     Tenère conſenſum, to agree or conſent vnto other.
                  
                     Tenet me amor, loue meueth me moche.
                  
                     Tenère inſaniam. Sed hoc primum expurgare tibi uolo, me inſaniā ne
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         tenere, neque mi eſſe ullum morbum, niſi quod ſeruio, But fyrſte I wyll declare my ſelf vnto the, that I am neyther out of my wyt, nor haue any ſycknes, but that I am bonde.
                  
                     Plautus in Amphit & Epidico. Terent. in Adelph. Plautus in mereatore Plautus in truculen. In Mere
                           •
                        . Sueton in domi
                           •
                        ian
                           •
                        
                     
                     Tenère ius, to knowe the lawe,
                  
                     Tenère legem, to be vnder a lawe.
                  
                     Tenêre memoria, to remembre.
                  
                     Tenêre medium, to kepe a meane.
                  
                     Tenere modum, to kepe a meaſure.
                  
                     Tenere ſe, to take hede of hym ſelfe.
                  
                     Tenere aliquem mendarij, to take oone with a lye.
                  
                     Tene tibi, take it as thyne owne.
                  
                     Tenere cauſam, to vanquyſhe or recouer agaynſte one in a matter.
                  
                     Plin. epiſt. 
                           •
                        3.
                     Teneri deſyderio, to deſyre moch or feruētly
                  
                     Teneri ludo, to take pleaſure in game.
                  
                     
                        Teneriſur
                              •
                           i,
                      to be giltie of felonye.
                  
                     Tenera aetas, youthe.
                  
                     Teneris annis, in yonge yeres.
                  
                     Tenere, & teneriter, tenderly, louyngly.
                  
                     Tenni, olde writers vſed for tenui.
                  
                     Tenitae, were callyd goddeſſes of lottes.
                  
                     Tenontes, the greate and ſtronge ſynewes, whiche do kepe the necke vpryght. Alſo a broode ſynewe, whyche gothe frome the hamme downe to the heele.
                  
                     Tenor, noris, an order, a contynuaunce of a thynge.
                  
                     Tenos, an yle in the greke ſee, one of them, whyche is callyd Cyclades.
                  
                     Lucretius.
                     Tenta, ſtretched.
                  
                     Tentamentum, temptation.
                  
                     Tentigo, tiginis, a ſtyffeneſſe.
                  
                     Tentipellium, a ſhowe with an yron ſoole, wheron the ouer lether is ſtretched.
                  
                     Tento, tare, to attempte, to aſſay or proue, to tempte one to do euyll.
                  
                     Tentorium, a tent or pauylyon.
                  
                     Tentum, a mans priuye membre.
                  
                     Tentyra, a citie in Egypte.
                  
                     Tentyri, uel tynteritae, a venymous beaſte in an Ile on the ryuer of Nilus, whoſe voice the cokodryll doth feare.
                  
                     Tenué, & tenuiter, poorely, ſymply.
                  
                     Tenunculus, la, lum, very ſymple, or lyttelle in eſtimation.
                  
                     Tenui filo, with a ſmall threde, applyed to ſtyle in wrytynge, whyche is not elegant, but playne.
                  
                     Tenuis, nue, lyttell or ſymple in eſtimation, ſmalle in quantitie, poore.
                  
                     Tenuitas, tatis, ſmalleneſſe, pouertie.
                  
                     Tenuo, are, to make ſmalle, to make leane, or feeble.
                  
                     Tenus, ni, a ſhare. Beinge an aduerbe, hit ſygnyfyeth vnto. Tenus urbem tendit, It extendeth vnto the cytie, or noo further than the cytie.
                  
                     Tenus, a prepoſition, ſygnifieth nyghneſſe, or vntyll a thynge.
                  
                     Tepifacio, cere, to make warme.
                  
                     Tepefio, fieri, to be warme.
                  
                     Tepeo, & tepeſco, tepui, poſcere, to be warm or hotte.
                  
                     Tepidarium, a veſſelle, wherein water is made temperate, alſo a chaumber, whereinto men do go out of a bayne.
                  
                     Tepidus, tepida, tepidum, meane betweene hotte and colde, warme. Alſo kolyd from heate Somtyme noyfull or vnprofytable.
                  
                     Tephrites, a ſtoone, whyche hathe the fygure of a newe moone, in colour blacke, 
                        〈◊〉
                      aſſhe colour.
                  
                     Tepidior, colder.
                  
                     Tepidiſsimus, a, um, moſte warme.
                  
                     Tepidulus, tepidula, tepidulum, a dymynutyue of tepidus.
                  
                  
                     Tepocon, a forme of wrytyng downwarde.
                  
                     Tepor, oris, & tepiditas, tatis, warmthe, or warmeneſſe.
                  
                     Ter, thryſe.
                  
                     Terapne, a contray in Lacedemonia, where the fayre Helene was borne. alſo an Iland nowe callyd Corſica.
                  
                     Terebinthus, a tree, the wodde wherof is blacke and harde lyke boxe, oute of this tree rounneth a gumme, callyd commonly Turpentyne. All be it the common turpentyne is not it, but an nother, whyche is as cleere as glaſſe, and is a ſoueraygne medycyne to clenſe the ſtomake of putryfyed humours.
                  
                     Ternarius, & ternus, terna, num, the thyrde in number.
                  
                     Tertius, tia, um, the thyrd. Tertio, & tertium, the thyrde tyme.
                  
                     Terdenus, na, num, the thyrdtenth.
                  
                     Terebellum, a wymble or percer.
                  
                     Terebratio, a borynge with a wymble.
                  
                     Terebrae, ſiue terebrum, an awgour, wherewith holes are boored.
                  
                     Terebro, brare, to bore or make an hole.
                  
                     Teredo, dinis, a lytel worm that eteth wod.
                  
                     Terentius, the mooſte eloquente wryter of comedyes. Terentianus, of Terence.
                  
                     Terentum, a place in the fyelde by Rome, callyd Campus Martius, wherein was an aultar of Pluto and Proſerpyne.
                  
                     Teres, teretis, longe and rounde, lyke a tree or a pyller. Teretrum, an inſtrument, wherwith a thynge is made rounde.
                  
                     Terga dare, to run away, proprely in baraſle.
                  
                     
                     Tergemini, three chylderne borne at oone bourdeyne. Tergeſtes, a citie in Italye.
                  
                     Terginus, na, num, that whiche is made of a beaſtes hyde.
                  
                     Tergiuerſatio, a nonſuite in the lawe, whan the pleintife gyueth ouer his ſuite.
                  
                     Tergiuerſor, aris, ari, to turne back, to deny, in the lawe it ſygnifieth to be nonſuite.
                  
                     Tergo, & tergeo, terſi, tergere, to wype or make cleane.
                  
                     Tergum, the backe of man or beaſte, or of any other thynge. ſommetyme it ſygnifyeth a hyde.
                  
                     Tergus, tergoris, a hyde of a beaſte.
                  
                     Terma, matis, the extremitie, the ende of a thinge, alſo the ſole of the fote.
                  
                     Termentarium, a lynnen clothe, wherewith the body is couered.
                  
                     Plaut. 
                           〈◊〉
                         Pom.
                     
                        Termentum, for detrimentum.
                  
                  
                     Termes, a braunche plucked of a tree with the fruite on it. alſo a worme, whyche eateth the fleſhe.
                  
                     Termile, a mountayne in Lycia, callyd alſo Chimaera.
                  
                  
                     Ter milies, thre thouſande tymes.
                  
                     Termillum, a potte for wyne, whyche was alway ſette on the table, that euery manne mought take as moche wine as he wolde.
                  
                     Terminalia, was a certayne holy day, at the latter ende of the yere.
                  
                     Terminalis lapis, a mere ſtone, laid or pight at the ende of ſondry mens landes.
                  
                     Termino, nare, to ende or fynyſhe.
                  
                     Terminus, a ſygne whiche declareth oone mans lande from an other, or one contrey or territorie from an other. alſo it ſignifyeth the buttynge.
                  
                     Terminus deus, was an ydoll, whiche was ſuppoſed to haue preemynence ouer the boundes of lande, whoſe temple had euer an hole in the roufe, for as moche as they thought it to be vnlefulle that boundes of lande ſhulde be couered or hydde.
                  
                     Termo, onis, old wryters vſed for terminus.
                  
                     Ternarius numerus, the number of thre.
                  
                     Ternus, na, num, the thyrde.
                  
                     Ternundenum, the thyrtenthe.
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        ide com.
                     Tero, triui, rere, to rubbe, to breke or broiſe.
                  
                     Terere iter, to go his way. Terere tempus, to cōſume tyme. Terere otiū, to lyue idelly.
                  
                     Terpander, dri, an olde muſytian, whyche added .vii. ſtrynges to the harpe.
                  
                     
                        Terpfi
                              •
                           hore,
                      one of the nyne muſis.
                  
                     Terra, erthe: ſometyme all the worlde, alſo a prouynce, a territorie, a countrey, land.
                  
                     Terraceus, a, um, of erthe.
                  
                     Terraneola, a byrde lyke to a larke, whiche we calle a huntynge.
                  
                     Terrefacio, facere, to make aferde.
                  
                     Terrae fillus, he that is come vp of nought, and no man knoweth his kynrede.
                  
                     Terraemorus, erthequake.
                  
                     Terrenum, a felde.
                  
                     Terrenus, na, num, of erthe, or lyuynge on erthe, erthely.
                  
                     Terreo, rui, rere, to make aferde.Vide com.
                  
                  
                     Terreſtris, tre, erthely.
                  
                     Terreus, rea, reum, of erthe. Vas terreum, an erthen veſſelle.
                  
                     Terribilis, bile, terryble, that whyche is to be feared.
                  
                     Terricola, he that dwelleth in the lande.
                  
                     Terricrepus, he that rebuketh one terribly.
                  
                     Terriculamentū, a feare, or a fearfull thyng.
                  
                     Terrificus, ca, cum, terryble, or that whiche induceth feare.
                  
                     Terrigena, begotten on the erthe.Varro de ling. latin.
                  
                  
                     Terriones, ploughmenne.
                  
                     
                        Terripauium, & terripudium, for tripudium,
                      daunſynge.
                  
                     Territo, tare, to make aferde.
                  
                     Territorium, the fyeldes or countraye lyenge within the iuriſdiction and boundes of a citie, a territorie.
                  
                     Terror, roris, feare.
                  
                     Terſus, ſa, ſum, cleane, pure.
                  
                     Terſus dies, of olde wryters was taken for a fayre daye.
                  
                     Tertiata uerba, wordes not perfytely pronounced: as whan one is in feare or drede of hym, to whome he ſpeaketh, he tremblynge in ſpeche, vnethe pronounceth the thyrde worde that he wolde ſaye.
                  
                     Tertiarum, is a mixt mettall, wherin are two partes of leade, and one of tynne.
                  
                     Tertio, are, to do a thynge the thyrde tyme, or to make the thyrde tylth in earynge.
                  
                     Tertio Conſul, where two haue bene Conſules before hym. Tertium Conſul, he that hath ben thryſe Conſul. So that Tertio ſignifieth the third in order, and place, two goynge afore. Tertiū
                      ſygnifieth the tyme, where twyſe gothe afore. The lyke is of Secundo, quarto, and other numbres.
                  
                     
                        Tertio pedato,
                        Cato.
                      at the thyrde retourne or comynge agayne. Tertius, a, ū, the third.
                  
                     Tertius decimus, the thyrtenthe.
                  
                     Tertullianus, a famous and eloquent autor. whyche for dyſpleaſure and malyce felle into hereſye.
                  
                     Teruncium, a poyſe or coyn of thre ounces.
                  
                     
                        Teſca,
                        Varro.
                      a place where miſticalle ceremonies were exercyſed.
                  
                     Teſqua, places harde or difficile to come vp to, where the Romaynes dyd practiſe their diuinatiōs by fleing of dirdis, callid auguria Teſſellatus, ta, tum, that whiche is wrought with ſmal pieces of ſtone, wodde, or bone,

as in playenge tables or counterbourdes.
                  
                     Teſſella, a greffe.
                  
                     Teſſera, that whiche is in euery part ſquare as a dye. alſo it is a dye. more ouer a watch worde or priuie tokē gyuen to ſouldiours. Alſo a token of warre and peace, a token gyuen to people to receyue corne of the kinges almes. Alſo a taile, wheron is ſcored or marked the numbre of thynges receyued, whiche is alſo called Teſſerula.
                  
                  
                     Teſſeradecas, fouretene.
                  
                     Teſſerarius, he that giueth the watcheword
                  
                     Teſſerulae, lyttell pauynge tyles.
                  
                     Teſſo, teſsi, teſſere, to diſpoyle or pulle of a garment or harncis by vyolence.
                  
                     Teſta, a ſharde of a potte or tyle. alſo an erthen pot. alſo all maner of ſhellfyſhe.
                  
                     Teſtaceus, a, um, that whiche hath a ſhelle.
                  
                     Teſteus, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Teſtaceam flagellum, a prouerbe applyed to ſodayn alteration of thinges, or of baniſhment vnlooked for.
                  
                     Teſtamentatius, a forger of teſtamentes.
                  
                     Teſtamentarius, ria, ium, pertaynynge to teſtamentes.
                  
                     Teſtamentum, a teſtament.
                  
                     Teſtaum, in pieces or ſhardes.
                  
                     Teſtatio, & teſtimonium, wytneſſe.
                  
                     Teſtator, toris, he that maketh a teſtament.
                  
                     Teſtatus, he that is deed, and hathe made a wyll alſo openly knowen of all men.
                  
                     Teſticulor, cularis, lari, to putte the male to the female. Teſtillor, idem.
                  
                  
                     Teſticulus, of a knowen ſygnification.
                  
                     Teſtificatio, a wytneſſe bearynge.
                  
                     Teſtificator, & teſtificatrix, he or ſhe that bereth wytneſſe.
                  
                     Teſtificor, caris, cari, to beare wytneſſe.
                  
                     Teſtimonium, & teſtatio, wytneſſe borne of a ioynge done.
                  
                     Teſtis, he that beareth wytnes.
                  
                     Teſtes, be alſo a mannes genitours.
                  
                     Teſtor, aris, ari, to beare wytnes, to calle to wytnes,Cōteſtor. Proteſtor Varro. to pray god.
                  
                     Teſtu, olde wryters vſed for teſta.
                  
                     Teſtuaceum, that whiche is boyled in an erthen potte.
                  
                     Teſtudinatum tectum, a roufe, which is holowe in foure partes.
                  
                     Teſtudo, dinis, a ſnayle. Alſo an engyne of warre to beate downe walles, whiche was made of bourdes, and couerid with lether or other thinges, which wold not bourne. within it was a piece of tymber, that had a great hoke of yron at the ende, whyche piece mought be plucked backe, and putte forthe with the ſtrength of men, and therwith plucke ſtoones oute of the walles of townes beſyeged, It is alſoo the roufe or vaulte of a howſe.
                  
                     Teſtus, tus, is a panne, wherin tartes, and other lyke thynges of paſte are baken.
                  
                     Tetanicus morbus, idem quod Tetanos.
                  
                  
                     Tetanothra, a medycine, wherwith the face of a man or woman is made ſmothe without wrynkles.
                  
                     Tetanos, whan the ſynnes are ſlyffe, ſo that a man can nat bowe ſome part of his body
                  
                     Tetarmorton, the fourth part of the zodiake cirkle, wherin are the .xii. ſignes. It is alſo that, whiche aſtronomers do calle the quadrate aſpecte of planettes.
                  
                     Te te, thy ſelfe.
                  
                     Teter, tetra, tetrum, foule, ſtynkyng, cruell.
                  
                     Teterrimus, a, um, moſte foule or ſtynkyng, or cruelle.
                  
                     Teterrimé, moſte abhomynably.Feſt. Po
                           •
                        .
                  
                  
                     Tethys, the wife of Neptunus, callid goddeſſe of the ſee.
                  
                     
                        Tetinierit, for tenuerit.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Tetinus, for tenus.
                        Feſt. Pom.
                     
                  
                  
                     Tettigoniae, lyttell graſſehoppes.
                  
                     Tettigometrae, the mother of graſſhoppes.
                  
                     Tetracinus, a coyne, whyche was in value foure dragmas, or olde poyſe grootes, of viii. to an ounce.
                  
                     Tetracolon, a ſentence hauyng .iiii. mēbres.
                  
                     Tetradoron, of foure handdbreth.
                  
                     Tetragonus, a, um, a thynge hauynge foure corners.
                  
                     Tetragrammaton, the name of god, whych the Iewes do call Ineffabile, that is to ſay, vnſpeakable.
                  
                     Tetragrammaton, in greeke, ſygnifyeth of foure letters.
                  
                     Tetrametrum, a kynde of metre, hauynge but foure fete.
                  
                     Tetrarcha, the rule of the fourthe parte of a royalme.
                  
                     Tetraſyllabum, of foure ſyllables, as, Im pe ra tor.
                  
                  
                     Tetré, ſharpely, cruelly, wyckedly.
                  
                     Tetrices, water, wherwith gardeynes are wateryd.
                  
                     Tetricus, a ſowre felowe, & alway vnpleſant.
                  
                     Tetrinno, are, to ſwymme lyke a ducke.
                  
                     Tetritudo, crueltie or ſharpenes.
                  
                     Tetrius, more ſharpe or cruell.
                  
                     Tetro, trare, to make fowle, to pollute, to make bytter.
                  
                     
                        Tetulit, for tulit.
                     
                  
                  
                     Teucer, & Teuerus, the name of a kynge of Troianes. alſo of the ſonne of Telamone the valyant Greke.
                  
                     Teucer, Teucra, crum, idem quod Troianus. of Troye.
                  
                     Teumeſus, a lyttell hylle in Boeotia.
                  
                  
                     Teumeſus leo, a Lyon, whyche Hercules

dydde ſlee, whan he was a chylde, and of his ſkynne made hym a cote.
                  
                     Teurion, the herbe whiche is alſo callydde Tripolium.
                  
                  
                     Teuta, a quene of Illiria, which lyued euer chaſte, and vanquyſhed many noble capitaynes, and diuers hoſtes of the Romains
                  
                     Teurates, was in olde time amc̄g the french men taken for Mercurius.
                  
                     Teuthania, a piece of the coūtrey of Troy.
                  
                     Teutones, people nowe callyd Almayns.
                  
                     Vide com.
                     Texo, texui, texere, to weaue or wind threde, Alſo to make to builde, to write, to gather, to ornate.
                  
                     Texta, an hearelace, wherwith the heare is bounden vppe.
                  
                     Textilis, le, that which is weaued or woundē
                  
                  
                     Textim, an aduerbe, ſygnifieng in weauing or wyndynge vp.
                  
                     Textor, toris, & textrix, tricis, he or ſhe that weaueth or wyndeth.
                  
                     Textrina, & textrinum, the place where thinges be weaued or wounden. alſo the craft of weauynge.
                  
                     Textrix, & textricula, a woman, whiche warketh in a frame or ſtole.
                  
                     Textura, the weauynge.
                  
                     Textus, & textum, the texte.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶T ANTE H.
                  
                     THalamus, a chamber where the huſbande and the wyſe do lye togither.
                  
                     Thalaſsicus, chamblette.
                  
                     Thalaſsio, uide Talaſsio.
                  
                  
                     Thaſſus bonorum, a prouerbe applyed to them that promyſe great thynges, as a mā wolde ſay, a worlde, a countray of welthe.
                  
                     Thalaſſo meli, is a lycour made of honye, ſalte water, and rayne water, and is put into a veſſell raſed with pytche.
                  
                     Thales, a philoſopher, whiche was one of the ſeuen wyſe men of Grecia.
                  
                     Thaleſtris, was a quene of Amaſones, whiche came to kynge Alexander with three hunderde womenne with her, to the intente to haue iſſue by hym and his menne: and whanne ſhe perceyued, that ſhe and her ladyes were ſpedde, they departed home agayne.
                  
                     Thali, are in lyekes, garlyke, and oynyons, whan they do growe, the myddell ſ
                        •
                     alke betwene the blade and the heed or rote.
                  
                     Thalia, one of the graces, whiche the auncent poetes dyd ſuppoſe to be one of the doughters of Iupiter, and gyuers of dilectable ſpeche, and pleſant pronunctatiō.
                  
                     Thamaras, was he, whiche fyrſte playd on a harpe, without ſyngynge therto.
                  
                     Thamnos, in latine arbuſtum.
                  
                     Thanatos, mors in latyne.
                  
                     Thapſus, an yle by Sicile.
                  
                     Thapſia, an herbe lyke to ſenell, and hathe a yelowe flowre, and a flatte rounde ſede.
                  
                     Tharia, pyckelle, wherein fyſſhe is ſalted, and kepte.
                  
                     Tharſos, a citie in Cilicia.
                  
                     Thaſia, an almonde.
                  
                     Thaſia nux, callyd alſo graeca.
                  
                     Thaſij, menne of the Ile callyd Thaſus in Egypte.
                  
                     Thaſium, a certayn wine, which is in Egipt.
                  
                     Thauma, in greke is a meruaile or myracle.
                  
                     Theatralis, le, & theatricus, ca, cum, that whiche pertayneth to theatrum.
                  
                     Theatridium, a diminutiue of theatrum.
                  
                     Theatrum, a place made halfe round, wherin the people aſſembled to beholde playes and ſondrye ſbate mentes, ſometyme it ſygnifieth the multitude that beholdeth.
                  
                     Theboe, arum, Theba, be, & Thebe, bes, the name of cities, wherof one was in Egipte, buildid by Buſirides, an other in Boeotia, buylded by Cadmus: an nother in Cilicia, where Andromaches, the wyfe of Hector was borne.
                  
                     Thebaicae, & thebaides, dates of the beſte forte.
                  
                     Thebais, idis, & idos, a countraye of Egipt, it is alſo the name of a boke made by Statius the poete.
                  
                     Thebanus, na, num, a man of Thebes.
                  
                     Theca, a caſe, a ſhethe or ſcaberde, a boxe.
                  
                     Theleboae, people of an yle callid Capreae, whiche lyeth agaynſt Naples.
                  
                     Theleboij, people of the Ile Capreas.
                  
                     Thelephus, a kynge, whyche camme in the ayde of the Troyanes, and was ſlayne by Achylles.
                  
                     Theligonium, an herbe, whyche hathe beries lyke to an olyue.
                  
                     Thelphuſa, a citie in Arcadia.
                  
                     Thelphuſsiū, uel thelphoſsion, a cite in Boeotia, where Pyndarus prayſed Bacchus,
                  
                     Thelypteris, ſheferne, or the female ferne.
                  
                     Thema, matis, a thynge purpoſed to be diſputed or reſoned. it is alſo a figure, wherin aſtronomers doo write the ſtate of heuen, in placinge or ſettyng the planettes in ſuche ſignes and degrees, as they be in at the tyme of a mans natiuitie, or whan any thynge ſhall happen that they ſerche for.
                  
                     Thembinacha, a contrey called alſo Nemia.
                  
                     Themes, an olde towne in the ile of Lipres where braſſe was fyrſte founde.
                  
                     Themis, one of the ſyſters of Iupyter, ſhe was callid the goddeſſe, whiche cōmanded men to aſke that whiche was leful. There

was an other woman callyd Themis, whiche was called alſo Carmentis, it was ſomtyme taken for fas, lefull.
                  
                  
                     Themiſcyra, a cite in Capadocia, afterward callyd Caeſaria.
                  
                  
                     Themiſones, people by Licia.
                  
                     Themiſtius, a philoſopher which wrate cō
                     mentaries on Ariſtotels warkes.
                  
                     Themiſtocles, a noble capitain of the Athemenſis, whiche beinge expelled out of his countrey, and commen to Xerxes king of Perſia, was ſent by hym with a great armye agaynſte the Athenienſes, but whan he perceyued his countrey in peryll to be diſtroyed, he dranke poyſon, and chaſe rather to dye, than eyther to be vnfeythfull to Xerxes, or els to diſtroy his countrey, although it were vnkynde towarde hym.
                  
                     Thenſa, a halowed carte or chariot.
                  
                     Theocritus, a poete of Grecia, which wrate Bucolica, or the contention of herd men.
                  
                     Theologia, diuynitie.
                  
                     Theomenia, the wrathe of god.
                  
                     Theonino dente rodere, to rebuke a manne ſhamefullye.
                  
                     Theophraſtus, a noble phyloſopher, and of excellent eloquence.
                  
                     Theos, in greke is god.
                  
                     Theotochos, the mother of god.
                  
                     Theorema, ſpeculation.
                  
                     Theoria, ſpeculation, vnderſtandyng.
                  
                     Theopolis, the chiefe citie of Syria, callyd alſo Antiochia.
                  
                     Thera, a cytie by Athenes.
                  
                     Theramnum, a citie in Theſſalia.
                  
                     Theriace, ces, ſeu theriaca, tryacle.
                  
                     Thereotrophion, a place where wylde beaſtes are kepte, as a foreſt, or parke.
                  
                     Therioma, a ſoore of the priuye members, wherby all the partes therabout, are corrupted, and therof iſſueth blacke and ſtinkynge humour.
                  
                     Theriſtrum, a thynne vayle, which the women of Paleſtina dyd weare.
                  
                     Thermae, are bathes of hote water.
                  
                     Thermefacio, cere, to chaufe or make oone hotte with outragious eatynge and drynkynge of hote thynges.
                  
                     Thermopolium, a place where meates and drynkes were ſolde, wherwith men were made hote or warme in cold wether.
                  
                     Thermodoon, a ryuer in Cappadocia.
                  
                     Thermodontiacus, ca, cum, pertaynynge to that ryuer.
                  
                     Thermopoto, tare, to drynke hotte or warm drynke.
                  
                     Thermopylae, a mountayne in Greece, hauynge a narowe entrie or paſſage, where two thouſand Lacedemoniens, with their capytayne Leonidas, faught agaynſt fyue hundred and .xxviii. thouſande Perſyans▪ and reſyſted them two dayes, vntylle the ſayd Lacedemoniens were all ſlayne.
                  
                     Therſites, was a prynce that came with the grekes to the ſyege of Troye, whyche in perſone and condicyons was of all other moſte defourmed.
                  
                     Theſaurizo, are, to gather treaſure.
                  
                     Theſaurus, & theſaurum, treaſure.
                  
                     Theſeus, a noble and valyant kyng of Athenes, companyon to Hercules.
                  
                     Theſis, a clauſe in writyng or ſpekyng, whiche contayneth a ſentence.
                  
                     Theſmophoria, the ceremonyes of Ceres, the goddeſſe of grayne.
                  
                     Theſmophoros, was a name of Ceres.
                  
                     Theſpia, a free towne in Boeotia.
                  
                  
                     Theſſalia, a region in Grece.
                  
                     Theſſalicus, ca, cum, of Theſſalia.
                  
                     Theſſalonica, a citie in Macedonia.
                  
                     Thetis, tidis, the mother of Achilles.
                  
                     Theucitis, a ruſhe growynge in Nabachis, whiche hath the taſte of ſharpe wyne.
                  
                     
                        Theoſitas, for ſodalitas.
                        Feſt. Pom.
                     
                  
                  
                     Theutones, & theutonici, people in Germanye, callyd Duchemen.
                  
                     Thirromachus, one of the ſonnes of Hercules by Megara.
                  
                     Thiaſias, he that is burſte or broken in his ſtoones.
                  
                     Thideus, was the name of the father of Diomedes.
                  
                     
                        Thieum, for ſuccinum,
                      aumbre.
                  
                     
                        Thita praefigere, for condemnare.
                     
                  
                  
                     Thymelici, mynſtrelles retayned with noble menne.
                  
                     Thoa, one of the nymphes.
                  
                     Thoas, the name of two kynges, oone of Taurica, the other of Lemnos.
                  
                     Thoes, be wolfes in Ethiope, Arrianꝰ doth calle them tygres in India.
                  
                     Tholos, a ſcochen or ſmall tergate. alſo the the ſyldynge of a houſe, or a round houſe.
                  
                     Thomices, lyches of hempe, wherwith halters are made, they be alſo lyttel bolſters, whiche men do weare whanne they carye burdeynes, for frettynge of theyr neckes and ſhulders with cordes or ropes.
                  
                     Thon, nis, he that fyrſte brought phiſyke in the fourme of a ſcyence, amonge the Egyptians.
                  
                     Thoota, the daughter of Phorcꝰ, on whom Neptunus gate Polyphemus.
                  
                     Thoracatus, he that wearethe curettys or breſte plates.
                  
                     Thorax, racis, is proprelye the hole boulke of a man from the necke to the myddelle, it is alſo curettes or breſte plates.

ſometyme it ſignifieth a towre.
                  
                     Thous, a duke of Troye.
                  
                     Thracia, a region of Europa, wherin is the citie of Conſtantinople.
                  
                     Thraceas, uel Thraſsias, a northweſt wynd.
                  
                     Thraſimedes, the ſonne of Neſtor.
                  
                     Thraſomenus, a ryuer in Italye nyghe to Peruſia.
                  
                     Thrax, acis, a man of Thracia.
                  
                     Threces, idem quod gladiatores.
                  
                  
                     Threnodia, a mournyng ſonge.
                  
                     Threnos, a lamentacyon, whyche was vſyd a
                        •
                      buryenge.
                  
                     Threſſa, a woman of Thracia.
                  
                     Throni, be one of the .ix. orders of angels.
                  
                     Thronus, the ſeate or chayre of an Emperour or kynge.
                  
                     Thrulla, a trewell, whyche maſons, tylers, and pargettours doo vſe for layenge of morter.
                  
                     Thrulliſſo, are, to laye on morter.
                  
                     Thryallis, an herbe callyd in Italye Strella & Bipinella.
                  
                  
                     Thryps, a mowthe.
                  
                     Thule, an Ile beyonde Scotlande.
                  
                     Thunnus, a fyſhe, callyd Tuny.
                  
                     Thuribulum, a ſenſar.
                  
                     Thuringia, Thuryn in Fraunce.
                  
                     Thurini, a people in Italye.
                  
                     Thuriferus, ra, rum, that whyche bearethe Frankynſence.
                  
                     Thurifico, to make a perfume, or to ſence.
                  
                     Thurius, ria, rium, of incenſe.
                  
                     Thus, thuris, frankyncenſe.
                  
                     Thuſcana, a cytie in Italye.
                  
                     Tuſculani, a people by Rome.
                  
                     Thuſculum, a diminutiue of thus. Alſo a cite in Latium.
                  
                     Thyas, a ſacrifyce made to Bacchus.
                  
                     Thyaſus, a daunce dedycate to Bacchus.
                  
                     Thiella, a ſtorme.
                  
                     Thyeſtes, whome his owne brother Atreus cauſyd to eate his propre chylderne.
                  
                     Thymbra, an herbe callyd ſanerye.
                  
                     Thymele, es, a woman, whyche fyrſt taught daunſynge in open places.
                  
                     Thymelici, maye be callydde daunſers of Moryſdaunces.
                  
                     Thymiama, matis, a ſwete perfume.
                  
                     Thymus, an herbe called tyme.
                  
                     Thymū, a wart, which is as great as a bean.
                  
                     Thynnus, a fyſhe callyd Tuny.
                  
                     Thyridion, a wycket or lyttell doore.
                  
                     Thyrſus, the ſtalke of letyſe and of other herbes, whiche may be eaten. ſomme doo take it for a ſpeare with a ſharpe heade, whiche hadde boughes and leaues of yuy wrapped aboute them: ſuche ſpeares dyd Bacchus and his flocke of drunken harlottes, beare in theyr handes. Lucretius the poete taketh thyrſum, for furye or an ardent mocyon.
                  
                     Thyſus, the ſtalke of euery herbe, ſpecially of letyſe▪ It is alſo a ſtaffe wounde about with yuy, whiche was borne of them that dyd ſacrifyce to Bacchus.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶T ANTE I.
                  
                     TIara, an ornament, which the women of Perſia dyd weare on their heedes, whiche was rounde, and couered onely the hynder parte of theyr heedes. Princis & priſtis vſed alſo to weare it.
                  
                     Tiatura, a cytie in the countray of Miſ
                        •
                     a.
                  
                     Tibareni, people in Scithia, being in Aſia.
                  
                     Tibia, the leg, proprely the ſhanke or ſhinne bone, it is alſo an inſtrumēt callid a ſhalme.
                  
                     Tibialis, le, pertaynyng to ſhaulmes.
                  
                     Tibiale, lis, pluraliter tibialia, geiues or legge harneys.
                  
                     Tibicen, & tibicina, he or ſhe that blowethe a trumpette or ſhalme.
                  
                     Tibicen, is alſoo any thynge, whereby any thynge in buyldynge is ſuſteyned, as a ſhore or proppe.
                  
                     Tibi, to the.
                  
                     Tibicis, a ryuer in Scythia.
                  
                     Tibin, a baſkette or coffyn made of wickers or bulle ruſhes, or barke of a tree:Origenes ſuper Ex. ſuche one was Moyſes put into by the daughter of Pharao.
                  
                     
                        Tibiluſtria,
                        Feſt. Pom.
                      were dayes whan menne wente with trumpettes, as it were in proceſſyon aboute their lambes.
                  
                     Tibini, tunes made with ſhalmes.Feſt. Pom.
                  
                  
                     Tiburtes, people in Italy nigh to Rome.
                  
                     Ticinum, a citye in Lumbardye nowe callyd Pauia.
                  
                     Tigillus, a rafter.
                  
                     Tignarius, faber, a Carpentar that maketh a houſe of tymber.
                  
                     Tignus, & tignum, a rafter of a houſe, whiche beareth the roufe. It is alſo generally all the tymber, which ſerueth to a hous.
                  
                     Tigrane, a riuer in the countray of Media.
                  
                     Tigranes, the propre name of a kynge of Media, of the greatter Armeny.
                  
                     Tigris, a beaſte of a wonderfull ſwyftenes, it is alſo one of the foure ryuers, whiche commeth out of Paradyſe.
                  
                     Tigurini, people of Germanye, whiche do inhabyte the fourthe parte of Heluetia, or Swyzerlande.
                  
                     Tile, an Ile beyonde Scotlande, callydde alſo Thule.
                  
                     Tilia, a tree, whyche ſome do thinke is callyd quyckebeame.
                  
                     
                     Tilium, a citie in the weſte parte of Sardinia, on the ſee ſyde.
                  
                     Tilos, an yle in the Indian ſee, wherein is plentie of perle, and trees of dyuers fruites, and the leaues of trees there growynge do neuer falle. alſo wolle groweth on trees there, whiche do beare goardes of the greatnes of quynces, and beynge type do open, in the whyche doo appiere the wolle, wherof are made fyne and precious clothes. About that place dothe begynne the mountain of Caucaſus, whiche dothe paſſe through a greate parte of the worlde.
                  
                     Timalos, an herbe and flower growyng in waters, callyd commonly of potycaries Nenufer.
                  
                  
                     Timaeus, a noble phyloſopher of Pythagoras ſecte.
                  
                     Timanus, a ryuer in Italy beſides Aquileia.
                  
                     Timens▪
                      he that feareth for a tyme.
                  
                     Timidus, he that alway feareth, callyd tymorouſe.
                  
                     Timeo, mui, mere, to feare or dreade.
                  
                     Timeo te, I feare the as myn ennemy, leſte thou ſhallt do me harme.
                  
                     Timeo tibi, I am af
                        •
                     rd of the as my frende, leſte thou ſhuldeſt haue any harme.
                  
                     Timeo mihi abs te▪
                      I am afrayde that thou wylte do me harme.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈1 paragraph〉
                        
                     
                     Timeo finem pomis, I am afrayde that one wyll ſeale myn appulles.
                  
                     
                        Timeo mo
                              •
                           i
                              •
                           tur,
                      I am aferd that he wyl die
                  
                     Timide, fearefully.
                  
                     
                        Timidi
                              •
                           as,
                      feare.
                  
                     Timiopilae, ingi oſſers or regraters of markettes, whiche doo bye moch corne or vitayle togyther, to make it ſcarſe and dere.
                  
                     Timor, moris, & timos, feare of ſome euyll commynge.
                  
                     Timotheus, was the name of a noble capytayn of the Athemēfes, who for the good fortune that he had in battayle, was paynted lyenge aſlepe, and hauynge by hym a nette pytched, wherin fortune was taken. Alſo a cunnynge muſitian, whiche vſyd to take of his ſcholers, which had lerned before▪ double ſalarie, that he toke of other, whiche neuer lerned, ſayeng, that he toke with them double labours, that is to ſaye, to make them to forgette that which they hadde lernyd afore, and thanne to teache them perfytely.
                  
                     Tin, olde wryters vſ
                        •
                     d for Eum.
                  
                     Tina, & Tinia, a greatte bolle, whiche being ful of wine, euery man mought drynke therof as moche as he lyſted.
                  
                     Tinctor, ctoris, a dyer.
                  
                     Tinctilis, le, that whiche is dyed.
                  
                     Tinctura, dyenge.
                  
                     Tinea, a mothe, they be alſo wormes in the bealye, alſo wormes breding in bee ſtalles.
                  
                     Tineoſus, a, um, full of mothes▪
                  
                  
                     Tinge, a promontorie or elbowe of Affrica.
                  
                     Tingitana, a parte of Mauritania or Barbaria agaynſte Spayne.
                  
                     Tingo, xi, gere, to deepe a thynge into lycour, to dye colours.
                  
                     Tinnio, nire, to rynge or make a ſounde as mettall dothe, ſometyme as in a mās eare.
                  
                     Tinnimentū, a ryngyng in the eare of a mā.Plaut. in ruden.
                  
                  
                     Tinnunculus, a byrd, which maketh a ſharp ryngynge noyſe, and is of the kynde of haukes, and in ſome place dothe brede in houſes, whiche with his voyce dryueth away other hawkes, and therfore the byrdes of hym are kepte in erthen pottes couered with claye, and hanged vp in doue-houſes, whyche cauſeth culuers meruaylouſely to loue their houſe.
                  
                     Tinnulus, la, lum, ſharpe in ſounde, as that which is made by beatinge on metall.
                  
                     Tintinaculus, he that beateth with roddes, a tranſgreſſour of a lawe.
                  
                     Tintinabulum, a lytle bell.
                  
                     Tintino, nare, to ringe lyke a bell.
                  
                     Tiphernum, a towne in Italy.
                  
                     Tiphis, an excellent carpentar, the whiche founde firſt the meane to gouerne a ſhyp, a rother.
                  
                     Tipula, a wurme, whyche runneth on the water as other wurmes doo on the lande, and hath ſixe fete.
                  
                     Tireſias, was kynge of Thebes, who had the knowlege of thinges whyche ſhoulde happen, and was blynde.
                  
                     Tirius, a ryuer in Grecia: alſo the contray where Hercules was borne in Peloponeſſo, now called Morea.
                  
                     Tirinthius, was a ſurname of Hercules.
                  
                     Tirinthis, a famouſe olde citie in Grecia.
                  
                     
                        Tis, for tui, the genitiue caſe of Tu.
                  
                  
                     Tiſiphone, one of the furies of helle, which was ſuppoſed to tourment homycydes, or ſ
                        •
                     eers of men.
                  
                     Titan, & Titanus, was the brother of Saturne, and is taken for the ſonne, and Titanis, for the moone.
                  
                     Tithimallus, an herbe callyd werte worte, wherof the mylke woll take away wartes.
                  
                     Tithymalus, an herbe whyche is commonly callyd Spurge.
                  
                     Titillo, are, to tyckle, to prouoke or meeue pleaſantly.
                  
                     Titio, onis, a fyrebrande or wodde, whiche hath ben in the fyre.
                  
                     Titiuillitium, ſygnifyeth nothynge.
                  
                     Titubantia, ſtammmerynge.
                  
                     
                     Titubo, are, to ſtacker in ſpeking or going, as a man beinge drunke or ſycke.
                  
                     Titulotenus, no further than his title.
                  
                     Titulus, the title or inſcription of a warke or acte. ſometyme dignitie, alſo a monumēt or other remembrance.
                  
                     Titus, the name of a man.
                  
                     Titus Liuius, the moſte excellent hyſtorien or writer of ſtories, in whom was the foū
                     tayne of the mylke of pure eloquence.
                  
                     Tiepolemus, was the kyng of the Rhodes, whiche camme to the battayle of Troye, with nyne ſhyppes.
                  
                     Tityus, the ſonne of Iupiter, whom poetes fayned to be ſlayne by Apollo, bycauſe he wolde haue rauyſſhed Latona his ſyſter. And therfore lyeth in helle, hauyng an egle alwaye eatynge his lyuer. And it is alſoo ſayde, that his bodye was in lengthe nyne furlonge. wytneſſe Tibulle, whiche was a poete, and alſo a greate louer, and therfore coulde not lye.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶T, ANTE M.
                  
                     TMolus, a mountayne in Lidia, wheron dyd growe great plentie of ſaffron and vynes. It is alſo a lyttell buſſhe, whiche beareth floures of ſaffron coloure.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶T ANTE O.
                  
                     TOdi, lytell byrdes, I ſuppoſe it be the byrde, whyche is callyd a tytmous.
                  
                     Toga, the common garmente of men and women, callyd a gowne. And bycauſe the Romaynes ſpecially dydde weare that garment in the tyme of peace, toga was taken for peace, as arma was for warre.
                  
                     Toga praetexta, a garment whiche the Romains dyd weare afore that they were of the age of .xvi. yeres. Afterwarde it was worne of them, whiche were in auctoritie.
                  
                     Toga polymita, a garment made with thredes of ſondrye coloures, as motleye or bauldekyn.
                  
                     Togata Comoedia, a comedye or enterlude, wherein the maners of the Romaynes, were expreſſed.
                  
                     Togata Gallia, the countrey nowe callydde Lumbardy.
                  
                     Toga candida, was a garment, whiche they dyd weare, that ſued for any great office in the citie of Rome.
                  
                     Togari, apparayled in gownes.
                  
                     Togatus, he that weareth a gowne.
                  
                     Tolerantia, ſufferance.
                  
                     Toleranter, paciently.
                  
                     Tolles, a waxynge kernell.
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        
                        ▪ Liuius.
                     Tolleno, nonis, that wherein any thynge is put or layde to be drawen vp.Vegetius. Budeus. ſometyme a buckette wherwith water is drawen vp.
                  
                     Tollenon, an engyne to drawe vppe water, whiche hath a great poiſe at the one ende
                  
                     Tolero, rare, to ſuffre, to endure, to beare, to lyue poorely, or nyghly.
                  
                     Tolerare uitam, to lyue, or to maynteyne his lyfe.
                  
                     Tolerabilis, rabile, that whiche maye ſuffre or beare.
                  
                     Tollo, ſuſtuli, ſeu tetuli, tollere, to lyfte vppe, or ſette vppe.
                  
                     Tollere clamorem, to crie oute.
                  
                     Tollere criſtas, to ſette vp the creſt, applyed to them that be proude or arrogante, & do ſtretche vp their browes with a dyſdaynfull countenaunce.
                  
                     Tolle digitum, hold vp thy fynger, confeſſe thy ſelfe vanquyſhed.
                  
                     Tollere gradum, to ſette forthe, or to marche forthe.
                  
                     Tollere, to take away. Tolle hanc patinam,
                     Plautus in milite. take away this dyſhe.
                  
                     Tollere, to haue a chylde by a woman.
                  
                     Tollere, to nouryſhe. Verum quod erit natū,
                     Plautus in Amphit. 
                     
                        
                           •
                        ollito, What ſoo euer is borne, putte it to nouryſhynge.
                  
                     Tollere, to deferre or prolonge,Plautus. 
                     Omnes tollo ex hoc die in alium diem, I put them all of from one day to an other.
                  
                     Tollere minas, to thretten or menace.
                  
                     Tolutarius, & tolutaris equus, an aumblynge horſe.
                  
                     Tolutiloquentia, a ſwyfte or faſte ſpeche.
                  
                     Tolutim, an amblynge pace.
                  
                     Tolutim loqui, to ſpeake faſte oone worde after an nother.
                  
                     Tomaculae, Tomacula, & tomacla, a certayn ſorte of pouddynges, proprelye ſwynes pouddynges.
                  
                     Tomentum, floxe, which is ſhorne of wollen cloth. alſo lockes clypped of white wolle.
                  
                     Tomices, hempen cordes, alſo colers, whiche are put on carthorſes, for hurtynge of their neckes.
                  
                     Tomos, a pece of a boke, or a warke vnperperfyte. Alſoo a citie in the countraye of Ponthus.
                  
                     Tomyris, was a noble queene of Maſſagetis in Scithia, agaynſte whom whan Cirus the great kynge of Perſia came, and hadde ſlayne her ſonne, ſhe pytchynge a fylde agaynſte hym, and of purpoſe hauing great plentie of vytayles in her pauyllyone, after a lyttell ſkyrmyſhe ſhe and her hoſt fled. And whan Cirus had a whyle folowed the chace, and blowen to the retraicte, he came to her campe, and fyndynge greate plentie of vytayle, he and his people dyd ſo moche

fyll theym ſelfee therwith, that fallynge aſlepe, they were all taken by the quene, and ſlayne, and ſhe cauſynge a great veſſell to be fylled with the bloudde of Cirus, and the Perſyans, dyd caſte his heed therinto, ſayinge, Bloode thou haſte thyrſted, and nowe drynke therof thy fylle.
                  
                     Tonarion, a certayne ſhaulme with a ſofte ſounde, on the whiche in the old time ſome oratours vſed to haue, to playe by theym, whan they pleaded, that by the tunes of the ſhalme, the oratour mought moderate and order his pronunciation.
                  
                     Tondeo, totondi, tondere, to clyp or ſheare.
                  
                     Toneſco, tonui, toneſcere, to thunder.
                  
                     Ennius.
                     
                        Tonimus, for tonamus.
                     
                  
                  
                     Tonitrus, & tonitru, & tonitruum, thunder.
                  
                     Tonitruo, are, to thunder.
                  
                     Tonitus, thunder.
                  
                     Tono, nare, to thunder, to make a greatte ſounde or noyſe, to ſpeake loude.
                  
                     Tonſae, ſhepe, which be ſhorne or clypped. alſo ores of botes or ſhyppes.
                  
                     Tonſilis, le, that which is ſhorne or clipped.
                  
                     Tonſilla, a poſte, hauynge the one ende armed with yron, whiche is pitched into the erth, to thende that ſhippes or botes may be tyed therat.
                  
                     Tonſillae plurali, a dyſeſe within the chekes and mouthe lyke to great kernels.
                  
                     Tonſi montes, hilles without woddes.
                  
                     Tonſor, et tonſtrix, tricis, he or ſhe whyche clyppeth or ſheareth.
                  
                     Tonſorius, ria, rium, pertaynynge to clyppynge.
                  
                     Tonſtrix, tricis, a woman barbar.
                  
                     Tonſtricula, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Tonſtrina, a place where they do vſe to clip or a barbers ſhoppe.
                  
                     Tonſus, a, um, ſhorne or clypped.
                  
                     Tonus, a tune or accent. alſoo the ſpace or diſtance, whiche is betwene the erthe and the moone.
                  
                     Toparcha, he that hathe the gouernaunce and charge of one onely countrey.
                  
                     Toparchia, the rule of one countray.
                  
                     Topazion, & topazius, a preciouſe ſtone of the colour of golde.
                  
                     Tophus, a kynde of ſtone, whiche is ſoone reſolued into ſande.
                  
                     Topiarium, a warke made of trees, buſhes, bryers, or herbes, for pleaſure, and contayned places to ſytte or walke in, as it is vſed nowe with boxe, eglantine, iacymine, and other lyke trees or thornes, that be flexible, or wyll be wounden.
                  
                     Topiarius, he that maketh ſuche warkes.
                  
                     Topiaria, the warke.
                  
                     Topica, warkes in that part of logike, whiche declareth the places, out of the whiche argumentes maye be inuented, that moſte proprely pertayneth to oratours.
                  
                     Topographia, the deſcription of a place, as of a countrey or citie.
                  
                     Topper, the olde wryters vſed for ſoone,Feſtus. ſhortly, or quyckely.
                  
                     Toral, & toralium, in plurali numero, toralia, euery thynge that lyeth on a bed, as ſhatis blankettes and couerlyds. In the old time it were certaine floures and ſwete herbes wounden togyther in ropes, and hanged before the place, where men dyd lye. Like as nowe they vſe in London at Mydſommer to hange afore their doores.
                  
                     Torcular, aris, & torculare, & torculū, a preſſe for wyne, ſyder, or vertiuyce.
                  
                     Torcularius, a, um, bylongynge to a preſſe.
                  
                     Toreuma, matis, & tereumatum, grauen or polyſhed warke.
                  
                     Toreutis, a grauer.
                  
                     Toreutice, ces, the crafte of grauynge.
                  
                     Tormen, minis, frettynge or tourmente in the bealy and guttes.
                  
                     Tormina, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Tormentum, tourment, or an engyn to turment men, generally all ordinance pertaynynge to warre.
                  
                     Torminoſus, he that hathe tourmentes or frettynge in his guttes.
                  
                     Tornacum, a towne callyd Tornay.
                  
                     Tornatilis, le, that whiche is tourned with a whele.
                  
                     Torniamen, may be nowe taken for a tournayment or iuſtes.
                  
                     Torno, are, to torne or warke with a whele, as tourners done.
                  
                     Tornus, the inſtrument or whele.
                  
                     Torpedo, dinis, ſlouthefulnes. alſo a fyſſhe, whiche in the takynge maketh the handes of theym that doo drawe, to be ſtonyed or deed for the tyme.
                  
                     Torpeo, & torpeſco, pui, torpere, uel torpeſcere, to be aſtonyed, or ſlowe.
                  
                     Torpor, poris, a debilitation or feblynge of mynde, an vnaptnes to do any thynge.
                  
                     Torporo, rare, to aſtonye, or make aſtonied.
                  
                     Torquatus, a rynge doue, or ſtocke doue. it is he alſo that weareth a colar or chayne.
                  
                     Torqueo, torfi, quêre, to wynde in,Vide
                           •••
                        
                      to whirle aboute lyke a whiele, to ſuſtayne or beare vp, to tourment.
                  
                     Torquere telum, to throwe a darte or iauelyn, that he runne rounde.Vergilius
                  
                  
                     Torquere ſaxa, to tourne great ſtones.Vergilius
                  
                  
                     Torquere, to ſpynne.
                  
                     Torques, a colar, chayne, or bye of gold or ſyluer, ſuche as is worne by knyghtes or eſquiers about their neckes.
                  
                     
                     Torrefacio, cere, to broyle or roſt at the fire, or by the heate of the ſonne.
                  
                     Torrens, tis, a ſtreame, that cometh downe of hylles, whiche is cauſed by moche rayne or ſnowe. Torrens, a particyple, ſygnifieth flowynge with a great ſwepe. Torrentior, more flowing, with a greatter violence.
                  
                     Torreo, riri, rere, idem quod torrefacio.
                  
                  
                     Torreſco, re, to be broilid or roſted, or dried.
                  
                     Torridae zonae, are two girdels imagined in the firmament on euery ſide of the equinoctial line, vnder whiche gyrdels the people whiche inhabyte there, are burned with the feruent heat of the ſonne, bicauſe the ſonne abideth lōgeſt in thoſe .ii. places & ar alſo named Tropicus cancri, & tropicus Capricorni,
                  
                  
                     Torridus, da, dum, dried or burned.
                  
                     Tortilis, le, that whiche is bent or bowed.
                  
                     Torris, a ſtycke of fyre.
                  
                     Tortiuum vinum, wyne of the laſte preſſe.
                  
                     Torto, tare, to tourment vehemently.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈1 paragraph〉
                        
                     
                     Tortor, toris, a tourmentour, or he that caſteth a ſtone with a ſlynge.
                  
                     Tortū, an engin, to throw great ſtones with.
                  
                     Tortuoſus, a, ū, woūdē or turned many wais.
                  
                     Tortus, ta, tum, crooked.
                  
                     Torué, toruū, torua, toruiter, ꝓprely in beholdyng ſowerly or grymly.
                  
                     Toruinus, an apparell of a womans heed.
                  
                     Torus, a bedde, it was ſomtyme made with herbes wounden togyther.
                  
                     Tori, the brawnes of the armes and leggis, or the fleſhe myxte with ſynewes.
                  
                     Toroſus, a, um, myghty or ſtronge in brawnes of the legges and armes.
                  
                     Torſio, ſionis, Theodorus, Gaza, & Longolius ſuppoſed to be a ſturgion. Paulus Iouius is of a contrary opinion.
                  
                     Torulus, a lyttell bedde.
                  
                     Toruê, ſturdyly in looke.
                  
                     Toruitas, tatia, ſturdynes.
                  
                     Toruus, ua, uum, cruel and ſturdy in loking.
                  
                     Toſtus, a, um, toſted or roſted.
                  
                     Totidem, verily ſo many, euen as many.
                  
                     Tot, as many. Toties, ſo many tymes.
                  
                     Totus, ta, tum, all, the hole, euery whyt.
                  
                     Toxicum, venym or poyſon.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶T ANTE R.
                  
                     TRabales, a certayne tourment.
                  
                     Trabalis, le, pertayning to a beame.
                  
                     Trabalis clauus, a yron pin or gret nail wherwith bemis ar made faſt to the rafters
                  
                     Trabea, a cerklet or kyrtell worn by kynges vnder theyr mantell.
                  
                     Trabiea nauit, a ſhyp made with gret bemes
                  
                     Trabs, & trabes, a beame of a houſe.
                  
                     Trachale, the ouer part of a fiſhe callid Mutex, of whom purple colour is made.
                  
                     Trachea, the weſon or pype of the lunges.
                  
                     Trachelū, the midle part of tho faſt of a ſhip
                  
                     Trachelus, the chine of a mā or beaſt, from the heed to the haunche.
                  
                     Trachida, Trachina, & Trachurus, I ſuppoſe is a banſtykle.
                  
                     Trachinia, a kynde of roſes, not perfytelyted, lyke to them, that we call french roſes.
                  
                     Traconia, a roughnes within the eie liddes.
                  
                     Traconitidis, a parte of Iudea.
                  
                     Tractabilis, treatable, that may be intreatid.
                  
                     Tractare, to handell.
                  
                     Tractim, on length, a longe tyme or ſpace.
                  
                     Tracto, tare, to intreate. Haec arte tractabat uirum, She handlid the man craftely, or of that ſorte. alſoo to vſe or exerciſe, to order or gouerne.
                  
                     Tractoriū, a windlas to draw vp heuy thīgis Tractus, us, a ſpace, a countrey.
                  
                     Trado, didi, dere, to delyuer, alſo to teache, to commytte in truſt to an other man.
                  
                     Traditio, a tradition.
                  
                     Traduco, duxi, ducere, to brynge from oone place to an other, to brynge ouer, to tranſlate oute of one language into an nother.
                  
                     Traducere tempus, to paſſe the tyme, to brynge vp or nouryſhe.
                  
                     Traduces, vynes or trees tranſlated frome place to place.
                  
                     Tragelaphus, a beaſte in parte lyke a harte, in parte lyke a gote.
                  
                     Tragemata, that whyche are commonlye callyd bankettynge dyſhes.
                  
                     Tragite, cruelly, in the maner of a tragedy.
                  
                     Tragicum tueri, to loke grymly.
                  
                     Tragicus, a wryter of tragedyes.
                  
                     Tragoedia, a tragedye, whiche is an enterlude, wherin the perſonages do repreſent ſomme hyſtorie or fable lamentable, for the crueltie and myſerye therin expreſſed.
                  
                     
                        Tragoedus,
                        Plin. 38. cap. 13.
                      he that exercyſeth ſome part in a tragedye.
                  
                     Tragonis, ſiue Tragion, a tree growynge in Candy, lyke to Iunyper, the iuyce wherof is lyke to mylke, and waxethe thycke lyke gumme.
                  
                     Tragum, is lyke a tyzan made of wheate, it is alſo a fyſhers nette callyd a dragge.
                  
                     Tragonia, an herbe nowe callid Taragon, late ſene in this realme, whiche hath a taſt lyke gynger: whiche herbe layde to the lefte ſyde, conſumeth the ſplene.
                  
                     Tragopa, a byrde in Ethiopia, greatter thā an egle, & hath on his hed horne like a gote.
                  
                     Tragopogus, a fyſhe callyd a barbyll.
                  
                     Tragoriganon, an herbe whiche I ſuppoſe, is callyd Peny royalle, growyng wylde.
                  
                     Tragula, a iauelyn with a barbyd heed.
                  
                     Traguriū, an ile in the ſee callyd Hadriaticū
                     
                     ▪
                  
                  
                     Trigon, is a fyſhe callyd a thornebacke.
                  
                     
                     Tragulam inijcere, to practiſe deceyte.
                  
                     Traha, a dray or ſlyd drawen wtout wheles.
                  
                     Trahax, acis, a couetous perſone, the whiche draweth all thynge vnto hym.
                  
                     Vergilius.
                     Trahere diem, noctem, tempus, to paſſe the day, the nyghte, or the tyme.
                  
                     Plautus in trinammo Cic 
                           ••
                        te
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         ir
                           •
                        t in exilium.
                     Trahere, to tary. At
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         egomet me adeo cumillis una ibidem traho, And I my ſelfe taryed as longe with them. Trahere, to liue. Et uosut turā tranquillā
                        
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         fortunā traheretis, mea perfeci uigilantiā. And by my vygilancy I brought to paſſe, that ye ſhulde lyue in a ſure and quiete proſperitie.
                  
                     Traho, xi, here, to draw, to leade, to deferre, or delay, to extend, to remoue, to prolong.
                  
                     Traiicto, reci, ijcete, to leade ouer, to carye ouer, to brynge ouer, to ſtryke through.
                  
                     Traiectitia pecunia, money caried ouer ye ſee
                  
                     
                        Tra
                              •
                           ectus, tus,
                      a paſſage. Traiectio, idem.
                  
                  
                     Trallis, a citie in Lidis, an other in Phrigia.
                  
                     Trallianus, a man of that citie.
                  
                     Tralucidus, da, dum, clere, that a man maye loke through.
                  
                     Trama, an vnder garment.
                  
                     Trames, mitis, a croſſe waye.
                  
                     Trano, nare, to ſwymme ouer.
                  
                     Tranato, tare, to ſwymme ouer.
                  
                     Tranquille, ſoftely without noyſe.
                  
                     Tranquillitas, tranquillitie, reſt, quyetenes.
                  
                     Tranquillo, lare, to make quiete.
                  
                     Tranquillus, la, lum, quiete, in reſt, peaſible.
                  
                     Tranquillum eſt, it is fayre wether.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈1 paragraph〉
                        
                     
                     Tranquillus locus, a good place to reſte in, a place of quietenes.
                  
                     Trans, ouer, from one place to an other.
                  
                     Tranſactio, an agrement vpon cēmunicatiō.
                  
                     Tranſactus, a, ū, paſſed, lōge agone, achiued.
                  
                     Tranſalpina Gallia, Fraunce on this ſyde the mountaynes.
                  
                     Trāſalpinus, a, ū, ouer the moūtains of alpes
                  
                     Tranſcendo, dere, to go ouer, to excede.
                  
                     Tranſcindo, ſcidi, ſcindere, to cut on ſonder.
                  
                     Vergilius.
                     Tranſcribere, is to giue or deliuer. Turne tot incaſſum fuſos patiere labores, Et tua Dardaneis trāſcribi ſceptra colonis? Wilt thou Turnus ſuffre thy labours to be loſt, & thy realm to be giuen to the inhabytantes of Troy?
                  
                     Agretius.
                     Tranſcribere, the tranſpoſition of a poſſeſſion from one to an other.
                  
                     Tranſcribo, pſi, bere, to write out of a copie, ſometyme to tranſlate.
                  
                     Tranſcurro, rere, to runne forthe.
                  
                     Tranſcurrit aeſtas, the ſommer is paſſed.
                  
                     Tranſcurſus, us, a courſe. In tranſcurſu, In paſſynge forthe.
                  
                     Tranſenna, a loupe to loke out at. alſo a windowe, or caſement. alſoo a rope ſtretched out, a ſnare or trappe.
                  
                     Tranſeo, ſiui, & ſii, ſire, to go forthe, to paſſe euer, to paſſe. Tranſire domum, to go home.
                  
                     Tranſeunter, paſſynge by or ouer.
                  
                     Transfero, tuli, ferre, to cary or bryng from one place to an other, to tranſlate from one langage to an other, or from ones poſſeſſiō to an others. Tranſlatus, a, ū, the participle.
                  
                     Transfigo, xi, gere, to thruſte through.
                  
                     Transfuga, he that departeth from his own people or capytayne vnto the parte of the ennemies, or of theym that are ſuſpected in tyme of truce.
                  
                     Transfodio, dere, to dygge through.
                  
                     Transfoſſus, a, ū, digged or ſtriken through.
                  
                     Transfiguro, rare, to tranſfourme, to turne into an nother fygure.
                  
                     Transfretatio, a paſſage ouer the ſee.
                  
                     Transfreto, tare, to paſſe ouer the ſee.
                  
                     Transfugere ad hoſtes, is to goo and yelde hym to the contrary parte.
                  
                     Transfugium, an yeldynge to ennemies.
                  
                     Transfulgeo, re, to ſhyne through.
                  
                     Transfundere, to tranſlate frome one to an other. Libentius omnes meas laudes (ſi modo ſint aliquae meae laudes) ad te transfuderim,
                     Ci. Dol
                           •
                        . I haue more wyllyngly tourned my prayſe, (yf I haue any prayſe) vnto you.
                  
                     Transfugio, gere, to fle from place to place.
                  
                     Transfundo, fudi, fundere, to poure oute of one veſſell into an nother.
                  
                     Transgredior, deris, di, to paſſe or go ouer or beyonde, to excede, to tranſgreſſe a law or commaundemente.
                  
                     Transgreſsio, is a figure of retorike, where a mā leaueth the principal matter, & entreth into an other thing, & after returneth to his matter. We cōmonly call it, a digreſſion.
                  
                     Transgreſſus, us, a paſſing ouer the ſee.
                  
                     Tranſigere uiram, to paſſe his or their lyfe.Saluſt. Plaut. in Amphit Terent. in Andria.
                  
                  
                     Tranſigere, is alſo to perfourme.
                  
                     Tranſigo, egi, igere, to dryue furth, to treate a mater, to agree or condeſcende, or come to a point: as hapneth betwene men, which do contend for ſomwhat.
                  
                     Tranſilio, ſiliui, & ſilii, ire, to leape ouer.
                  
                     Tranſitio, ſitus, a paſſing ouer, a going forth.
                  
                     Tranſitorius, a, ū, that which ſhortly paſſeth.
                  
                     Translatio, a trāſlation, or brynging frō one place to another. Trāſle go, ere, to rede ouer
                  
                     Tranſluceo, cere, to ſhyne through.
                  
                     Transmarinus, na, um, that whiche cōmeth from beyonde the ſe.
                  
                     Transmigratio, a departinge or goynge frō one place to dwell in another.
                  
                     Tranſmigro, grare, to go further, to dwell further of, to tranſpoſe my dwellynge.
                  
                     Trāſmiſsio, a going or ſēding further or ouer
                  
                     Tranſmittere mare, to paſſe ouer the ſee.Plin. ep
                           ••
                         173. Epiſt. 183. Epiſt. 16
                  
                  
                     Tranſmittere tempus, to paſſe the tyme.
                  
                     Tranſmittere diſcrimen, to eſcape a danger.
                  
                     Tranſmitto, miſi, mittere, to ſende from one

place to an other, to go or runne quickly, to ſend ſhortly or quickly to paſſe ouer a water
                  
                     Tranſmoueo, êre, to remoue frō one place to an other. Tranſnato, are, to ſwym ouer.
                  
                     Sueton. de claris grā
                        maticis.
                     Tranſnomino, nare, to chaunge his name.
                  
                     Tranſpareo, rêre, to be ſene thrugh a thinge.
                  
                     Tranſpicio, ſpexi, ſpicere, to loke through.
                  
                     Plautus in mercator.
                     Trāſquietus, a, ū, in quiet or reſt frō hēsforth
                  
                     Tranſtra, tranſoms which do go ouerwhart a houſe▪ alſo the ſeates, wheron they do ſyt, whiche do rowe in a ſhyppe or bote.
                  
                     Tranſtyberinus, rina, num, that whiche is or dwelleth beyonde the ryuer of Tyber.
                  
                     Tranſuado, are, & trauſuador, ari, to waade ouer a ſhalowe place of a ryuer.
                  
                     Tranſueho, uexi, uehere, to carye ouer.
                  
                     Tranſuerbero, are, to ſtryke through.
                  
                     Tranſuerſum agere, to tourne haſtily away from the purpoſe which a man went about.
                  
                     Tranſuerſum unguem non diſcedere, not to go a nayle bredth from it. A prouerbe ſignifieng a litle diſtance. Trāſuerſū digitū, idē.
                  
                  
                     Tranſuerſus, a, um, ouerthwart, not ſtraight or direct. Tranſuerto, tere, to turne away, or out of the right facion or way.
                  
                     Tranſuideo, dère, to ſe through a clere thīg.
                  
                     Plautus in 
                           •
                        pt.
                     Tranſulto, tare, to leape ouer.
                  
                     Tranſumptū, that which is writē out of a record, and approued vnder the kinges ſeale, or the ſygnynge of the iudge. In the common lawe they calle it an exemplifycation. Some do alſo call it a Tranſumpte.
                  
                     Tranſumptio, a figure callid alſo Metalepſis, wherby one ſignification is gathered of an other: as of Nox atra, a blacke nyghte, is gathered Nox tenebricoſa, a darke nyght.
                  
                     Tranſuolo, are, to flye ouer, or leape ouer. or to go or runne beyonde a place.
                  
                     Tranſumo, umpſi, ſumere, to take of or from an nother, to remeue from one to an other
                  
                     Tranſuo, ere, to ſowe through.
                  
                     Trapetes, petum, a myl wherin oyle is made
                  
                     Trapeza, a table, wheron an exchāger doth tel money. Trapezita, an exchāger or bāker
                  
                     Trapezus, zuntis, a citie in the countrey of Pontus, Trapezuntius, a man of that citie.
                  
                     Feſtus
                     Trapit, olde writers vſed for vertit.
                  
                     Traſton, a certain roſine or gumme, the beſt of that which is callyd gummihamoniacum.
                  
                  
                     Traulius, he that ſpekith with gret difficulti
                  
                     Trebellicū vinum, ſeu Trebulanū uinum, wine growing about the riuer of Trebia, in Lū
                     bardye, the Italions do call it Trebiana.
                  
                     Trebula, an olde towne nygh to Rome.
                  
                     Trebulani, men of that towne.
                  
                     Treceni, thre hūdred. Trecēti, & trecentū, idē
                     
                  
                  
                     Trecentenus, na, num, the thre hundreth.
                  
                     Trecenteſimus, ma, mum, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Trecenties, three hundred tymes.
                  
                     Tredecim, thyrtene.
                  
                     Tremebundus, he that trembleth moche.
                  
                     Tremefacio, feci, cere, to make to tremble or quake. Tremiſco, ſcere, to tremble.
                  
                     Tremo, ere, to quake as one doth in a feuer. alſo to feare. Tremulus, he that quaketh for feare. Tremor, oris, quakyng, alſo feare.
                  
                     Trepidatio, tremblyng, feare.
                  
                     Trepidanter, fearefully, tremblyng.
                  
                     Trepido, dare, to feare, to make haſte.
                  
                     Trepidus, da, dum, fearful, alſo he that doth a thing haſtily. Trepōdo, thre poūd weight.
                  
                     Tres, thre. Treſsis, thre pounde.
                  
                     Treueris, a citie in Germany callid Tryre.
                  
                     Treueri, people callyd Treues.
                  
                     Triambi, were thre which ſpake togither in a tragedy. Triangularis, re, hauīg .iii. corners
                  
                     Triangulus, la, lum, thre cornerde,
                  
                     Triarchus, a maſter of a ſhyp with .iii. tops.
                  
                     Triarij, ſoudiors that be ſet alway in the rere warde, which were the ſtrongeſt men, they faught ſtāding, bowing their knies, as they wold rather dy thā remeue frō their places
                  
                     Triatrus, a feſtiuall day kept after the third Idus of euery moneth.
                  
                     Tribaces, they which be worne with ſtripes
                  
                     Tribrachus, a fote in meter of .iii. ſhort ſillables. Tribula, & tribulum, a flayle or other lyke thing, wherwith corne is threſhed.
                  
                     Tribulis, a kynneſman that commeth of the ſame ſtocke that I do.
                  
                     Tribulor, aris, ari, to be troubled with heuynes of mynde. Tribulus, a bremble.
                  
                     Tribunal, the place where a Iudge ſytteth in iudgement.
                  
                     Tribunatus, the office or dignite of a tribune
                  
                     Tribunus, was an offycer amonge the Romains, hauinge chiefe iurisdiction amonge the communes, alſo a capytaine in warres, hauynge auctoritie ouer ſoudiours, to view and ſee that they were welle armed and exercyſed. Tribunitius, a, um, pertaynynge to the Tribunes.
                  
                     Tribuo, buere, to gyue, ſommetyme to ſette moche by. Alſo to fauour.
                  
                     Tribus, bus, a part of the people, ſomtime diuided into thre partis. It ſemeth that it was ſomtime taken for a family or particular iuriſdiction among the people, and therof cometh tribulis. And therfore the partition of the people of Iſrael were into .xii. Tribus. hereof be ſondry opinions. rede Calepine.
                  
                     Tributarius, he that payeth tribute.
                  
                     Tributim, by ſondrye families or partes of the people. Tributum, tribute.
                  
                     Tricae, fethers in the fete of chykens & pygeons, whiche do let them to go, and therfore all thinges which do let a man ar callid Tricae. Vide extrico, & intrico.
                  
                  
                     
                     Tricaptum, a garment, whiche was ſo fyne, that it ſemed to be made of ſmalle heares.
                  
                     Tricenus, na, num, cometh of triginta, thirtie. it is ſometyme taken for tricentenum.
                  
                  
                     Tricentuplus, a, um, thre hundred folde.
                  
                     Triceps, cipitis, hauynge thre heedes.
                  
                     
                        Tricerbe
                              •
                           us,
                      a great hell hounde.
                  
                     Trichiae, be fyſhes callyd Sardynes.
                  
                     Trichila, a veſſell hauynge thre lauers, oute of the whiche water is poured.
                  
                     Trichomanes, an herbe callid Maidenhear.
                  
                     Triclinium, a parlor to ſup in, wherin were thre tables and thre beddes. For in the old tyme they vſed to lye, whan the
                        •
                      dyd eate.
                  
                     Triclinarius, the ſeruaunt, which doth ſerue in the parlour.
                  
                     Triclinarius, a, um, pertaynynge to the parlour or dynynge chaumber.
                  
                     Triclinarium, idem quod triclinium.
                  
                  
                     Tricôlon, hauynge thre membres.
                  
                     Tricones, men hauynge ſoure couuntenances, and that be neuer or ſeldome ſene to laugh. Alſo pykers of quarels.
                  
                     Tricongius, was oone whiche dranke or he reſted, thre meſures of wine, callid congii, whiche as I ſuppoſe, was thre galons and a pynt of our wyne meſure. wherfore Tiberius the Emperoure promoted hym to honour, and at the laſt made hym Conſul of Rome.
                  
                     Tricornium, that whiche hath thre hornes.
                  
                     Tricubitalis, le, of thre cubytes in meaſure.
                  
                     Tricubitus, ta, tum, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Tricus, a ſtone, which although it be black yet ſheweth he at the roote blacke, in the myddell ſanguyne, at the toppe whyte.
                  
                     Tridacna, an oyſter ſo greate, that a manne muſt make of hym thre morſels.
                  
                     
                        Tridens, 
                              •
                           is,
                      euery inſtrument, toole, or wepon, hauynge thre tethe.
                  
                     Triduanus, a, um, of thre days continuance.
                  
                     Triduum, the ſpace of thre dayes.
                  
                     Triennalis, le, of thre yeres.
                  
                     Triennium, the ſpace of thre yeres.
                  
                     Triennis, ne, thre yeres olde.
                  
                     Triens, tis, a coyne whiche is the third part of a pounde, it is alſo a cuppe cuntaynyng that poyſe.
                  
                     Trientalis herba, an herbe, whiche hath leaues as great as the coyne callyd triens.
                  
                     Triental, a veſſel containing the thirde part of that meſure, which was named Sextariū.
                  
                  
                     Trierarclius, the capytain of a ſhyppe, whiche is callyd trieris.
                  
                  
                     Trieris, a greate ſhyppe, whiche hathe in it thre orders of ſeates for the rowers.
                  
                     
                        Trietericus, ca, cum, for triennalis, that whiche hapneth to be done euery thirde yere
                  
                     Trieteris, the ſpace of thre yeres.
                  
                     Trifariā, in .iii. partes, or thre maner of wais.
                  
                     Trifarius, a, um, of the ſame ſignification.
                  
                     Trifaux, faucis, hauynge thre chekes.
                  
                     Trifax, & triforum, a weapon of thre cubytes longe.
                  
                     Trifer, fera, rum, that which bryngeth frute thryſe. Triferus, a, um, idem.
                  
                  
                     Trifera, is a medycyne and other delycate ſpyces, to expulſe eaſily corrupt humours
                  
                     Trifidus, da, dum, dyuided into thre partes.
                  
                     Trifinium, the buttyng of thre feldes, whiche ioyne togyther.
                  
                     Trifolium, maye be taken for the generalle name of all herbes hauynge thre leues. Al be it there is one herbe callid ſo proprely.
                  
                     Trifur, furis, more than a thefe, three tymes wars than a thefe. Semblably tri, ioyned with any thyng, ſignifieth more.
                  
                     Triga, a carte drawen with thre horſes.
                  
                     Trigarium, a certain courſe with ſuch cartis
                  
                     Trigamus, he whiche hathe or hath hadde three wyues.
                  
                     Trigarius, a place by campū Martiū, at Rome
                  
                     Trigemini, thre chyldern at one byrthe.
                  
                     Trigeminus, na, num, idem quod tres, three.Columel. 3. cap. 19.
                  
                  
                     Trigemmis, a plant or ſlyppe hauynge thre ioyntes and thre buddes.
                  
                     Trigeſimus, ma, mum, the thirtieth.
                  
                     Trigeſies, thyrty tymes. Triginta, thirty.
                  
                     Trigla, a fyſhe, I ſuppoſe it to be a ſore mullette, ſuche as are taken in Deuonſhyre and in Cornewall.
                  
                     Trigles, a ſtone whiche is of the colour of a ſoore Mullet.
                  
                     Trigo gare, to bynde or to drawe a thynge clo
                        •
                     e togyther.
                  
                     Trigon, gonis, a balle. alſo a turtyll.
                  
                     Trigonia, the thirde age.
                  
                     Trigonalis, le, that whiche is thre cornerde, hauyng thre lynes.
                  
                     Trigonus, na, num, thre cornerde.
                  
                     Trilinguis, he that ſpeaketh thre langages.
                  
                     Trilix, licis, a garmēt wt thre diuers thredis.
                  
                     Trimatus, tus, the tyme of thre yeres.
                  
                     Trimembris, bre, hauyng thre members.
                  
                     Trimeſtris, tre, of thre monethes.
                  
                     Trimetrum, a verſe of thre fete.
                  
                     Trimma, a wyne made with ſpices, as that whiche is callyd ypocras.
                  
                     Trimorion, is named of .iii. ſignes in heuen, whiche contayne .lxxxx. degrees or porcions. wherfore Timorion, is in calculation of natiuities from the time of the birth or cōception, the .lxxx. & tenth part or degree.
                  
                     Trimus, ma, mum, of thre yeres.
                  
                     Trimulus, the diminutiue of Trimus.
                  
                  
                     Trimyxos, a lampe or candellſtycke, bearynge thre lyghtes.
                  
                     Trinacris, & trinacria, the contrey of Sicile.
                  
                     
                     Trinepos, potis, he which is thre diſcentes lyneall from my chyldes chylde.
                  
                     Trineptis, a woman in lyke degree of blode as trinepos is.
                  
                     Trinitas, trinitie, the number of thre.
                  
                     Trinoxius, a, um, three nyghtes.
                  
                     Trinundinum, the thirde faire or markette, whiche was wont to be proclaimed, to the intent that it ſhuld be the better remēbrid.
                  
                     Trinus, na, num, thre.
                  
                     Trioboli homo, & triobolaris, a man worthe thre halfe pens, of lyttell value.
                  
                     Triobolus, thre halfe pens, or worthe three halfe pens.
                  
                     Triones, plough oxen. Alſoo they be ſeuen ſterres beinge in the northe.
                  
                     Triophthalmus, a lyttell ſtone, hauynge in hym the fygure of thre eyen.
                  
                     Triorchis, a kynde of hawkes, hauynge three ſtoones.
                  
                     Triparcus, a greatte nygarde.
                  
                     Tripartior, tiri, to dyuide into thre partes.
                  
                     Tripartito, an Aduerbe, ſygnyfyenge in three partis.
                  
                     Tripartitus, ta, tum, dyuided in thre partis.
                  
                     Tripedaneus, a, um, hauyng thre fete.
                  
                     Tripes, pedis, with thre feete.
                  
                     Trifoliū, thre leaued graſſe. Triphillon, idē.
                  
                  
                     Triplaris, thryſe as moche.
                  
                     Triplex, plicis, three folde, treble, a table with thre leaues.
                  
                     Triplicitas, treble.
                  
                     Tripliciter, three folde·
                  
                     Triplico, are, to do or fold a thing .iii. times.
                  
                     Triplium, a veſſell lyke a baſkette.
                  
                     Triplus, a, um, treble.
                  
                     Tripolis, a countray in Affrica, an other in Syria, the thyrde in Phenicia.
                  
                     Tripolium, an herbe.
                  
                     Tripondium, thre pounde weight.
                  
                     Tripontium, a towne in Vmbria in Italy, ſo callyd bycauſe it hath thre brydges.
                  
                     Triptolemus, a man whiche founde the vſe of grayne in the countray of Athenes.
                  
                     Tripudium, daunſynge.
                  
                     Tripus, podis, euery thynge that hath three feete. Tripodes, were alſoo tables in the temple of Apollo, of golde.
                  
                     Triquetra, a fygure three cornerde. It was alſo a name of the Ile of Sicile.
                  
                     Triquetrus, tra, trum, hauynge thre corners.
                  
                     Triremis, a galeye.
                  
                     Tris, three or thryſe.
                  
                     Triſmegiſtus, the name of Mercurius, in latyn Ter maximus.
                  
                  
                     Triſtegum, a chamber in the third ſtorye or floore of a houſe.
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        irtius in cōmentar
                           •
                        
                     
                     Triſtimonia, heuyneſſe or ſorowe.
                  
                     Triſsis, thre pounde weight.
                  
                     Triſtis, is alſo taken for doctus, Iudex triſtis & integer, A iudge welle lerned and of a good conſcience.
                  
                     Triſtis, agaynſte his wyll, not well content.Terent. in Eunucho.
                  
                  
                     Triſtitia, ſorowe, or heuynes.
                  
                     Triſtis, ſorowfull, heuy, alſo cruelle, of moche grauitie, bytter, more difficile or hard▪ ſometyme angry.
                  
                     Triſto, tare, to make heuy or ſorowfull.
                  
                     Triſulcus, ca, cum, hauynge thre edges.
                  
                     Triſulcū telū, a weapon hauyng thre edges.
                  
                     Triſyllabus, ba, bum, hauyng thre ſillables.
                  
                     Tritauia, my great grandfathers mother.
                  
                     Tritauus, my great grandfathers father.
                  
                     Tritheles, an herbe whiche hathe thryſe in the yere flowres.
                  
                     Triticeus, a, um, of wheate.
                  
                     Triticum, wheate.
                  
                     Trito, tare, to breake or beate ſmalle.
                  
                     Triton, one callyd god of the ſee.
                  
                     Tritonia, the name of Minerua.
                  
                     Trituro, rare, to threſhe corne.
                  
                     Tritura, threſhynge. Trituratio, idem.
                  
                  
                     Tritus, ta, tum, worne.
                  
                     Triueneſica, a great ſorcereſſe.
                  
                     Triuia, a name of Diana.
                  
                     Triuialis, le, commune or of ſmalle eſtimation vſed or taught in hyghe wayes, alſoo rude, not elegant.
                  
                     Triuialis lingua, a homely forme of ſpeche.
                  
                     Triuium, where ways do mete, alſo a place where commune recourſe of people is.
                  
                     Triuialiter, communely, in the vulgare or homely facyon.
                  
                     Trium literarum homo, was ſpoken in ſcorn of hym, that wolde ſeeme to be a gentylle man, where he was none, whyche worde was made by this occaſyon, that amonge the olde Romaynes gentylle men vſyd to wryte theyr names with three letters, as Q, F, M, for Quintus Fabius Maximus. Alſo this prouerbe was ſpoken of them, whiche were theues, bycauſe that Fur, contayned but thre letters.
                  
                     Triumphalis, le, belongyyng to triumphes.
                  
                     Triumphator, he that tryumpheth or hathe triumphed for vaynquiſhyng his enmyes.
                  
                     Triumphalis uir, he that hath triumphed.
                  
                     Triumphatus, ta, tum, of the whiche oone hath tryumphed.
                  
                     Triumphatus, tus, a triumph. Triūphatio, idē.
                  
                  
                     Triūpho, are, to triūph, to reioice excedīgly
                  
                     Triumphus, a triumph, whiche is a ſolemne pompe or ceremonie, where a prince, a cō
                     ſul or principal capitayn of an armye, hath had vyctorie of the ennemies of his countray, & therfore is brought home & receyued with al reioycing & honor that may be deuiſed of the people. The order & forme

therof ye may ſe in Titus Liuius, Apianus, and Iulius Capitolinus.
                  
                     Triumuir, one of theym whyche is in anye office, wherof be thre in like auctorite.
                  
                     Trium uiralis, le, pertaynynge to an office or auctoritie, wherin be thre perſones.
                  
                     Triumuiratus, is an offyce in the publyque weale, wherin thre men haue equall iurisdiction togyther. Triumuiratus, the office or auctoritie of triumuit.
                  
                  
                     Triuncis, & triuncium, thre ounce weight.
                  
                     Trixalis, a worme lyke to that which is callyd Locuſta, but he hath no wynges.
                  
                     Troas, adis, the citie of Troy, and the coū
                     trey aboute it callyd the laſſe Phrigia.
                  
                     Trochaeus, a foote in meter, whiche is of two longe ſyllables, and one ſhorte.
                  
                     Trochilos, a lyttell byrde, whiche is callyd kynge of byrdes.
                  
                     Trochiſcus, a lyttell whele. Alſoo trochiſci, be of phiſitians callyd, lyttell balles flatte at bothe endes, whiche be made of ſondry poulders.
                  
                     Trochum, a certayne ſtoole or chaire, whiche wyll be tourned aboute.
                  
                     Trochus, a top, wherwith childern do play.
                  
                     Troclea, & trochalea, a poley wherin ye cord rūneth, wherby any thynge is drawen vp. it is alſo the gyn, whiche is callid a crane.
                  
                     Troezene, a citie in the parte of Grece, callyd Peloponeſus. It is alſo a countraye in the laſſe Aſia.
                  
                     Troglotidae, people in Ethiopia.
                  
                     Troia, the citie of Troy. alſo the countrey wherin Troye ſtode.
                  
                     Troianus, na, num, of Troye.
                  
                     Troianus ludus, was a playe of chylderne on horſebacke.
                  
                     
                        Troicus, ca, cum, for troianus.
                     
                  
                  
                     Troiugena, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Troius, a, um, of Troye.
                  
                     Tropeus, he that dothe a ſhrewde tourne, and runneth away whan he hath done.
                  
                     Trophaeum, was a marke or token of tymber or ſtone, ſette in the place where enemyes were vanquyſhed or put to flyghte, ſometyme it is taken for vyctorie.
                  
                     Tropicé, fyguratiuely.
                  
                     Tropice, ces, a kynde of bulle ruſſhes, the ſede wherof wyll make one to ſlepe.
                  
                     Tropicus, ca, cum, fyguratiue.
                  
                     Tropei uenti, wyndes, whyche doo comme from the ſee.
                  
                     Tropologia, a figuratiue ſpeakynge.
                  
                     Tropus, a fygure, a maner or facion, an alteracion of a worde or ſentence from his propre ſignification.
                  
                     Tros, troos aut trois, a Troyane. alſoo the name of a kynge of Troianes.
                  
                     Troſſulum, a citie in Italye.
                  
                     Troſſulus, in the olde tyme was taken for a horſman or man of armes. It is alſo a perſon delycate, well fedde or fleſhy.
                  
                     Troximi, grapes to be eaten.
                  
                     Trua, idem quod trulla.
                  
                  
                     Trucido, dare, to ſlee cruelly.
                  
                     Trucidatrix, ſhe that kylleth one.
                  
                     Truciter, cruelly.
                  
                     Truculentè, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Trucitas, crueltie.
                  
                     Truculentia, crueltie.
                  
                     Truculentius, more cruelly.
                  
                     Truculentiſsimé, moſte cruelly.
                  
                     Truculentitas, idem quod truculentia.
                  
                  
                     Truculentus, cruelle in countenaunces or menaces.
                  
                     Trudo, truſi, trudere, to thruſte oute with vyolence.
                  
                     Truella, a veſſel wherwith water is throwē into the ſynke.
                  
                     Trulla, wherin meate is put whan it is roſte or ſodden. It is alſoo a pyſſepotte, of ſomme it is taken for a great cuppe, brode and deepe, ſuche as greatte maſers were wonte to be.
                  
                     Trulla, a trewell, wherwith maſons, tylers, and pariettours do lay morter.
                  
                     Trulleum, a bolle.
                  
                     Truncatio, a cuttynge in pieces.
                  
                     Truncatus, ta, tum, cut in pieces.
                  
                     Truncator, & truncatrix, he or ſhe that cutteth in pieces.
                  
                     Trunco, are, to cutte of.
                  
                     Truncus, a piece cutte of from the reſydue ſpecially of a tree.
                  
                     Truncus, a, um, cutte of.
                  
                     Truo, onis, a byrde callyd alſo Onacratalus, and is lyke to a ſwanne.
                  
                     Truſatilis, le, that whiche maye be tourned and dryuen about with a mans hande.
                  
                     Truſatiles molae, a querne, ſuche as malte is grounde in, or muſtarde is made in, and is tourned with ones hande.
                  
                     Trutina, a wayenge balance. ſometyme it is taken for iudgement.
                  
                     Trutino, nare, to waye or examyne.
                  
                     Trux, trucis, cruell, horryble.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶T ANTE V.
                  
                     TV, tui, tis, tibi, thou, of the, to the.
                  
                     Tuatim, after thy facyon or cuſtome.
                  
                     Tuba ductilis, a braſon trumpette.
                  
                     Tuba, a trumpette.
                  
                     Tuber, beris, a puffe growyng on the groūd lyke a muſheron or ſpunge. It is alſoo generally euery ſwellynge in a mans bodye or vyſage. It is alſoo in a tree lyke to a

greatte knotte.
                  
                     Tubercula, a lyttell ſwellynge or puſhe.
                  
                     Tubero, are, to ſwelle.
                  
                     Tubicen, cinis, a trumpettour.
                  
                     Tubulus, a lyttell pype, wherin water runneth from a ſprynge. it is alſo a riede.
                  
                     Tubus, a pype, wherin water is conuayed to a cundyte.
                  
                     Tuburcinor, aris, ari, to eate haſtily.
                  
                     Tubus, & tubulus, the pype of a cundyte. it was alſo a thynge, wherewith they made walles hote, before there were chymneis.
                  
                     Tucetum, a meate made with choppid fleſhe lyke to a gigot or alowe.
                  
                     Tudertum, a citie in Italye.
                  
                     Tudicula, a ladell, a pryntynge yron, wherwith veſſell is marked.
                  
                     Tudiculo, are, to ſteere, to prynte a marke.
                  
                     Tuditantes, they that trauayle in buſyneſſe.
                  
                     Tuditanus, the name of a man, ſo callyd bycauſe he had a heed as bygge as a betyll.
                  
                     Tuditis, a mallette.
                  
                     Tudito, tare, to labour for aduantage.
                  
                     Tuor, êris, eri, to defende. alſoo Tueor, túeris, to ſee.
                  
                     Tugurium, a houſe of huſbandry.
                  
                     Tuguriolum, a cotage.
                  
                     
                        
                           ••
                        ſt. pom.
                     Tu ipſe, thou thy ſelfe.
                  
                     Tulit, he broughte.
                  
                     Feſtus.
                     Tullii, ſome ſuppoſe them to be ryuers, ſom flowinges of bloudde out of ſondry membres or ioyntes.
                  
                     Saluſt.
                     Tullianum, a dungeon within the common pryſon of Rome.
                  
                     Tum, than, whan he gothe before cum, it ſygnifieth as welle.
                  
                     Tumba, a holowe place in the grounde, a ſepulchre.
                  
                     Tumdemum, fynally.
                  
                     Tumefacio, feci, to make to ſwelle.
                  
                     Tumeo, & tumeſco, ſcere, to ſwelle.
                  
                     Tumet, thou thy ſelfe.
                  
                     Tumidus, da, dum, ſwollen.
                  
                     Tumor, ris, ſwellynge.
                  
                     Tumulo, are, to make the grounde holowe, to burye.
                  
                     Tumulor, ari, to be buryed.
                  
                     Tumultuare, in haſte, withoute moche aduyſemente.
                  
                     Tumultuarius, a, um, that whyche is doone without aduyſement, or in haſte.
                  
                     Tumultuo, are, to make rumour.
                  
                     Tumultuoſè, troublouſly, or without ſtudy.
                  
                     Tumultuoſus, a, um, troublous, or makynge rumoure.
                  
                     Tumultus, tus, a rumour.
                  
                     Tumulus, a lyttell hylle or barowe, ſommetyme a tombe.
                  
                     Tunc, thanne.
                  
                     Tunc temporis, at that tyme.
                  
                     Tundo, tutudi, tundere, to ſmyte, to braye or beate as in a mortar.
                  
                     Tunetū, a citie in Affrica callid now Tuniſe.
                  
                     Tungo, gere, olde writers vſed for Noſco, noſce, to knowe.
                  
                     Tunica, a iackette.
                  
                     Tunica pallia propior, my iackette is nerer than my gown. a prouerbe applyed where we wyll ſignifie that all frendes are not to be lyke eſtemed or made of.
                  
                     Tunico, care, to put on a iackette.
                  
                     Tunicatus, he that weareth a iackette.
                  
                     Tuopte ingenio, of thyne owne wytte.
                  
                     Tuor, eri, to beholde, all be hit that worde is not in vſe.
                  
                     Turarius, a ſtrete at Rome.
                  
                     Turbatio, trouble.
                  
                     Turba, a multitude or aſſemblye of people. Quid illec turba eſt? nūnam ego perij?
                     Terent. in Eunucho. Terent. in Heautont, What a multitude is yonder? am not I vndoone for euer? Alſo it ſignifieth trouble. Propter eam haec turba at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         abitio euenit, For hyr ſake is all this trouble or diſſenſion.
                  
                     Turbaſis, ſterche.
                  
                     Turbella, a lyttell trouble.
                  
                     Turbidé, troublouſely.
                  
                     Turbidus, troublous, not clere.
                  
                     Turbinatus, ta, tum, rounde and ſharpe, lyke a toppe.
                  
                     Turbino, nare, to make ſharpe at the ende.
                  
                     Turbiſtum, is a thynge myxte with the lycour, wherwith woulle is dyed, which maketh the dye to ſynke into the woull, wherby the colour is made perfyte.
                  
                     Turbo, bare, to trouble, to ſtere.Vide com.
                  
                  
                     Turbo, binis, a boyſtouſe wynde, whyche dothe blowe downe trees and houſes, alſo a toppe, wherwith chyldern do play. It is generally all thynge, whiche is round and brode aboue, and ſharpe benethe.
                  
                     Turbulentia, trouble.
                  
                     Turbulentus, troublous, angry, full of contention.
                  
                     Turdetania, a contray now callid Granado.
                  
                     Turdetani, & turduli, peple of that contray.
                  
                     Turdus, a byrde, whiche is delycate in eatynge, a thruſtell or blacke byrde, alſoo a fyſhe callyd an hadocke.
                  
                     Turgeo, êre, & turgeſco, ſcere, to be ſwollen.
                  
                     Turgidilus, la, lum, ſommewhat ſwollen or bollyd oute.
                  
                     Turgidus, da, dum, ſwollen.
                  
                     Turiones, the tendrelles of trees.
                  
                     Turma, a companye of ſouldiours, contaynynge .xxxii. horſemen.
                  
                     Turmatim, in order of battayle.
                  
                     Turpis, pe, fowle, diſhoneſte, cruelle.Vergilius. Alſoo greatte.
                  
                     
                     Turpiter, ſhamefully, diſhoneſtly.
                  
                     Turpiſsimé, moſt ſhamefully or diſhoneſtly.
                  
                     Turpitudo, diſhoneſtie, vyllany, deformitie, ſometyme rebuke.
                  
                     Turpo, pare, to defyle, dyſhoneſt, or brynge out of good facyon.
                  
                     Turreus, rea, reum, lyke a towre.
                  
                     Turriſico, care, to 
                        •
                     enſe.
                  
                     Turris, a toure or any thing made like to it.
                  
                     Turricula, a lyttell towne. alſo a boxe, oute of the whiche dyſe are throwen.
                  
                     Turriger, that whiche beareth a towre, as an Elyphaunt.
                  
                     Turritus, ta, tum, high, alſo towred, or fulle of towres. alſo the name of the ydol, whiche was callyd mother of goddes.
                  
                     
                        Turtu
                              •
                           , turis,
                      a byrde callyd a turtelle. It is alſo a fyſhe.
                  
                     Turundae, pellettes of bread or paſt, wherwith capons or other foules ar crammed. Alſo a tente whiche ſurgeons doo put into a wounde.
                  
                     
                        Tu
                              •
                           , tutis,
                      frankyncenſe, it is alſoo wrytten whi
                        •
                     h 
                        〈◊〉
                     , as thus.
                  
                     
                        Tuſc
                              •
                           a,
                      a countrey in Italye, wherin be the cities of Florence, Sene, Luca, and Piſe.
                  
                     Tuſcalum, a lyttelle piece of frankincenſe. alſo a citie by Rome.
                  
                     Tuſculanus, na, num, of that citie.
                  
                     
                        T
                              ••••
                           s, ca, cum,
                      of the countrey of Tuſcia.
                  
                     
                        Tu
                              ••••
                           o, dinis,
                      the cowghe.
                  
                     
                        Tu
                              •
                           sicula,
                      a lyttell coughe.
                  
                     Tuſsilago, ginis, an herbe, whiche puttethe away the cough. ſome men ſuppoſe it to be coltes foote.
                  
                     Tuſsio, ſiui, ſire, to cough.
                  
                     Tuſsis, the coughe.
                  
                     
                        Tu
                              •
                           anus,
                      was ſuppoſed to be a god, whiche had the cuſtody of men.
                  
                     Tute, thou thy ſelfe.
                  
                     Tutela, the wardſhyp or cuſtody of infātes.
                  
                     Tutelaris diuus, the ſaint whom we do take for our ſpeciall aduocate to god.
                  
                     Tutelina, was callydde a Goddeſſe, vnder whoſe cuſtodye was corne, whyche was in barnes or rykes.
                  
                     Tutiſsime, mooſte ſure.
                  
                     Tutius, more ſure.
                  
                     Tuto, withoute perylle.
                  
                     Tuto, tare, to defend. Tutor, taris, tari, idem.
                  
                  
                     Tutor, a garden, he that hath the warde of an infante.
                  
                     Tutorius, a, um, pertaynynge to a gardeyn.
                  
                     Tutulus, a top of the heare wounden with a purple lace on the crowne of a womans heed, whiche was only worne of her that was wife to the great prieſt at Rome, callyd Flamen Dialis.
                  
                  
                     Tutus, ta, tum, ſure, defended from peryll, out of daunger.
                  
                     Tuus, a, um, thyne.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶T, ANTE Y.
                  
                     TYber, a gret riuer, which is by Rome
                  
                     Tyberinus, of Tyber.
                  
                     Tyberius, the name of an emperoure of Rome.
                  
                     Tybur & tyburtum, a citie by Rome.
                  
                     Tyburtinus, na, num, of the cite of Tyburtū.
                  
                     Tyburs, burtis, & tyburtis, hoc tyburte, of Tyber.
                  
                     Tydeus, the father of Diomedes the noble capytayne, whome Venus dyd wounde at the battayle of Troy.
                  
                     Tyle, callyd alſo Thule, an ile within one dayes iourney of the froſen ſee.
                  
                     Tylus, a worme, whyche lyeth vnder ſtones and tyles, whiche haue lyen longe on the grounde, and is ſomewhat blacke and ſcalyd, and hath many legges, whych beinge touched, cloſeth hym ſelfe rounde as a peaſe, and is moſte commonlye callyd a cheſelyppe.
                  
                     Tymbra, a great felde in the countreye of Troy, through which the ryuer of Tymber runneth into the riuer of Scamander.
                  
                     Tymoetes, one of the ſons of king Prtamꝰ.
                  
                     Tymolus, idem quod Tmolus.
                  
                  
                     Tympaniſta, he that playeth on a drumſlade or tymbrell.
                  
                     
                        Tympaniſ
                              •
                           ria,
                      a woman that playeth on a tymbrell.
                  
                     Tympanites, a kynde of dropſy, wherin the bealy ſwelleth great, a tympany, whereof wynde is the chiefe occaſyon.
                  
                     Tympanizo, to play on a tymbrell, tabour, or drumſlade.
                  
                     Tympanotriba, idem quod tympaniſta.
                  
                  
                     Tympanū, a tymbrel, a tabour, or drumſlade. Seruius calleth it a couered charyotte or carte, other doo ſuppoſe it to be the ſtrake of a carte whele. I ſuppoſe that it may be taken for that, whyche is callyd the corſe of a charyotte or horſelytter, made with bayles or bourdes ioyned, whiche is not moche from the opynyon of Seruius.
                  
                     Tympanum, is alſo a great whele, wherein men do goo and drawe vp water. It is alſo a platter, whiche ſerueth for meate.
                  
                     Tymphei, people in Etholia, whyche is in Grecia.
                  
                     Tyndarus, the father of the fayre Helene, for whom Troy was deſtroyed, and alſoo of Caſtor and Pollux.
                  
                     Typhon, & Typhos, was a great gyant, the ſonne of Tytan. It is alſo a greate puyſſaunt wynde.
                  
                     
                     Typhonae, be certayne impreſſyons in the ayre lyke globes of fyre or dartes.
                  
                     Typhis, was a carpenter, whiche fyrſt dyd fynde the way to gouerne a ſhyppe.
                  
                     Typus, a fygure, an example, or a fourme, a lykenes or ſhadowe of a thyng.
                  
                     Tyrannicé, cruelly, tyrannouſely.
                  
                     Tyrannicus, ca, cum, of a tyrant.
                  
                     Tyrannis, nidis, a cruelle or violente rule or gouernance for a priuate commoditie, and not for a publyke weale.
                  
                     Tyrannicida, he that ſleeth a tyrant.
                  
                     Tyrannicidium, the kyllynge of a tyrant.
                  
                     Tyrannus, a tyraunt.
                  
                     Tyranthina, a garment of purple colour.
                  
                     Tyranthinus color, purple colour.
                  
                     Tyrius, a, um, of the yle callyd Tyrus, Alſo vyolette or purple colour.
                  
                     Tyro, ronis, a yonge ſouldiour or manne of armes. Alſo he that fyrſt entreth into the experience of any ſcience, art, or exerciſe.
                  
                     Tyroniacus, ca, cum, of a younge ſouldiour or lerner.
                  
                     Tyrocinium, the fyrſt exerciſe in any thing.
                  
                     Tyros, a cite in Phenicia. alſo an yle, where the colour of purple was fyrſte founden.
                  
                     Tyrunculus, a veraye younge ſowldiour or yonge lerner.
                  
                     Tyrotarichus, a ſawce made with cheſe.
                  
                     Tyrrheni, the people of Thuſcane.
                  
                     Tyrſis, the circuite without the walles of a town, wherin mē may walk for their ſolace.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶V ANTE A.
                  
                     
                        VACCA, a cowe. Alſo a citie in Numidia.Saluſt
                           •
                         in 
                           ••
                        gurt.
                  
                  
                     Vaccinus, vaccina, cinum, of a cowe.
                  
                     Vacerra, madde, without wytte, percloſes or railes, made of tymber, within the whych ſome thynge is incloſyd.
                  
                     Vacillo, are, to moue inconſtantly, to wagge or waue, to be vnſtable, or vnſure.
                  
                     Vacinium, the flowre, whiche is alſo callyd Hyacinthus, and hath longe leaues, a roūd roote, a ſtalke of a ſpanne longe and more, hauynge on it many purple floures, wherwith in ſome places they do dye pourple. I doubte whither it be the flowre whiche is callyd Hartis eaſe, or Swete wyllyam.
                  
                     Vacillatio, a waggynge or wauerynge and inconſtant meuynge.
                  
                     Cl. Tyro.
                     Vacillantes literae, letters wrytten crokedly or out of order.
                  
                     Vacillans teſtis, a wytneſſe, whiche inconſtantly dothe varye in report or depoſition.
                  
                     Vacat, it ſerueth to no purpoſe, it is ſuperfluous. Alſo it ſygnyfyeth, I am at good leyſure, or withoute buſynes. ſometyme it ſygnifyeth to care or force. Et cui eſſe deſerto vacat, And who careth to be wel ſpoken or eloquent.
                  
                     Vacatio, vacation, or tyme whan a man is out of his common buſynes.
                  
                     Vaco, care, to applye wytte or ſtudye. Vaco ſapientiae, I applye my ſtudy to wiſedome. Vaco rei diuinae, I apply my wytte to goddes ſeruyce. Alſo to be emptye or voyde. Fac uacent aedes, cauſe the houſe to be voided. Vacat occupatione, He is without occupation or ydell. Somtime it ſignifieth to be ſuperfluous, or vnprofitable.
                  
                     Vacuae aures, Date mihi vacuas aures, dum eloquor, Gyue your eares oonely to me, whyle I ſpeake, or here nothyng els.
                  
                     Vacuefacio, cere, to empty or auoyde.
                  
                     Vacuo, are, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Vacuus, a, um, voyde, emptye, or withoute a thynge.
                  
                     Vacuus animus, a mynde withoute care or ſolycitude.
                  
                     Vacuna, was callyd a goddeſſe, vnto whom huſbandmen after that harueſt was cleane done, dyd ſacrifyce, as to the goddeſſe of quyetenes after labour.
                  
                     Vacuitas, emptyneſſe.
                  
                     Vadimonium, ſuretie to appiere at a day
                        •
                      aſſygned.
                  
                     Vadis, & uas, uadis, he that vndertaketh for an nother.
                  
                     Vadium, ſuretie.
                  
                     Vado, dere, to go forth. alſo to fynd ſuretie.
                  
                     Vado, dare, to wade.
                  
                     Vador, aris, ari, to fynde ſureties.
                  
                     Vadimonio obſtrictus, let to bayle or mainpryſe, whan a man is bounden to appere at a day aſſigned by a iuſtyce.
                  
                     Vadimonium obire, to appiere at the daye aſſygned.
                  
                     Vadimonium deſerere, to make defaute at the day, and not to appiere.
                  
                     Vadimoniū miſſum facere, to diſcharge the recogniſance or ſureties that were boūden.
                  
                     Vadimonium differre, to gyue a longer day of apparaunce.
                  
                     Vadoſus, a, ū, ful of fordes or ſhalow places.
                  
                     Vadum, & vadus, a fourde or ſhalow place in a water, where menne and beaſtes may goo ouer.
                  
                     Vaeh, an interiection, wherwith we do curs.
                  
                     Vafellus, he that is ſomewhat crafty.
                  
                     Vafer, fra, frum, ſubtyll, crafty, flye.
                  
                     Vaframentum, ſubtyltie or crafte, ſlyneſſe.
                  
                     Vafre, craftily, fynely in deceyuyng.
                  
                     
                     Vagabundus, a wanderer aboute.
                  
                     Vadigabar, an hebrewe worde, whyche in latyne is Numeri, one of the fyue bookes of Moyſes.
                  
                     Vageni, a people dwellynge amonge the mountaynes callyd Alpes.
                  
                     Vagina, a ſhethe or ſcaberde.
                  
                     Vaginula, a lyttell ſhethe.
                  
                     Vagio, gire, to crye as a chylde.
                  
                     Vagitus, tus, the crienge of a chylde.
                  
                     Plaut. in milite.
                     
                        Vago, gare, for vagor,
                      to wander.
                  
                     Vagor, aris, ari, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Vagus, ga, gum, wandrynge and abydynge in noo place.
                  
                     Vah, an interiection, wherwith we wonder 
                        •
                     r a thynge, alſo of reioyſynge.
                  
                     Plautus in caſina.
                     Vaha, an Interiection of reioyſynge or lawghynge.
                  
                     Valacchia, a countrey beyonde Hungarie.
                  
                     Valde, very moche.
                  
                     
                        Valdius, for validius.
                     
                  
                  
                     Vale, farewelle.
                  
                     Valens, puiſſaunt, hole, ſtronge.
                  
                     Valentia, puiſſance, habilitie.
                  
                     Valentior, ualentius, more puiſſant or ſtrong.
                  
                     Valentiſsimus, moſte puiſſant, or ſtronge.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         in 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                        ▪
                     
                     Valentulus, ſomewhat ſtronge.
                  
                     Valeo, lui, lere, to be able, to be hoole. Male ua
                           •
                        eo, I fare yll, I am yll at eaſe.
                  
                     Valere, to be ſtronge or puyſſant, to may do, or be of force or power. Neque tam imperita, ut quid amor ualeat, ne ſciam, I am not ſuche a foole, but I knowe what loue may do, or of what power loue is.
                  
                     Valere á morbo, to be recouerid fro ſicknes
                  
                     Valere, alſo ſignifieth to be worthe.
                  
                     Terent. in Andria.
                     Valeat, farewel he, I care not for hym. Imo habeat, ualeat, uiuat cum illa, well lette him wedde her, I care not for him, moch good do it hym with her: or let hym haue her, god be with hym, lette hym make merye with her.Cicero. 
                     Si deus talis eſt, ut nulla gratia, nulla hominum charitate teneatur ualeat, If god be ſuche oone, that he hathe neyther fauour nor loue to mankynde, I care not for hym.Terent. in Andria. 
                     Valeant, qui inter nos diſsidium uolunt, They that wyl haue vs at variance let them get them henſe.
                  
                     Valeſco, ſcere, idem quod ualeo.
                  
                  
                     Valeria, the ſiſter of Meſſala, wyfe to a noble man callyd Seruius, who beinge deed, whan ſhe was aſked, why ſhe dyd not marye agayne, ſhe anſwered, that ſhe alwaye lyued by Seruius her huſbande.
                  
                     Valerius, a mans name.
                  
                     
                        Valeſius, for Valerius
                     .
                  
                     Valetudinarium, a place where men do lye, whan they be ſycke, as the fermerye in a monaſterye.
                  
                     Valgiū, an inſtrument to make flores ſmoth.Plinius.
                  
                  
                     Valgulatio, a queſtion in rebuke of one.
                  
                     Valguſtus, a croked ſtaffe.Feſt. Po
                           •
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Valgus, he that hathe his legges or feete bowed inwarde.
                  
                     Valetudinarius, a, um, nowe and than ſycke, oftentymes ſycke.
                  
                     Valitudo, & valetudo, dinis, ſometyme ſignifieth ſickenes, ſometyme helthe.
                  
                     Validè, valyantly, myghtyly.
                  
                     Validus, da, dum, valyant, myghty.
                  
                     Validior, validius, more myghty.
                  
                     Validiſsimus, mooſte myghty.
                  
                     Validitas, tatis, myghte.
                  
                     Vallecula, a lyttell valey.
                  
                     Vallaris, re, pertaining to a trench in a feld.
                  
                     Vallaris corona, a garlande gyuen to hym▪ whyche fyrſte entred into the trenche of the enemyes campe.
                  
                     Valleſcit, olde writers vſed for perierit, he is loſte or peryſhed.
                  
                     Vallis, a valey or dale.
                  
                     Vallo, are, to incloſe, to fortifye.
                  
                     Valonia, was callyd the goddeſſe of valeis.
                  
                     Vallum, & vallus, a trenche, which is made in a felde to defende an hooſte, within the whiche pauilions are pytched. Alſo a poſt whervnto vynes are bounde.
                  
                     Valor, oris, value or price.
                  
                     Valuae, dorc
                        •
                      whiche be ſhut on two partis.
                  
                     Valuulus, the codde of a beane or peaſe, or other lyke thynge.
                  
                     Vanans, olde wryters vſed for fallens,No. Mar. deceyuynge.
                  
                     Vandalia, a countray in the northe parte of the worlde.
                  
                     Vané, vaynely, foolyſhely, lyengly.
                  
                     Vaneſco, ſcere, to vanyſſhe, to be broughte vnto noughte.
                  
                     Vanidicus, a lyer or teller of folyſhe tales.
                  
                     Vaniloquus, 
                     idem,
                  
                  
                     Vaniloquidorus, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Vaniloquentia, vayne ſpeeche.Plautus 
                           〈◊〉
                         Perſa.
                  
                  
                     Vanitas, tatis, vanitie, lyghtnes, leſyng, foly.
                  
                     Vanitudo, vanitie.
                  
                     Vanno, are, to vanne corne.
                  
                     Vannus, a vanne.
                  
                     Vanus, a, um, voyde or empty. Alſo foliſſhe or enuyous, a maker of lyes.
                  
                     Vapor, oris, & vapos, a vapour, or hot breth iſſuynge out of a thynge.
                  
                     Vaporarium, a place made hotte to ſytte in in the wynter tyme.
                  
                     Vaporo, rare, to hete or make warm a place
                  
                     Vappa, wyne, whyche hathe loſte his verdure. It is ſometyme taken for a manne, in whome is no wytte or perfyte reaſon.
                  
                     Vapo, onis, a beaſt that fleeth.
                  
                     Vapularis, he that is beaten.
                  
                     
                     Vapulo, lare, to be beaten.
                  
                     Variabilis, le, variable.
                  
                     Variantia, varietas, & variatio, varietie, dyuerſitie in thynges.
                  
                     Varices, & varicae, variculae, ar vaynes whiche do ſwelle excedyngly.
                  
                     Varicoſus, he that hath ſuch vaynes ſwollē.
                  
                     Varicor, aut varico, to tranſgreſſe, to paſſe ouer a thynge neglygently.
                  
                     Varicus, an aduerbe, whyche ſygnyfyethe ſtrydynge.
                  
                     Varae manus, croked handes.
                  
                     Vari, ſpottes in the face.
                  
                     Variè, dyuerſely.
                  
                     
                        Variae, for Pantherae,
                      beſtes of diuers colors.
                  
                     Variegatus, a, um, painted or garniſhed with ſondrye colours.
                  
                     Varius, a fyſhe callyd a troute.
                  
                     Vario, are, to make dyuerſe.
                  
                     Variolae, meaſylles.
                  
                     Varius, a, um, dyuers, vnlyke, inconſtaunt, varyable.
                  
                     Varolus, a deuourer, alſo a pycker.
                  
                     Varro, ronis, was a noble Romayne, of all other moſte excellently lerned.
                  
                     Varus, whoſe legges are croked inwarde.
                  
                     Varus, a ryuer, whiche dyuydeth that part of Fraunce, that is callydde Narbonenſis, frō Italy. Alſo it was the name of a poete
                  
                     Vas, vadis, a ſuretie, he that vndertakethe for an other man. alſo a pledge.
                  
                     Vas, vaſis, a veſſelle.
                  
                     Vaſcones, Gaſcoynes.
                  
                     Vaſcularius, a potter.
                  
                     Vaſcularius, a goldſmythe, the whiche maketh plaate.
                  
                     Vaſa conclamare, to crye to truſſe vp caryage and baggage, as whanne an armye dothe remoue.
                  
                     Vaſculum, & vaſcillum, a ſmall veſſell.
                  
                     Vaſtatio, deſtruction.
                  
                     Vaſterna, a horſelytter, or any thynge borne by two horſes.
                  
                     Vaſteſcant, old writers vſid for inhorreſcant.
                  
                     Vaſto, are, to waſte or diſtroye.
                  
                     Vaſtus, a, um, great, huge, ſomtime deſolate.
                  
                     Vaſtitas, tatis, vaſtitudo, & vaſtities, greattenes, alſo deſtruction.
                  
                     Vaſum, a veſſelle.
                  
                     Vates, a prophete, a poete.
                  
                     Vateſco, ſcere, to be diſtroyed, to be dryed vppe, to be forſaken.
                  
                     Vaticanus collis, a hylle by Rome.
                  
                     Vaticinor, aris, ari, to prophecie, or tel what ſhall happen, to coniecte.
                  
                     Vaticinium, a prophecye, a coniecture.
                  
                     Vaticinatio, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     
                        Vatidicum, for propheticum,
                      that whiche is ſpoken in a prophecye.
                  
                     Vatius, idem quod valgus, he that hath croked legges outwarde.
                  
                     Vatrax, & vatricoſus, he that hath ylle legges from the knee downewarde.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶V, ANTE B.
                  
                     VBer, & huber, a womannes breaſte. Vide Huber.
                  
                  
                     Vbi, where▪ in what place, ſomtyme whan, after. Vbiloci, idem.
                  
                  
                     Vbi
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         gentium, in all countrayes.
                  
                     Vbi
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , in all places, euery where, in all.
                  
                     Vbi
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         loci, in euery place.
                  
                     Vbilibet, where ye wylle.
                  
                     Vbicun
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , in euery place. Vbicubi, idem.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  ¶V ANTE D.
                  
                     
                        ❧ Vdus, da, dum, moyſte.
                  
                     Vuidus, da, dum, moyſte inwarde.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶V ANTE E.
                  
                     VE, idem quod Vaeh, Alſoo it is putte for uel, or 
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     .
                  
                     Vecors, dis, madde.
                  
                     Vecordia, madneſſe.
                  
                     Vectabulum, wherin any thynge is caryed.
                  
                     Vecticularia, ui ta, to haue moche to day, and nothynge to morowe, ſodaynly ryche, and as ſodaynely poore.
                  
                     Vectigal, a tribute, a pencion, a rent, a yerely reuenewe.
                  
                     Vectigalis, le, he that payeth trybute, pencyon, or rente.
                  
                     Vectis, a barre. alſo a leauer, wherwith thinges be lyfte, or borne by men.
                  
                     Vecto, are, to carye. Vectito, idem
                  
                  
                     Vectatio, caryage.
                  
                     Vector, toris, he that is caryed, ſometyme he that caryeth.
                  
                     Vectorius, a, um, apte to carye.
                  
                     Vectura, caryage, alſo the hyre or moneye gyuen for caryage.
                  
                     Vegeo, gere, to be in helthe.
                  
                     
                        Veget, for uegetat.
                     
                  
                  
                     Vegetius, a noble man that wrate of marciall doctryne.
                  
                     Vegeto, uegetare, to recreate, to quycken, to conſerue.
                  
                     Vegetus, ta, tū, hole, ſtronge in helth, quick.
                  
                     Vegrandis, lyttell.
                  
                     
                        Vehea, for via.
                     
                  
                  
                     Vediouis, & veiouis, was callid a god which had no power to do good, but onely harme.
                  
                     Veheare, olde wryters vſed for vehere.
                  
                  
                     Vehemens, tis, vehemente, greate, vrgente, fyers, ſharpe.
                  
                     Vehementis, vehemency, myght.
                  
                     
                     Vehementer, vehemently, ſharply, mightily.
                  
                     Vehementior, tius, more vehement or ſharp.
                  
                     Vehementiſsimus, ma, mum, mooſte vehemente or ſharpe.
                  
                     Vehes, a carte or wayne.
                  
                     Vehia, in the old Tuſcane tonge was a cart.
                  
                     
                        Vehiatura, for vectura,
                      caryage.
                  
                     Vehiculatius, a carter.
                  
                     Vehicularis equus, a cartehorſe.
                  
                     Vehiculum, a generall name to all thynges, whyche ſerueth for caryage.
                  
                     Veho, uexi, uehere, to carye.
                  
                     Veios, a cytie in Hetruria.
                  
                     Veientes, people, with whom the Romayns had longe tyme warres.
                  
                     Veientanus, na, num, of the citie of Veios.
                  
                     Veij, the people of Veios.
                  
                     Veiouis, uide ante Vedionis.
                  
                  
                     Vel, or, ſommetyme alſo, chiefely, namely, at the leſte.
                  
                     Velabrum, a place in Rome. It may be alſo callyd a tent, whiche craftes men do ſette vp, where they haue noo howſes, to be in ſtede of their ſhoppes.
                  
                     Velamen, minis, a couerynge.
                  
                     Velaria, clothes, wherwith tentis ar made. alſo the ſame tentes.
                  
                     Velatura, a frayte.
                  
                     Velatus, ta, tum, apparayled.
                  
                     Veles, velitis, a ſouldiour that weareth light harneyſe.
                  
                     Velia, a f
                        •
                     nne in Italy, in the countreye of Calabria.
                  
                     Velifico, care, to ſayle.
                  
                     Velina, a ſtrete in Rome, by the hyll callyd Mons Palatinus.
                  
                  
                     Velis equiſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , by ſee and by lande.
                  
                     Velitaris pugna, battayle done by them that are lyght harneyſed.
                  
                     Velitatim, by leapes or ſkyppes.
                  
                     Velitor, aris, ari, & uelito, uelitare, to ſtryue, to brawle.
                  
                     Velitatio, brawlynge.
                  
                     Velittae, plurali numero, a cytie in Italy.
                  
                     Veliuolus, a, um, that whiche gothe with a ſayle, or is occupied with ſayles.
                  
                     Vella, olde writers vſed for villa.
                  
                     Vellaturam facere, to lyue by cariage frome one towne to an nother.
                  
                     Vellicarim, by pluckes.
                  
                     Vellico, care, to pynche, ſomtime to rebuke, to byte, to rente.
                  
                     Vello, lere, to plucke vp, or pull a thynge.
                  
                     Vellus, velleris, a flyſe.
                  
                     Velo, lare, to couer or hyde, to bynde, to apparayle.
                  
                     Velocitas, ſwyfteneſſe.
                  
                     Velocior, velocius, ſwyfter.
                  
                     Velociſsimus, ma, mum, ſwyfteſt.
                  
                     Velociſsimè, mooſte ſwyftely
                        •
                     .
                  
                     Velociter, ſwyftely.
                  
                     Velox, locis, ſwyfte.
                  
                     Velum, a ſayle, a curtayne.
                  
                     Velut, veluti, as, lyke as.
                  
                     Vena, a vayne.
                  
                     Venabulum, a huntynge ſtaffe.
                  
                     Venalitiarius, he that ſelleth ſlaues.
                  
                     Venalis, le, that whiche is ſette to ſale.
                  
                     Venalitium, a place where any thing is ſold.
                  
                     Venalitius, he that ſelleth,
                  
                     Venaphrum, a citie in Campania.
                  
                     Venaria, an Ile, wherein be many vaynes of mettalle.
                  
                     Venaticus, ca, cum, pertaynyng to huntyng,
                  
                     Venatorius, a, um, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Venaticus canis, a hounde.
                  
                     Venator, a hunter.
                  
                     Venatrix, a woman hunter.
                  
                     Venatura, idem quod venatio.
                  
                  
                     Venatus, tus, huntynge. Venatio, idem.
                  
                  
                     Vendax, acis, he that gladly ſelleth.
                  
                     Vendibilis, le, eaſy or redy to be ſolde.
                  
                     Vendicatio, a clayme.
                  
                     Vendico, care, to vendicate, to clayme.
                  
                     Venditarius, a, um, redy to be ſolde.
                  
                     Venditatio, an auaunt.
                  
                     Venditio, a ſaale.
                  
                     Vendito, tare, to ſelle often, to auaunt.
                  
                     Vendo, didi, dere, to ſelle.
                  
                     Veneficium; the act and craft of poyſoning.
                  
                     Veneficus, & venefica, a maker of poyſon, a vſer of ſorcerie.
                  
                     Venenariae mulieres, womē that do ſel poiſon
                  
                     Venenatus, ta, tum, poyſoned.
                  
                     Veneno, nare, to poyſon.
                  
                     Venenoſus, a, um, that hath poyſon,
                  
                     Venenum, poyſon, it is the general name of all that dothe alter the nature or colour of that thinge, wherwith it is myxte.
                  
                     Veneo, niui, nire, to be ſolde.
                  
                     Venerabilis, worthy to be honoured.
                  
                     Venerabundus, he that dothe wourſhyppe any thynge. Venerandus, idem.
                  
                  
                     Veneranter, reuerentely.
                  
                     Veneratus, ta, tum, humblye prayed vnto. Sometyme reuerende.
                  
                     Veneror, aris, ari, to honour.
                  
                     Veneratio, honour, reuerence.
                  
                     Venereus, a man diſpoſed to lecherie.
                  
                     Venetiae, arum, the citie of Venyce.
                  
                     Veneti, values in Brytayne. Alſo the people of Venyce.
                  
                     Venetus, ta, tum, of Venyce. Alſoo the colour of lyght blewe or blunkat.
                  
                     Venia, pardon, forgyueneſſe. Tua venia, by your lycence.
                  
                     Venibo, auncient wryters vſed for veniam.
                  
                     Venio, nire, to come, to ſprynge.
                  
                     
                     Venire in mentem, to come to remembrāce.
                  
                     Venit in mentem, it cometh to my mynde.
                  
                     Venitur ad me, they came to me.
                  
                     
                        Venila, for vnda,
                      water in a ryuer.
                  
                     Venor, aris, ari, to hunte, to gette a thynge craftylye.
                  
                     Ventanea, thynges that ſeme to be dangerous, and yet therin is no daunger.
                  
                     Venter, tris, the bealy or panche. ſometyme it is taken for the ſtomake.
                  
                     Ventilabrum, a fanne or f
                        •
                     abelle, wherewith wynde is made.
                  
                     Ventilatio, a fannynge or wynn
                        •
                     wynge.
                  
                     Ventilator, a vanner or wynnower of corne.
                  
                     Ventilo, are, to gather wynde, to vanne or wynowe corne, to tourne out of one hande into an nother.
                  
                     Ventito, tare, to come often.
                  
                     Ventoſus, a, um, wyndy, alſo lyght.
                  
                     Ventoſitas, wyndyneſſe·
                  
                     Vento uiuere, to lyue by the wynde. A prouerbe applyed to theym, whiche haue noo ſubſtance to lyue on.
                  
                     Ventus, wynde.
                  
                     Ventulus, a lyttell wynde.
                  
                     Ventus operam dat, the wynde blowethe a good coole.
                  
                     Ventus popularis, vayneglorie.
                  
                     Ventrale, a ſtomacher.
                  
                     Ventricoſus, a gorbealy.
                  
                     Ventriculus, the ſtomacke.
                  
                     Venum ire, to be ſolde.
                  
                     Venundo, dare, to ſelle.
                  
                     Venundatio, byenge and ſellynge.
                  
                     Venus, veneris, callyd goddeſſe of loue, ſomtyme lechery, alſo carnall appetite, alſoo beautie, by whiche a man is ſtyred to loue.
                  
                     Venuſtas, tatis, beautie, proprely of women. ſomtime a dilectable pronūciatiō or ſpeche
                  
                     Venuſtè, proprely, pleaſantly, amyably.
                  
                     Venuſtulus, a, um, ſomewhat fayre.
                  
                     Venuſtus, ta, tum, fayre, dylectable.
                  
                     Venuſto, are, to ornate or make beautifull.
                  
                     Veprecula, a lyttell bramble. Vepres, bryars.
                  
                     Vepretum, a place full of bryers.
                  
                     Ver, ueris, the ſpryng of the yere.
                  
                     Veratrū, an herbe callyd alſo Helleborus.
                  
                     Verax, racis, he or ſhe that ſayth truthe.
                  
                     Veracitas, tatis, truthe in ſpeche.
                  
                     Verba dare, to deceyue.
                  
                     Verba mortuo dare, to ſpeake to a deed mā, a prouerbe whan a man loſeth his labour.
                  
                     Verbaſcū, an herbe wherof be .ii. kindes: of which one is ſuppoſed to be Molin or long wort, the other is ſuppoſed to be that whiche is callyd primeroſe, not withſtandynge other menne redynge the deſcription, lette theym iudge at theyr lybertie.
                  
                     Verbena, & uerbenaca, an herbe callyd veruyn. ſometyme Verbenae, are all leaues ſodeinly plucked vp, to garnyſhe howſes or churches, or to make garlandes.
                  
                     Verber, a ſmall longe ſtycke or yarde.
                  
                     Verberalis, worthy to be beaten.
                  
                     Verberatio, Verberatus, tus, a beatynge.
                  
                     Verbereus, ea, eum, worthy to be beaten.
                  
                     Verbero, rare, to beate, to punyſhe.
                  
                     Verbero, ronis, a perſone worthy punyſhement, the reproche of all ſeruantes.
                  
                     Verberito, tare, to beate ofte.
                  
                     
                        Verbigero, rare, for verba facere,
                      to talke.
                  
                     Verbenarius, was one of the ambaſſadors ſēt fro the Romans vnto their enmies, whiche ware on his heed a garland of veruyn.
                  
                     Verboſe, an aduerbe, ſignifienge with many wordꝭ. Verboſitas, moch talking or ſpeking.
                  
                     Verbis meis ſalutem dicito, ſalute him in my name.
                  
                     Verboſus, full of wordes.
                  
                     Verbulum, a lyttell worde.
                  
                     Verbi cauſa, as by example. Verbi gratia, idē.
                  
                  
                     Verbum, a worde, alſo a ſentence compriſed in one worde, a prouerbe.
                  
                     Vercellae, was a citie in Liguria, nigh to the mountayns called Alpes. Veré, truely.
                  
                     Verecundanter, & verecunditer, ſhamefaſtly.
                  
                     Verecundia, ſhamefaſtneſſe.
                  
                     Verecundé, ſhamefaſtly.
                  
                     Verecundor, aris, ari, to be aſhamed.
                  
                     Verecundus, da, dum, ſhamefaſte.
                  
                     Veredarius, a meſſanger that rideth by poſt.
                  
                     Veredus, a lyght horſe, a huntynge nagge, or ſwyfte geldynge.
                  
                     Verenda, places in a man and woman, which without ſhame may not be named.
                  
                     Verendus, da, dum, to be feared or dradde.
                  
                     Vereor, reris, reri, to feare as the child doth the father. Timêre, to feare, as the ſlaue or boye dothe his mayſter.
                  
                     Vereor dicere, I dare not tell.
                  
                     Vereor abs te, I am aferde of the, leſte thou wylt doo me dyſpleaſure.
                  
                     Vergiliae, the .vii. ſterres, callid alſo Pleiades
                  
                     Vergo, uerſi, aut uerxi, gere, to declyne or bowe downe.
                  
                     Veridicentia, truthe in ſpeakinge a true tale.
                  
                     Veridicus, ca, ū, he or ſhe that telleth truthe.
                  
                     Verifico, are, to verifie as lawyers do ſay, to auerre
                  
                     Veriloquētia, idē quod ueridicētia.
                  
                  
                     Veriloquꝰ, & ueriloquax, he ye ſpeketh truth.
                  
                     Veriſimile, likely. Veriſimiliter, idem.
                  
                  
                     Veriſimilis, le, lyke to be true.
                  
                     Veriſimilitudo, lykelyhode.
                  
                     Veritanus ager, a felde diuided amonge the people, ſo that euery mā may haue a porciō.
                  
                     Veritas, trouth.
                  
                     Vermiculatim, an aduerbe, ſygnyfyenge in ſmalle pieces.
                  
                     Vermiculus, a lyttell worme.
                  
                     
                     Veriuerbium, a true tale.
                  
                     Vermiculor, aris, ari, to be fulle of vermyne or wourmes.
                  
                     Vermiculata opera, warkes whyche are of ſmall pieces of dyuers colours, wherin ar ſette out ſondrye pyctures, lyke as we ſee in ſpruſe tables or counters.
                  
                     Vermina, pryckinges in the body, that it ſemeth wormes were cutte aſonder.
                  
                     Vermino, nare, to haue wormes.
                  
                     Verminatio, the dyſeaſe of the wourmes, proprely in cattell.
                  
                     Verminoſus, a, um, full of wormes, or that wherin wormes are.
                  
                     Vermis, a worme. Alſo it is a fiſhe in the riuer of Ganges, whiche is in length .lx. cubytes, and is blue in coloure, whiche hath ſuche ſtrength, that whan oliphantes com to the water and do drynke, he wylle take one of them by the noſe, and plucke hym into hym.
                  
                     Verna, a bondeman or bondewoman, borne in the houſe of the lorde, or in his owne countreye.
                  
                     Vernaculus, la, lum, al that taketh beginning in our owne contrey, as Vernacula lingua, the countrey language, the cōmon ſpeche, peculyar or propre to countrey or howſe. Vernaculi, be alſo men of ylle maners and language, whych vſe to flatter or to ſpeake in rebuke.
                  
                     Vernacula putatio, cuttynge of vynee in the ſprynge of the yere.
                  
                     Vernalis, le, pertaynynge to the ſprynge of the yere. alſo ſeruyle.
                  
                     Vernaliter, lewdely, flatteryngly.
                  
                     Vernatio, the olde ſkynne of an adder. It is ſometyme taken for age.
                  
                     Vernilis, le, ſeruyle.
                  
                     Coecilius.
                     Vernilitas, flatterye.
                  
                     Vernilitus, olde wryters vſed for a flatterer.
                  
                     Verniliter, flatterye.
                  
                     Verno, are, to ſprynge, as herbes done, alſo to ſynge as byrdes done.
                  
                     Vernula, a dyminutiue of verna.
                  
                     Vernus, a, ū, luſty, freſhe, as the ſpring time.
                  
                     Verò, truely, verily. ſomtime it doth affirme that which foloweth. alſo but yet.
                  
                     Vero, is alſo a ryuer in Byſkay.
                  
                     Vero, are, to ſaye truthe.
                  
                     Verona, a citie in Italy.
                  
                     Verones, people dwellynge nyghe to the ryuer of Vero.
                  
                     Veronenſis, & Veronius, a man of Verona.
                  
                     Verpus, pa, pum, that whiche hath no ſkyn. It is alſo the myddell fynger.
                  
                     Verpi, be alſoo Iewes.
                  
                     Verra, an altar at Rome, wherat they prayid that children ſhulde not be wronge borne.
                  
                     Verres, a hogge vngelded, a tame bore. as aper may be called a wylde bore.
                  
                     Verricula, olde wryters vſed for articulus.
                  
                     Verriculum, a nette callyd a dragge.
                  
                     Verrinco, care, to tourne or chaunge a thing vnto better.
                  
                     Verrinus, a, um of a bore.
                  
                     Verruca, an hyllocke or knappe on a hylle. alſo a warte.
                  
                     Verrucaria herba, warteworte.
                  
                     Verrucoſus, he that hath wartes.
                  
                     Verrucula, a lyttell warte.
                  
                     Verrunca, old writers toke for a hye place.
                  
                     Verſatilia, thingis that ar tourned or wounden one about the other, as two cordes or two ſtyckes woūden togyther. alſo pillers made of the ſame facion.
                  
                     Verſatilis, le, that whiche tourneth or maye be tourned.
                  
                     Verſicolor, oris, chaungeable, or that which changeth colour. alſo of ſondry colours.
                  
                     Verſicolorius, a, um, any thyng tourned out of his naturall colour. alſo that whiche is of dyuers colours mixt togither.
                  
                     Verſiculus, a lyttell verſe.
                  
                     Verſipellis, a crafty perſon that wyll tourne often as he lyſteth.
                  
                     Verſo, are, to tourne.
                  
                     Verſoria, the needell in a ſhyppe, to knowe the coſtes. Verſor, aris, ari, to be occupied in a thynge or matter.
                  
                     Verſura, a tournynge. it is alſo whan a man boroweth of oone to pay his dettes to an other. and to borow in ſuche wyſe is Verſuram face
                        •
                     e.
                  
                     Verſuram ſoluere, is to chaunge creditours, as to borowe of one man to pay an other.
                  
                     Verſus, ſa, ſum, tourned.
                  
                     Verſus, us, a verſe. ſometyme an order. alſo a ſonge. Verſus, towarde.
                  
                     Verſutè, craftyly.
                  
                     Verſutus, mutable, ofte tournynge, wylye, experte.
                  
                     Verſutia, wylyneſſe.
                  
                     Verſutiloquus, a crafty ſpeaker.
                  
                     Vertagus, a hounde whyche wylle hunte by hym ſelfe.
                  
                     Vertat tibi bene, God gyue the therof good lucke. Di bene uertant, I pray god tourne it to good.
                  
                     Vertebrae, places in the bodye, where the boones doo not meete: but are knytte togyther in ſuche wyſe with ſynewes, that they may tourne the more lyghtly.
                  
                     Vertere terga, to rounne awaye, or flye in battayle.
                  
                     Vertere ſolum, to goo and dwelle oute of a mans propre countrey.
                  
                     
                        Vertere, for verſuram facere.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Vertere ſtultitiae, to repute foly in a thyng.
                  
                     Plautus in Epidic.
                     Vertere uitio, to put the blame in one. Quis erit, uitio qui id non uerta
                           •
                         tibis? Who is it, that wyll not put the blame in the?
                  
                     Vertere, to tranſlate▪ or interprete oute of one tunge into an nother.
                  
                     Verrex, & vortex, ticis, a whyrlewynde. alſo a whyrlepoole in a water. alſo the crowne or toppe of the heed. alſo the toppe of euery thynge.
                  
                     Vertibulum, idem quod vertebra.
                  
                  
                     Vertibula, a fyſhe callyd alſo vrtica.
                  
                     Verticulum, a wherue, whyche is a rounde thyng ſet on a ſpyndel, to cauſe it to turne.
                  
                     Verticillum, a lyttell wherue.
                  
                     Vertigo, ginis, a ſicknes of the heed, wherin it ſemeth to a man, that he ſeeth thynges tournynge.
                  
                     Vertigus, a whyrlynge aboute.
                  
                     Vertius, a man of great ſtrength.
                  
                     Verto, ti, tere, to tourne, to drawe, to tranſlate, to conſyder.
                  
                     Vertunalia, the ſolemnitie of Vertunus, whiche was kept in Octobre.
                  
                     Vertunus, was callyd the god of bieng and ſelling it is ſomtime taken for the yere.
                  
                     Veru, a ſpytte or broche.
                  
                     Veruetius, a, um, lyke a ſhepe.
                  
                     Feſtus.
                     Veruecinus, a, um, of a wether.
                  
                     
                        Veruat, for circundat, it compaſſeth.
                  
                     Verutum, a caſtynge darte with a ſtrynge.
                  
                     Veruactum, the ſommer tylthe.
                  
                     Veruculum, an inſtrument of goldeſmithes lyke a lyttell broche.
                  
                     Veruex, uecis, a wether ſhepe.
                  
                     Verus, ra, rum, true, ſubſtanciall, vncorrupted, good, iuſte, profytable.
                  
                     Veritas, tatis, truthe.
                  
                     Verum, an aduerbe, ſignifieth truly. alſo but.
                  
                     Verumtamen, yet not withſtandynge.
                  
                     Veſanus, a, um, cruell, furious, woode.
                  
                     Veſania, furye, woodneſſe.
                  
                     Veſcor, ſceris, veſci, to eate, to vſe. Actius vſed it to ſee.
                  
                     Veſcus, ca, cum, euery thynge that may be eaten, alſo lyttell or leane.
                  
                     Veſca, browſe, leaues, wheron beaſtes doo feeds in wynter.
                  
                     Veſculus, a, um, very leane.
                  
                     Veſicaria, an herbe, whiche potycaries do calle Alkakengi.
                  
                     Veſica, a bladder.
                  
                     Veſuuius, & veſeuus, a mountayn by Naples which ſendeth out continually ſmoke & fire.
                  
                     Veſpae, they whiche do burye deed corſ
                        •
                     s.
                  
                     Veſpa, a waſpe.
                  
                     Veſper, the euenynge, or euentyde, alſo the euenynge ſterre.
                  
                     Veſper, ra, rum, of the euenynge.
                  
                     Veſperi, an aduerbe, ſignifienge late, at the ende of the daye.
                  
                     Veſpero, tare, to be euenynge.
                  
                     Veſperaſco, ſcere, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Veſperna, old wryters vſed for coena, ſupp.
                  
                     Veſpertilio, onis, a reremous or backe.
                  
                     Veſpertinus, na, num, that whyche is doone in the euenynge.
                  
                     Veſperugo, ginis, idem quod ueſper.
                  
                  
                     Veſpices, places thycke of buſhes.
                  
                     Veſpillo, onis, he that burieth menne in the nyghte tyme.
                  
                     Veſta, the doughter of Saturnus, whiche for her chaſtitie was honoured for a goddeſſe. ſometyme it is taken for pure fyre.
                  
                     Veſtales, were virg
                        •
                     ns, whyche myniſtred to Veſta.
                  
                     Veſter, tra, trum, your.
                  
                     Veſtiarium, a warderobe, wherein garmentes are layde.
                  
                     Veſtiarius, the yomā of the robes, or he that hepeth the warderobe.
                  
                     Veſtibulum, a voide place without the dore, where men do tary whyles they do knock and vntyll the doore be opened.
                  
                     
                        Veſticeps, 
                              •
                           ipis,
                      a yonge man, which beginneth to haue a berde.
                  
                     Veſtigabundus, he that ſeeketh moche.
                  
                     Veſtigator, he that ſeketh for a thinge.
                  
                     Veſtigium, the prynt of a mans foote in the ground. It is taken alſo for a ſygne or token of any thynge that is doone.
                  
                     Veſtigo, gare, to ſeke.Vide com.
                  
                  
                     Veſtimenta, a veſture or garment.
                  
                     Veſtini, people in Italye.
                  
                     Veſtio, iui, ire, to apparel, to adorne, to ke
                        •
                     er
                  
                     Veſtiplica, a mayden whiche layeth vp her mayſtreſſe garmentes.
                  
                     Veſtis, a veſture, a garment, ſometyme it is put for a bearde.
                  
                     Veſtiſpicus, & veſtiſpica, he or ſhe which kepeth their maiſter or maiſtres apparayle.
                  
                     Veſtiſsimus, a, um, beſt apparailed, beſt clad.
                  
                     Veſtitus, ta, tum, apparayled.
                  
                     Veſtitus, tus, apparayle.
                  
                     Veſtrapte, & ueſtropte, of your owne.
                  
                     Veſtras, ſtratis, yours.
                  
                     Veſulus, a mountayne in Liguria by Alpes, at the rote wherof the riuer callyd Padus or Po, ſpryngeth out.
                  
                     Veter, olde. Venerior, ueterius, elder.
                  
                     Veterrimus, ma, mum, eldeſt.
                  
                     Veteramentarius, a coblar or botcher.
                  
                     Veteraneus, a, um, auncient.
                  
                     Veteranus, ſometyme ſignifyeth olde. Alſo he that had ſerued a hol
                        •
                      yere in the citie. ſometyme he that hath longe continued in warres, an olde ſoudiour.
                  
                     
                        Veterator, oris, u
                              •
                           teratrix,
                      a crafty begyler.
                  
                     
                     Veteres, men of olde tyme paſſed.
                  
                     Veterina, beaſtes whiche do ſerue for burdeyne, as horſes, mulettes, and aſſes.
                  
                     
                        Ve, vide in Veli. Ve uobis,
                      oute vppon you, ſorowe come to you.
                  
                     Veterinarius, he that letteth to hyre horſes or mules.
                  
                     Veterinarius medicus, a horsleche, or ferror
                  
                     Veterinarius, a, ū, belōging to horſis & mules
                  
                     Veternus, ſlepe without waking, alſo ſlouth or ſluggyſhenes. alſo to moche ſlepe.
                  
                     Cato.
                     Veternoſus, he that ſlepeth to moch, ſluggiſh, ſlouthful. alſo he that hath the dropſy.
                  
                     Vetereſco, & veteraſco, ſcere, to be olde.
                  
                     Vetero, rare, to make olde.
                  
                     Veto, tare, Veto, tere, to prohibite.
                  
                     Vetulonia, a place in Tuſcia.
                  
                     Vetulus, la, lum, a diminutiue of vetus.
                  
                  
                     Vetus, teris, olde, auncient.
                  
                     Vetuſtas, age. Vetuſté, agedly.
                  
                     Vetuſteſco, ſcere, to be olde, to be the war
                        •
                      for age. Vetereſco, ſcere, to be the better for age.
                  
                     Vetuſtus, ta, tum, olde.
                  
                     F
                           •
                        ſtus▪
                     
                     Veuina, a longe darte.
                  
                     Vexillarrius, & vexillifer, the baner bearer.
                  
                     Vexillum, a baner.
                  
                     Vexo, are, to vexe or trouble.
                  
                     Vexabundus, he that troubleth or vexith other.
                  
                     Vexatio, vexation.
                  
                     Vexator, & vexatrix, he or ſhe that vexethe. other.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶V ANTE I.
                  
                     VIa, a waye, a, iourneye, the maner, or meane, cuſtome.
                  
                     Viam munire, to make or repair a way
                  
                     Viatica coena, a banket gyuen to a man atte his departynge.
                  
                     Viaticor, aris, ari, to prepare vytayles neceſſarie for iourneye.
                  
                     Viaticū, neceſſaries for iourney, be it in vitaile or other thing, preparation for iorney.
                  
                     Viator, toris, a trauayler by the way, a way farynge man, whiche warneth men to aſſemble to counſayle, and ſerueth offycers, to calle men vnto them.
                  
                     Viatorius, a, um, pertaynyng to the way.
                  
                     Viatoria vaſa, veſſels whiche doo ſerue for iourneye.
                  
                     Vibex, bicis, a ſpotte remayninge in the ſkin after beatynge.
                  
                     Vibratio, a brandyſhynge.
                  
                     Vibriſſae, heares in a mans noſe.
                  
                     Vibriſſo, are, to quauer in ſyngynge.
                  
                     Vibro, brate, to ſhake a thynge, or to make a thynge to ſhake or quauer.
                  
                     Viburnum, the ſprynge whyche commethe out of the roote of a tree.
                  
                     Vicani, men of the vyllage.
                  
                     Vicarius, a, um, that whiche is in the ſteede or place of an other. Alſo the ſeruaunte of hym, whiche is a ſeruant.
                  
                     Vicatim, in vyllages or ſtretes. alſo ſtreete by ſtrete, or vyllage by vyllage.
                  
                     Vicē, vice, plurali, uices, uicibus, time & times. p
                           •
                        multas inces, multis uicibus, many tymes. Vnica uice,
                     Horatius. Vergilius. Horatius. ones. Somtyme it ſygnyfyeth paynes. Alſo perylle. ſommetyme place or ſtede. Fungar uice cotis, I wyl vſe it in the ſtede of a whetſtone.
                  
                     Vicenarius, a, um, the twentieth.
                  
                     Vicenus, a, um, twenty.
                  
                     Vicia, a certayne grayne, whiche lyke to a vyne, runneth vpon the ſtalkes of herbes. whiche do growe hye.
                  
                     Viciarium, the ſowynge of ſuche grayne.
                  
                     Vicies, twenty tymes.
                  
                     Vicinia, the neyghbourheed, whiche corruptely we calle vicinetum.
                  
                  
                     Vicinitas, tatis, nyghneſſe. ſomtime the multitude of neyghbours.
                  
                     Vicinus, a neyghbour.
                  
                     Viciſsatim, by tymes, by tournes.
                  
                     Viciſsim, by tourne, nowe one, nowe an nother, ſometyme it ſygnifyeth, on the other parte. ſometyme ſemblably.
                  
                     Viciſsitas, idem quod viciſsitudo.
                  
                  
                     Viciſsitudo, dinis, the tourne, nowe oone, nowe an nother.
                  
                     Victima, the beaſt that is kylled in ſacrifice.
                  
                     Victimarius, the myniſter, whiche ſerueth to the ſacrifice. Alſo he whyche boughte the ſacrifice to ſelle it.
                  
                     Victito, tare, to lyue by eating certain meat.
                  
                     Victor, toris, he that vanquyſheth.
                  
                     Victoria, vyctorie.
                  
                     Victoriatus, a certayne coyne, wherin was the image of vyctorie,
                  
                     Victorioſus, accuſtomed to haue vyctorye.
                  
                     Victricus, a fader in law, my moders huſbād
                  
                     Victrix, plurali victricia, ꝑtaining to victory.
                  
                     Victrix, a woman that vanquyſheth.
                  
                     Victurus, the participle of the future tenſe, as well of Viuo, as of Vinco.
                  
                  
                     Victus, tus, & victuis, ſuſtinance or fedynge. Alſo a kynde or fourme of lyuynge.
                  
                     Victus, ta, tum, vanquyſhed.
                  
                     Vicus, a ſtrete in a towne. alſo a vyllage.
                  
                     Viculus, a lyttell ſtrete or vyllage.
                  
                     Videlicet, as who ſayth. ſometyme it ſignyfieth ſurely.
                  
                     
                        Video, di, d
                              •
                           re,
                      to ſee. It is ſometyme applyed to other ſences, as, Vide qualis eſt ſonus, Here what a noiſe it is. Vide quid oleat, Smell wherof it ſauoureth. Vide 
                           
                              
                           
                           quam
                         durum ſit, Fele howe harde it is. Alſo it ſignyfieth to take hede or cōſider, to prouide. Vide tibi
                     
prouide for thy ſelfe. Tu uideris, loke therto wel, take good hede, for I care not for it.
                  
                     Videro, I wyll prouyde.
                  
                     Videor, I remember me well.
                  
                     Videre uideor, me thynketh I ſee.
                  
                     Videtur mihi, me ſemeth.
                  
                     
                        Viden, for Vides ne? doeſt thou not ſee?
                  
                     Vidua, a wydowe.
                  
                     Viduertas, calamytie or myſerye.
                  
                     Viduitas, widowhed, lack of thīgꝭ neceſſary
                  
                     Vidulum, wherin any thing is kepte.
                  
                     Viduo, duare, to dyuide or take awaye, to leaue alone.
                  
                     Viduus, a, um, dyuyded, alone.
                  
                     Viēna, a cite in Auſtria, an other ī Dolpheni
                  
                     Vieo, ere, to bende, to bynde.
                  
                     Vietor, toris, a couper, whiche with howpes byndeth veſſels.
                  
                     Vietus, ta, tum, ſofte, weake, bendynge.
                  
                     Vietus, a howpe, or ſtrake of a carte.
                  
                     Vigeo, gui, gere, to lyue, to be ſtronge, to thryue in growynge.
                  
                     
                        Vigeſimae, as decimae, Vigeſimariū aurū, idē.
                     
                  
                  
                     Liuius.
                     Vigeſimus, ma, mum, the twentieth.
                  
                     Vigil, lis, watchful, vigilant. alſo a watchmā.
                  
                     Vigilans, tis, vigilant, watchefull, dylygent, circumſpecte.
                  
                     Vigilanter, watchefully, dylygently, vygilantely, cyrcumſpectly.
                  
                     Vigilantia, vygilancy, dylygence.
                  
                     Vigiliae, watches, aſwel by day as by night. ſomtyme the men whyche doo watche.
                  
                     Vide com.
                     Vigilo, lare, to wake, or watche, to be vigylant, or very dilygente. Alſo to here diligently.
                        
                           ••
                        uenalis. Plautus in 
                           •
                        uden. Alſo to take peyne. Vigilare decet hominem, qui uult ſua tempori conficere officia, a man muſte take payne, that wylle finyſhe his buſynes in tyme comuenient.
                  
                     Vigiſonus, a broke by the citie of Padua.
                  
                     Viginti, twenty.
                  
                     Vigor, goris, ſtrength, force.
                  
                     Vigoroſus, a, um, ſtronge, firme.
                  
                     Vilis, le, vile, of no value. alſo good cheape, of lyttell price.
                  
                     Vileo, & vileſco, ſcere, to be vyle, or of ſmall or none eſtimation or price.
                  
                     Vilitas, good chepe, contrary to derthe.
                  
                     Viliter, an aduerbe, ſygnyfienge cheape.
                  
                     Vilito, tate, to make cheape.
                  
                     Villa, a manour out of a citie or towne. alſo a vyllage.
                  
                     Villanus, a man of the vyllage.
                  
                     Villaris, re, & Villaticus, ca, cum, pertayning to the vyllage.
                  
                     Villico, & villicor, aris, ari, to be occupied about huſbādry, to haue the rule of huſbādry
                  
                     Villicatio, occupation about huſbandry. alſo the rule of huſbandry vnder the owner.
                  
                     Villicus, & villico, a baylyffe of huſbandry.
                  
                     Villula, a lyttell vyllage.
                  
                     Villum, ſmalle wyne.
                  
                     Villus, heare.
                  
                     Vimen, minis, roddes, whiche wyll wynde lyghtly, wherof baſkettes are made.
                  
                     Vimineus, a, um, wyckers, wyndynge roddes, or oſyars.
                  
                     Viminalis, le, apte to wynde.
                  
                     Viminalis coſlis, a lyttell hylle at Rome.
                  
                     Vinacea, kernels of grapes.
                  
                     Vinaceus, a, um, of wyne.
                  
                     Vinago, ginis, a kynde of ſtockedoues.
                  
                     Vinale, the vyntage.
                  
                     Vinarius, a vyntener.
                  
                     Vinarius, a, um, pertaynynge to wyne.
                  
                     Vinca, an herbe, whiche wyndeth about euery thynge. ſome do call it Perwynke.
                  
                     Vincia, olde wryters vſed for Continens.
                  
                  
                     Vincibilis, le, eaſy to be vanquyſhed.
                  
                     Vincio, vinxi, vincere, to bynde.Vide com. Vide com▪
                     
                  
                  
                     Vinco, vinxi, cere, to vanquyſhe.
                  
                     Vinctus, ta, tum, bounden. ſometyme it ſignifyeth a pryſoner.
                  
                     Vinculum, & uinclum, a bonde. alſo vincula pluraliter, is taken for a pryſon.
                  
                     Vindelicia, a countray in Germany, wherin is the citie of Auguſta, callyd Auſburgh.
                  
                     Vindemia, the tyme of gatherynge grapes to make wyne. it ſommetyme ſygnyfyeth the gatheringe of other thinges, as hony and ſyder.
                  
                     Vindemialis, le, & vindemiatorius, a, ū, pertainyng to gatherynge of grapes or fruite.
                  
                     Vindemiatio, a gatherynge of grapes, to make wyne, alſo a makynge of hony.
                  
                     Vindemiator, toris, he that doth gather grapes to make wyne.
                  
                     
                        Vin demio, are,
                        Saluſt▪ in Catal.
                      to gather grapꝭ or ripe frute
                  
                     Vindex rerum capitaliū, the myniſter of execution, cōmonly callyd the hangeman.
                  
                     Vindex, dicis, a reuenger of wronges. ſome tyme it ſygnyfyeth a proctour or attourney, whyche proſecuteth an nother mans cauſe. Alſo he that delyuereth hym ſelfe out of bondage.
                  
                     Vindiciae, aſſercyon of lybertie or fredome.
                  
                     
                        Vindicias ſecundum libertatem dare,
                        Ti. Liuius lib. 3.
                      to put in pledges to proue hym or hir to be free and nat bonde.
                  
                     Vindico, care, to reuenge, to defende or delyuer a man from iniurie or damage.
                  
                     Vindicta, vengeance. ſometyme lybertie.
                  
                     Vinditia, a rodde, whyche the lorde delyuered to his bondeman, whan he infraunchyſed hym.
                  
                     Vinea, a vyneyarde. It is alſo an ordynance of warre made of tymber and hardelles, vnder the whiche men went ſurely to the walles of a towne that was beſieged.
                  
                     
                     Vinealis, le, apt or pertaining to a vineyard.
                  
                     Vinearius, a, um, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Vineaticus, ca, cum, pertaynyng to vynes.
                  
                     Vineolus, he that behaueth hym ſelfe wantonly or tenderly.
                  
                     Vinetum, a vyneyarde.
                  
                     Vinitor, he that ordreth the vyneyarde.
                  
                     Vinolentus, drunke with wyne.
                  
                     Vinoſus, he that loueth to drynke wyne.
                  
                     Vinoſus, a, um, full of wyne.
                  
                     Vinulus, a, um, delycate.
                  
                     Vinum, wyne.
                  
                     Vio, are, to go a iourneye.
                  
                     Viola, a vyolette.
                  
                     Violabilis, le, whiche is apte to be violated.
                  
                     Violaceus, a, um, of violette colour.
                  
                     Violaris, are, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Violarius, he that dyeth vyolette colour.
                  
                     Violenter, violentelye, parforce, maugre his hedde.
                  
                     Violentia, vyolence.
                  
                     Violentior, tius, more vyolente.
                  
                     Violentiſsimus, ma, mum, moſte vyolent.
                  
                     Violentus, ta, tum, vyolent, forcible.
                  
                     Violo, lare, to vyolate, to corrupt, to defile.
                  
                     Vipera, a kynde of adders.
                  
                     Viperinus, na, num, of an adder.
                  
                     Vipiones, yonge cranes.
                  
                     Vir, uiri, a man, it is alſo a huſbande, it ſignifieth alſo one of a good courage.
                  
                     Virago, a woman hauynge the courage of a manne.N
                           •
                         Mar.
                  
                  
                     Viratium, of moche ſtrength.
                  
                     Virbius, twyſe a man, whiche name was giuen to Hippolitus, the ſonne of Theſeus after that Aeſculapius had broughte hym efteſoones to lyfe.
                  
                     Vireo, es, rere, & vireſco, ſcere, to be greene, to be more luſty.
                  
                     Viretum, a grene place.
                  
                     Viretus, ta, tum, greene.
                  
                     Virga, a rodde or yarde.
                  
                     Plautus.
                     Virgator, he that beateth with roddes.
                  
                     Virgeus, a, um, of roddes.
                  
                     Virginalis, le, & virginarius, a, um, of a virgin
                  
                     Virgindemia, a gatherynge of roddes.
                  
                     Virgineus, a, um, idem quod virginalis.
                  
                  
                     Virgo, virginis, a vyrgyn or mayden.
                  
                     Virginitas, vyrginitie.
                  
                     Virgulata, ſeu virgata veſtis, a ray gowne.
                  
                     Virgula, a lyttell rodde or yarde.
                  
                     Virgultum, a place full of yonge roddes.
                  
                     Virguncula, a yonge mayden.
                  
                     Viriatus, a ſtronge manne.
                  
                     Viriculae, lyttell ſtrength.
                  
                     Viriculum, a wymble or percer.
                  
                     Viridans, that whiche is grene.
                  
                     Viridarium, a grene place incloſed, wherin beaſtes or fowles are kepte.
                  
                     Viridia, a groue or place ſette with greene trees for pleaſure.
                  
                     Viridicatus, ta, tum, made grene.
                  
                     Viridis, de, grene.
                  
                     Virido, dare, to make grene.
                  
                     Virilia, the membres of a man.
                  
                     Virilis, le, of a man, alſo manlyke or valiant.
                  
                     Virilis toga, was a garment of the Romans whiche they beganne to weare at the age of .xvi. yeres.
                  
                     Virilitas, manlyneſſe.
                  
                     Viriliter, manly.
                  
                     Viripotens, tis, a mayden maryageable.
                  
                     Viritaneus ager, a fielde dyuyded amonge the people.
                  
                     Viritim, of euery man, alſo oone man with an nother, man by man.
                  
                     Viriditas, & viror, roris, greneneſſe.
                  
                     Viro, rare, to fortifye.
                  
                     Viroſa mulier, a womanne deſyrous of the compayne of manne.
                  
                     Viroſus, a, um, of ylle ſauour or taſte, ſometyme ſtronge.
                  
                     Virtus, tutis, vertue, ſtrengthe, ſommetyme power, alſo helpe, merite or deſerte.
                  
                     Virulentus, venymouſe.
                  
                     Virus, venyme, greuouſenes of ſauoure or taſte, lyghtneſſe in colour. ſometyme the humour of generation proprely in beaſtis. Alſo naturall vertue or power.
                  
                     Vis, power, ſtrengthe, poſſibilitie,Liuius. aboundance, vyolence, multitude.
                  
                     Viſcatus, ta, tum, dreſſed with byrd lyme, alſo lymed or taken with byrde lyme.
                  
                     Viſcera plurali, bowelles.
                  
                     Viſceratio, a dyſtrybution of fleſhe.
                  
                     Viſceratim, by the bowelles.
                  
                     Viſceror, rati, to diſtribute meate, whiche is boyled or roſted.
                  
                     Viſcidum, clammy, or cleuing to the fingers.
                  
                     Viſcoſus, clammy or cleauynge.
                  
                     Viſcum, Myſcelden or Myſcelto, whyche communely groweth on crabbe trees, and wyld peare trees.
                  
                     Viſcus, ſci, byrde lyme.
                  
                     Viſcus, ſceris, all that is betwene the bones and the fleſhe.
                  
                     Viſenda, thynges worthy to be ſene.
                  
                     Viſibilis, le, that whiche may be ſene.
                  
                     Viſitatio, vyſitynge or viſitation.
                  
                     Viſito, tare, to vyſite, to ſee often.
                  
                     Viſo, ſere, to go to ſee, alſo to ſee.
                  
                     Viſum, a dreame. Viſum, for videre, to ſee.
                  
                     Viſiones, vyſyons, fantaſyes.
                  
                     Viſus, us, ſyght. Viſa, dreames.
                  
                     Vita, lyfe. Vita functus, deade.
                  
                     Vitabundus, he that eſcheweth a thynge.
                  
                     Vitalis, le, that lyueth.
                  
                     Vitellus, the yolke of an egge.
                  
                     
                     Vitex, a kynde of wythy called oſyar.
                  
                     Vitiarium, a place, wherin yong vines ar ſet.
                  
                     Vitiata mulier, a womā rauiſhed or deflored.
                  
                     Vitiatio, a r
                        •
                     uyſſhemente, a corruption, or defourmynge.
                  
                     Viticula, a lyttell vyne.
                  
                     Viticulus, the ſhore of a vyne.
                  
                     Vitigineus, a, um, of a vyne.
                  
                     Vitilia, thynges whiche maye be wounden lyke an oſyar.
                  
                     Vitiligator, toris, a detracter or backebiter.
                  
                     Vitiligo, ginis, a fouleneſſe of all the bodye, hauynge ſpottes of ſondry colours.
                  
                     Vitiligo, are, to backebyte or detracte a man or womanne.
                  
                     Vitio, are, to corrupte or viciate, to defyle, to diſtroye, to defourme.
                  
                     Vitioſitas, vyce, corruption, an inconſtaunte affection.
                  
                     Vitio dare, to blame or reproue.
                  
                     Vitio uerrere, to dyſprayſe, to lacke.
                  
                     Vitioſi magiſtratus, offycers not ryght conſtitute or made.
                  
                     Vitioſus, ſa, ſum, vitious, or full of errours.
                  
                     Vitis, a vyne. Alſo a thynge, whyche a capytayne in warres dyd beare in his hand.
                  
                     Vitis alba, an herbe, whiche runneth vp in hedges, and wyndeth aboute the ſettes, hauing a leafe like a vine leaf, but rougher and a redde berye. It is callyd alſo Brionia, and in englyſhe
                  
                     Vitis nigra, a lyke wiede, whiche commonly groweth amonge herbes, & byndeth them togither, hauinge a leafe in facyon lyke to yuy, and lytle tendrynges with knappes, and is called of ſome men
                  
                     Vitiſator, he that ſelleth vynes.
                  
                     Vitiſco, ſcere, to ſprynge vnto a vyne.
                  
                     Vitium, vyce, contrarye to vertue. Alſoo a faut or errour. alſo ſycknes, an impedimēt.
                  
                     Terent. in 
                           •
                        ecyra.
                     Vitium offerre virgini, to defloure a virgine.
                  
                     Vito, tare, to eſchewe, or beware.
                  
                     Vitreus, a, um, of glaſſe.
                  
                     Vitrinus, na, num, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Vitrearius, a glaſſemaker, or a glaſyer.
                  
                     Vitreolum, an herbe growynge on walles, wherwith veſſelle beinge ſcoured, becommeth wonderfull bryght.
                  
                     Vitricus, a father in lawe, or ſteppefather.
                  
                     Vitriolum, a dyminutiue of vitrum.
                  
                  
                     Vitroſus, a, um, which hath plentie of glaſſe.
                  
                     Vitrum, glaſſe.
                  
                     Vitra, a fyllette or heedbande.
                  
                     Vitula, an he
                        ••
                     a
                        •
                     , or yonge cowe.
                  
                     Vitulati, to reioyce.
                  
                     Vitulatio, reioycynge.
                  
                     Vitulinus, 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     , of a calfe.
                  
                     
                        Vitulinu
                              •
                           ,
                      
                     
                        〈…〉
                     , veale.
                  
                     Vitulus, a calfe, not only of a cowe, but alſo of an olyphant, and of great fyſſhes. It is alſo a fyſhe callyd a ſeale.
                  
                     Vituperium, a rebuke.
                  
                     Vitupero, rare, to rebuke.
                  
                     Vituperatio, a rebuke gyuen.
                  
                     Vituperator, he that rebuketh or blamethe an nother.
                  
                     Vituperones, rebukers.
                  
                     
                        Viuacitas, & uiua
                              ••
                           a,
                      amonge olde wryters bodyly ſtrength.
                  
                     Viuaciſsimus, moſt liuely or ſtrōg of nature.
                  
                     Viuaciter, ſtrongely.
                  
                     Viuarium, a place, where wylde beaſtes. byrdes, or fyſhes be kepte. It may be callyd as welle a ponde, as a parke, a counnyngar, a walke for byrdes.
                  
                     Viuatior, more lyuely.
                  
                     Viuatus, & viuidus, full of lyfe or naturalle ſtrengthe.
                  
                     Viuax, nacis, lyuely, ſtronge of nature.
                  
                     Viuere diem, to lyue without any prouyſion or ſtoore.
                  
                     Viuerra, a ferette.
                  
                     Viuidus, da, dum, lyuely, quycke.
                  
                     Viuior, & viuiſsimus, olde wryters vſed for more lyuynge or moſte lyuynge.
                  
                     Viuiradix, icis, a yong vine ſet with the rote.
                  
                     Viuitur. Quid agitur? T. Viuitur, How is the mattier? T. I lyue as well as I may.
                  
                     Viuo, uixi, viuere, to liue, to haue a mery life.
                  
                     Viuus, ua, uum, that whyche lyuethe, alſoo quyck, natural, ſtrong, vehement, or great.
                  
                     Vix, vnethe, ſcantly, hardily. Vix dum, idem.
                  
                  
                     Vix tandem, in concluſyon.
                  
                     
                        Vix, for Non. Vix Priamus tanti,
                        Ouidius epiſtola Penelopes. 
                        tora
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            Troia fuit,
                      Kynge Priamus and all Troye was not ſo moche worthe.
                  
                     Vix, with moche a doo. Si idem iſtuc imitamur, ita tamenuix viuimus, Althoughe we do the lyke. yet with moche a do we lyue.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶V. ANTE L.
                  
                     VLcero, rare, to make a ſcabbe. alſo to exaſperate or make grefe.
                  
                     Vlceratiae herbae, herbes that make blyſters.
                  
                     Vlciſcor, ſceris, ſci, to auenge.
                  
                     Vlcus, ceris, a hydde myſchiefe. It is alſoo corrupt matter gathered within the ſkyn, and couered with a ſcabbe.
                  
                     Vlex, an herbe lyke to roſemarie, which breweth to ti golde.
                  
                     Vliginoſus, ſa, ſum, ſoked with longe abode of water.
                  
                     Vligo, ginis, moyſture of the erthe alwaye remaynynge.
                  
                     Vlius, a name of Apollo.
                  
                     Vlio, old writers vſed for vitus fuero, I ſhal

be reuenged.
                  
                     Vlius, la, lum, any.
                  
                     Vlmus, a tree callyd an elme.
                  
                     Vlmeus, mea, eum, of elme.
                  
                     Vlmarium, a groue of elmes.
                  
                     Vlna, a fathom, alſo an elle.
                  
                     Vlpicum, great garlyke.
                  
                     Vls, of whome commeth vltra.
                  
                     Vlterior, ulterius, further, more beyonde.
                  
                     Plautus in milite. Terent. in Heautont. V
                           ••••
                        ne. 8
                     Vltima platea, at the ende of the ſtrete.
                  
                     Vltimis aedibus, on the back ſide of the hous
                  
                     Vltimus, ma, mum, laſte. ſometyme it ſignifieth fyrſte.
                  
                     Vltio, vengeance.
                  
                     Terentius
                     Vltor, & vltrix, he or ſhe that takith vēgeāce
                  
                     Vltra, beyonde, more, moreouer, ſometyme ſhrewdely or frowardely.
                  
                     Vltró, willingly, without deſyre or coherciō
                  
                  
                     Vltro citro
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , hyther and thyther.
                  
                     Vltroneus, a, um, wyllyng, with a fre wylle.
                  
                     Vlubrae, a citie in Italye.
                  
                     Vlula, a ſhryche oule.
                  
                     Vlulatus, a barkyng.
                  
                     Vlulo, lare, to howle as a dogge or a wolfe.
                  
                     Vlyſbona, a cite in Portugal, callid Luſhbon
                  
                  
                     Vlyſſes, the moſte eloquent and wiſe prince of the Grekes, which came againſt Troy
               
            
            
               
                  ¶V ANTE M.
                  
                     VMbella, a lyttel ſhadow. alſo a ſkrine to kepe away the light of the ſonne.
                  
                     Vmber, of the countrey of Vmbria.
                  
                     Vmbilicatim, in the facyon of a nauyll.
                  
                     Vmbilicatus, ta, tū, made like a nauill.
                  
                     Vmbilicus, the myddes of euery thyng. alſo the nauyll. alſo a lyttelle cerkle made in the grounde, to knowe whyche waye the wynde ſtandeth. Alſo it is a lyttell ſmothe ſtone, or pyppell ſtone, a boſe, ſuche as is ſette on the backe of a boke. Ad umbilicū adducere, to brynge to a poynt.
                  
                     Vmbo, bonis, the boſe of a buckler or ſhield
                  
                     Vmbra, a ſhadowe. It was alſo that, whiche was callid a goſt of a man being deed, whiche not only paynims but alſo chriſten men ſuppoſed dyd appere viſibly vnto mē.
                  
                     Vmbraculum, a place, where men moughte be out of the ſonne, or that whiche made ſhadowe.
                  
                     Vmbraticus, ca, cum, lyke a ſhadowe.
                  
                     Vmbraticus homo, a man lyuynge at eaſe, and out of all labour or buſyneſſe.
                  
                     Vmbraticae artes, craftes exercyſed in the ſhadow, as the more part of handy craftꝭ.
                  
                     Vmbratilis, le, that which is done in the ſhadowe, or as it were with eaſe, and without any ſweate or payne.
                  
                     Vmbratiles res, tryflyng thynges or trifles.
                  
                     Vmbratilis pugna, exercyſes of feates of warre out of batayle as in a houſe.
                  
                     Vmbria, a parte of Italy.
                  
                     Vmbrifer, fera, ferum, makynge ſhadowe, as a greatte wodde dothe.
                  
                     Vmbrina, & vmbra, a fyſſhe, whiche by the deſcription of▪ Paulus Iouiue, ſemeth to me to be an halybut, for the greatteneſſe and delycacie of the heed, and ſimilitude to a ſturgion.
                  
                     Vmbro, brare, to ſhadowe.
                  
                     Vmbroſus, a, um, hauynge moche ſhadowe.
                  
                     Vmbro, bronis, a ryuer in Lumbardye, callyd alſo Lamber.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶V ANTE N.
                  
                     VNa, togyther. Vna cum Cicerone, togyther with Cicero.
                  
                     Vnanims, & vnanimus, of one mynde and wylle. Vnanimus conſenſus, one hole conſente.
                  
                     Vnanimitas, tatis, concorde.
                  
                     Vncia, an ounce. alſo an ynche.
                  
                     Vnciarius, a, um, of an ounce.
                  
                     Vnciatim, ynche by ynche.
                  
                     Vncinatus, a, um, hoked or croked.
                  
                     Vncinus, a litle club or bat crokid at the end.
                  
                     Vnciola, an ynche.
                  
                     Vnctio, an anoyntynge.
                  
                     Vnctuarium, a place nigh to a ſtoufe or hote howſe, where menne be annoynted after that they haue ſwette.
                  
                     Vnctum, the leafe of a hogge, whyche is the fatte that lyeth by the backe & the rybbes, whyche huſbandes vſe to rolle vppe, and kepe for to make ſaulues, or els to frie meate, as fritowes and pancakes.
                  
                     Vnctura, an annoyntynge.
                  
                     Vnctus, ta, tum, annoynted or greaſed.
                  
                     Vncus, a batte or croked clubbe. Alſo anye thynge croked at the ende.
                  
                     Vncus, a, um, croked.
                  
                     Vnda, water, proprely a wawe.
                  
                     Vndabundus, da, dum, makynge greatte or many wawes.
                  
                     Vndans, wawyng or mouing like to wawes.
                  
                     Vndatim, lyke to wawes of the ſee.
                  
                     Vndeunde, of what place ſo euer it be, or frō whence ſo euer it commeth.
                  
                     Vndecun
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Vnde, from whenſe, wherto, wherby, wherof, wherfore, what to do. Vndegentiū, idem
                  
                  
                     Vndecim, eleuen.
                  
                     Vndecimus, ma, mum, the eleuenth.
                  
                     Vndenus, na, num, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Vndelibet, from whens thou wylte.
                  
                     Vndeuigeſimus, a, um, the one and twenteth.
                  
                     Vndeuiginti, nynetene, lackynge one of .xx.

the lyke ſignification is, where Vnde is ioyned to any grete numbre.
                  
                     
                        Vndeuis, idem quod vndelibe
                              •
                           .
                     
                  
                  
                     Vndique, on euery ſyde.
                  
                     Vndicola, he that dwelleth on the water.
                  
                     Vndiſonus, na, um, that maketh a noyſe lyke to wawes whan they ryſe and fall in the water, or doeth rore as the water doeth at a great floode.
                  
                     Vndiuomus, a, um, that whiche caſteth water out frome hym.
                  
                     Vnedo, a kynde of wylde frute lyke apples, which is bitter, & hurteth bothe the heed, and the ſtomak.
                  
                     Vndo, are, to ryſe in wawes.
                  
                     Vndoſum mare, a troublouſe ſee, and full of of wawes.
                  
                     Vndulata veſtis, Chamlet, or a garment wrought as it were with rynges.
                  
                     Vndula, a lyttell wawe.
                  
                     Vnguentum, & vngentum, a ſwete oynemēt. it is vſurped for euery oynement.
                  
                     Vngues, muſkyls.
                  
                     Vngo, unxi, ungere, to enoynt.
                  
                     Vnguen, nis, oynement, or any thinge that is fatty.
                  
                     Vnguentarius, a maker of ſwete oynemētes.
                  
                     Vnguentaria, the craft to make oynmentes.
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        ra
                           •
                        m. in 
                           ••
                        ilia.
                     Vngues arrodere, to gnawe on his nayles, a prouerbe applyed to them, which are in a ſtudy, how they maye alter ſuche thinges as they do repent theym of.
                  
                     Vnguis, a nayle of the fyngars or toes. it is alſo a diſeaſe which at length couereth all the eye with fleſh in the corner of the eye.
                  
                     Vnguicula, a lytle ſoft nayle. A teneris vnguiculis, frome his tender youthe or infancye.
                  
                     Vngula, a houſe of a hors or other beaſte. Omnibus vngulis, with all myght & powar.
                  
                     Vngulatus, he that hath foule great nayles.
                  
                     Vngulum, of olde wryters was taken for a rynge.
                  
                     Cato. Non. Mar.
                     Vngularius, a great nayle and ragged.
                  
                     Vnguſtus, a croked ſtaffe, or ſuche as commonly men do cal a croke, wherwith they drawe to them any thynge.
                  
                     Vnicalamum frumentum, wheate, whyche hath but one rede growing out of the rote.
                  
                     Vnicallis, an herbe whyche hathe but oone ſtalke without any braunches.
                  
                     
                        Vnic
                              •
                           ,
                      onely.
                  
                     Vnicolor, otis, of one colour.
                  
                     Vnicornis, Vnicornius, & vnicornium, a beeſt callyd an vnycorne.
                  
                     Vnicuba, a woman whiche lyeth or companyeth but with one man.
                  
                     Vnicus, ca, cum, one alone.
                  
                     Vnigenitus, one chylde without moo.
                  
                     Vniiugae uineae, vines in the whiche vpon the proppes being ſette vp, ſondry rayles are layde on the one ſyde.
                  
                     Vnio, iui, ire, to ioyne togyther.
                  
                     Vnio, onis, concorde, ſomtyme a perle.
                  
                     Vnioculus, he that hath but one eye.
                  
                     Vnipes, pedis, hauynge but one foote.
                  
                     Vnitas, tatis, vnitie.
                  
                     Vnitio, a ioynynge togyther.
                  
                     Vnitus, ta, tum, ioyned togyther in one.
                  
                     Vniuerſalis, le, vnyuerſall.
                  
                     Vniuerſipotens, he that hath power ouer al.
                  
                     Vniuerſipotentia, power ouer all.
                  
                     Vniuerſitas, vniuerſitie or generaltie.
                  
                     Vniuerſus, a, um, vnyuerſall, ſometyme it ſignifieth all, or the hole.
                  
                     Vniuira, a woman hauynge but one huſbād.
                  
                     Vninocum, that whiche ſygnifyeth but one thynge.
                  
                     Vniuoce, of the ſame ſygnifycation.
                  
                     Vnoſe, olde writers vſed for ſimul, togither
                  
                     Vnni, Hungariens.
                  
                     Vn
                           
                              
                           
                           quam
                        , any tyme.
                  
                     Vnus, na, num, one, alſo alone.
                  
                     Vnus & alter, both, now one, now an other.
                  
                     Vnusquilibet, Vnuſquiſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , Vna que
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , Vnum quod
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , eueryche.
                  
                     Vnis aedibus, in the ſame houſe.Terent. in Eunucho.
                  
                  
                     Vno animo, of one accorde.
                  
                     Vnus quiuis, who ſo euer thou wylte.
                  
                     Vni ſex dies, ſyxe dayes contynuall.Plautus in trinummo
                  
                  
                     Vno ictu, at one ſtroke.
                  
                     Vno uerbo, at one worde.
                  
                     Vnum, one thynge.
                  
                     Vnus ex multis, Vnus ex omnibus, oone alone, onely.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶V ANTE O.
                  
                     VOberca, a towne by Bilbo in Spain.
                  
                     Vocabulum, the denomination of any thynge.
                  
                     Vocalis, le, lowde, alſ that whiche hathe a voyce, alſo a vowell.
                  
                     Vocalitas, a tune or ſounde of a voyce.
                  
                     Vocatio, a callynge.
                  
                     Vocator, a caller.
                  
                     Vociferatio, a cryenge out.
                  
                     Vociferator, he that crieth out.
                  
                     Vociferor, aris, ari, to crie out, to cry loude.
                  
                     Vocifero, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Vocito, to calle often.
                  
                     Voco, care, to call, to byd, to aſke.
                  
                     Voconia, a kynde of peares.
                  
                     Vocula, a lyttell voyce, ſomtyme obloquie.
                  
                     Voculatio, an accent in ſpeche.
                  
                     Vola, the myddes of the hande or the fote. It is taken for the ſoole of the fote.
                  
                     Volaticus, ca, cum, that which flieth or goth

awaye ſodeynly, flittinge.
                  
                     Volatilis, le, that which can flye.
                  
                     Volatus, & volatura, a flight.
                  
                     Volema, a great peare, a wardyn.
                  
                     Volens, willynge.
                  
                     Volenter, wyllyngly.
                  
                     Volentia, will.
                  
                     Volito, tare, to flye often.
                  
                     Vide com.
                     Volo, are, to flye, to runne or go quycklye, or faſt.
                  
                     Volo, uis, nolui, uelle, to will.
                  
                     Volo tuam gratiam, I deſyre your fauour.
                  
                     Volo te, I wolde ſpeke with the.
                  
                     Volones, were bondemen at Rome, whiche in the warres of Cartage whan there lacked Romanes, offred them ſelfes to fyght for their maſters, and bycauſe they dyd it willyngly withoute conſtraynt or called, therfore they were called Volones.
                  
                  
                     Volſella, an inſtrument to plucke heares frō the body or face.
                  
                     
                        Volua, for Vulua.
                     
                  
                  
                     Volubilis, le, that which is eaſyly tourned.
                  
                     Volucer, cri, ſwift, lyght
                  
                     Volucra, a beaſt whyche eateth the tender vines.
                  
                     Volueres, byrdes, foules.
                  
                     Volucrior, more ſwyfte.
                  
                     Voluctis, ere, all thinge that doth flye.
                  
                     Volucrum, the after byrthe in a woman.
                  
                     Volumen, minis, a booke: ſometyme part of a boke, called a volume.
                  
                     Voluntas, tatis, will.
                  
                     Voluntarius, a, um, voluntary, willynge.
                  
                     Voluo, uere, to wrappe, to tourne.
                  
                     Voluox, & Voluola, idem quod Conuoluolus, a lytle wurme with many legges, whiche eateth the leuys of vynes, and of other trees.
                  
                     
                        Volup, for Voluptas.
                     
                  
                  
                     Volupe, delectable.
                  
                     Volupia, & voluptia, goddeſſe of voluptie or delectation.
                  
                     Voluptabilis, le, that which reioyceth.
                  
                     Sal. in Ca.
                     Voluptaria loca, placis of pleaſure.
                  
                     Voluptas, tatis, an inordinate reioycinge or delectation in thynges worldly, or carnall.
                  
                     Voluptuarius, & voluptarius, he that is gyuen to carnall delectation.
                  
                     Voluptuoſus, a, um, voluptuouſe, vnſatiable in carnall pleaſure or delectation.
                  
                     Volutabrū, a place where ſwyne do walow.
                  
                     Volutabundus, walowynge, tournynge, toſſynge in the mynde.
                  
                     Volutatim, an aduerbe ſignifienge, eftſones toſſinge in the mynde.
                  
                     Voluto, tare, to tourne lyinge, to walow, to reuolue and toſſe in the mynde.
                  
                     Vomer, meris, the culter of a plowghe.
                  
                     Vomica, a rotten impoſtume, wherout runneth matter.
                  
                     Vomitus, vomite. Vomitio, idem.
                  
                  
                     Vomo, mui, mere, to vomyte or parbrake.Vide com.
                  
                  
                     Vopiſcus, where two children are conceyued, and one of them is abort, he that cō
                     meth to perfyte byrth is called Vopiſcus. it was alſo the name of one that wrate the lyues of Emperours.Feſtus.
                  
                  
                     
                        Vopte, for Voſipſi.
                     
                  
                  
                     Voraciter, lyke a glutton.
                  
                     Vorago, ginis, a ſwolowe or gulfe.
                  
                     Voro, rare, to ſwolowe downe meate ere it be chewyd. alſo to eate gredily.
                  
                     Vorax, racis, a glutton.
                  
                     Voracitas, gluttony.
                  
                     
                        Vorſura, for verſura.
                     
                  
                  
                     Vorſurā ſoluere, a prouerb applyed to them that ſo diſcharge them ſelues of one buſyneſſe, that they entre into another more paynefull or dangerouſe.
                  
                     
                        Vortex, for vertex.
                     
                  
                  
                     Vortūnalia, a ſolemne feaſt to the god Vortumnus.
                  
                  
                     Vos, you.
                  
                     Votiuus, ua, um, that whiche is vowed. alſo deſyred.
                  
                     Votiua verba, votiuae praeces, wordes and prayers, wherin we deſyre ſomwhat.
                  
                     Votum, a vowe, ſometyme a deſyre.
                  
                     Votiuae aures, eares whiche deſyre to here.
                  
                     Votitum, olde wrytars vſed for Vetitum.
                  
                  
                     Voto, & Votito, to make auowe.
                  
                     Voti compos, he that hath that whiche he deſyred.
                  
                     Voueo, ui, uere, to vowe, or make auowe.Vide com
                  
                  
                     Vox, uocis, a voyce.
                  
                     Voce aſſa, with the voyce onely of a manne without any inſtrument of muſyke.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶V, ANTE P.
                  
                     
                        ❧
                        Vpupa,
                      a lapwynk or blacke plouer.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶V, ANTE R.
                  
                     VRania, one of the Muſis, whiche is preſident of Aſtronomy.
                  
                     Vragus, of olde writars was vſed for Orcus, dethe.
                  
                     Vrbanatim, & vrbanè, lyke a gentyl manne, courteyſely, gratiouſely.
                  
                     Vrbanicani milites, ſouldyours of the citie.
                  
                     Vrbanitas, courteſye, good maner, gentilneſſe in ſpeche, ciuilitye.
                  
                     Vrbanus, a, um, ciuile, courtaiſe, gentyll in ſpeche and geſture.
                  
                     Vrbicula, a lytle citie.
                  
                     Vrbicus, ca, cum, of the citie.
                  
                     Vrbo, are, to caſt a mere with a plough.
                  
                     Vrbs, bis, a wallyd towne. alſo a citie.
                  
                     Vrceolaris, an herbe whiche is called Pelitory of the wall.
                  
                     
                     Vrceolus, a lytell water pitchar.
                  
                     Vrceus, a pytcher pot, wherin water is caryed.
                  
                     Vredo, dinis, the fault in corne or trees, whan they are blaſtyd. it ſignifieth alſo an yche and burnynge in the ſkynne.
                  
                     Vergilius Georg.
                     Vrgeo, urſi, urgère, to prouoke, to haſte furth. ſometyme to couer.
                  
                     Vriculum, any thinge that is holow.
                  
                     Vri, wilde beaſtis lyke oxen, called Bugles or buffes.
                  
                     Vrina, vryne or piſſe.
                  
                     Lucanus Verg.
                     Vrere, is alſo to byte as froſte doeth the graſſe.
                  
                     Ter. in Eu.
                     Vro hominem. Non malum hercle. G. vro hominem. P. vt falſus animi eſt. It is no harme. G. I haue gyuen hym a corſy. P. Se how falſharted he is.
                  
                     Vrere, to tourment or vexe.
                  
                     Plautus in Moſt.
                     Vrito, tare, to burne ſore or feruently.
                  
                     Vropigium, is the loweſt and naroweſt part of the chyne next to the fundement.
                  
                     Vrſulus, & vrſellus, a lytle or yonge beare.
                  
                     Vruat, Ennius vſed for Circundat.
                  
                  
                     Vruare, is alſo to drawe a furrowe with a plowgh aboute a place.
                  
                     Vruum, a plowghe beame, or crooked part of a plowghe.
                  
                     Vrinum, an adell egge.
                  
                     Vrino, are, & Vrinor, ari, to dyue vnder the water.
                  
                     Vrinator, toris, a dyuar.
                  
                     Leo. Por. & Men.
                     Vrna, a waterpot: it is proprely a veſſell, which contayneth as moch water as doth way fourtye pounde waighte: and two of them do make Amphoram.
                  
                     Vrnarium, a bourde wheron pottes where ſette.
                  
                     Vrnula, a lytle potte.
                  
                     Vro, uſsi, urere, to burne, to be turmented, or vexed.
                  
                     Vror, reris, uri, to be bourned.
                  
                     Vrſa, two figures of ſterres, the one called Vrſa maior, and the other Vrſa minor.
                  
                  
                     Vrſus, a beare.
                  
                     Vrſa, a ſhee beare.
                  
                     Vrſinus, na, um, of a beare.
                  
                     Vrtica, a nettyl. alſo a fiſſhe, which as Paulus Iouius writeth, is of the quantitie of a wallnutte, and the keuerynge of him is betwene a ſhell and a hard ſkynne, and is ſomewhat redde, and the fyſſhe of him is harde.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶V, ANTE S.
                  
                     
                        VSia for eſſentia.
                     
                  
                  
                     Vſitatio, an vſage.
                  
                     Vſitor, taris, tari, to vſe often.
                  
                     Vſpiam, in any place, to ſome place, any where.
                  
                     Vſquam, any where, in any wyſe or maner.
                  
                     Vſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         gentium, any where.
                  
                     Vſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , vntyll, well nygh, diligently, continuelly, ſo longe, allwaye.
                  
                     Vſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         dum, vntyll.
                  
                     Vſque adeo, as longe.
                  
                     Vſque eo, in ſo moche.
                  
                     Vſquequa
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , all aboute, euery where, allwaye.
                  
                     Vſquequo, vntyll whan, or what.
                  
                     Vſtrigo, ginis, blaſt of corne.
                  
                     Vſtrina, the meltinge houſe, or place where metall is molten or het.
                  
                     Vſtulo, are, to burne or ſere a thinge.
                  
                     Vſtus, ta, tum, bourned.
                  
                     Vſucapio, & Vſucaptio, a poſſeſſion by preſcription of a long tyme.
                  
                     Vſuarius, he that is in poſſeſſiō, the pernour of the profytes, the occupyar.
                  
                     Vſura, the occupation.
                  
                     Vſurarius, a, um, that which is occupyed.Leo. Port. de Pond.
                  
                  
                     Vſura ſemiſsium, where they gyue ſyxe for the yerely lone of one hundred, As if I borowe of one a hundred poundes, and paye to hym euery moneth ten ſhillynges, duryng the tyme of the lone: this yeldeth euery yere .vi. lb. for the hundred.
                  
                     Vſurpo, pare, to vſurpe, to vſe often and moche.
                  
                     Vſus, us, vſe, ſometyme the occupation or exerciſe of a thinge, alſo profyte or frute.
                  
                     Vſurpatio, an vſurpynge or vſurpation.
                  
                     Vſus fructus, the vſe of an other mannes goodes by the conſent of the owner, the ſubſtance of the thinge being ſaued.
                  
                     Vſuuenit, it happeneth ofte.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶V, ANTE T.
                  
                     VT, as, that, as ſoone, howe, lyke as, wolde to god, how moche, all be it, ſometyme for quippe & i
                        •
                     a, leſt not.Caeſ. in c
                           •
                        .
                  
                  
                     Vt ſatis commodè ſupportari poſſet, uaereri dicebant, They ſayde, that they feared, that it mowght not be.
                  
                     Vt, as well as. Vt uales? R. vt queo,
                     Plautus in Perſa. Howe fareſt thou? R. as well as I maye.
                  
                     Vt, beholde howe. Vt ſaepe ſumma ingenia in occulto latent, Beholde how that moſte exellent wittes do lye hyd in a corner.
                  
                     Vt, admit it, or ſet the caſe, or put the caſe. Legem illam appellare fas non eſt,
                     Ci. in Phſ. 
                     & ut ſit lex, non debemus illam Hircij legem putare, It is not conuenient, that we call it a lawe, and admit that it be a lawe, we ſhuld not yet ſuppoſe it to be Hircius lawe. Etenim vt circumſpiciamus omnia, quae populo

grata, ar
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         iucunda ſunt: nihil tam populare quàm pacem, quàm concordiam, quàm otium reperiemus, for put the caſe that we mought ſe perfitely all thinges that were pleſaunte and delectable vnto the people, we ſhoulde nothinge fynde, that they ſo moche deſyre, as peace, as concorde, as vacacion from laboure.
                  
                     Te. in Ad.
                     Vt eſt dementia, Se the mans foly.
                  
                     Vt iſtum dij deae
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         perdant, I beſeche god & all halowes ſend him a myſchief.
                  
                     Ci. in Bru.
                     Vt, for poſtquàm. Nam vt illos de Republica libros edidiſti, nihil à te ſané poſtea accepimus, for ſenſe ye ſet forth your bookes of the weale publike, I neuer after receiued any thinge from you.
                  
                     Pli. in 
                           ••
                        i.
                     Vt in limme auditur, he was as well herde, as if he had bene within.
                  
                     Plautus in poena.
                     Vt, ſo that. Olent, ſalſa ſunt, tangere vt non velis, They be ſo ſalte and ſtinkinge, that thou wilt wiſh, that thou haddeſt not touched them.
                  
                     Plautus in 
                           〈…〉
                        .
                     Vt, ſe that. Operam vt det, See that he do his indeuour.
                  
                     Vt ad pauta redeam, To make a ſhort tale.
                  
                     Vt ne addam, To be ſhort.
                  
                     Vtcun
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , In what maner or facyon. Sed noſtrum eſt intelligere, v
                           •
                        cunque, & vbicunque opus e
                           •
                        t obſequi. But it is oure part to knowe, in what facyon, and where ſoeuer we ſhall gyue oure attendaunce.
                  
                     Vtcun
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , how ſo euer.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈1 paragraph〉
                        
                     
                     Vtcun
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         erit, how ſo euer it ſhall happen.
                  
                     
                        Vten
                              •
                           ile,
                      neceſſary to be vſed.
                  
                     Vter, tris, a botell.
                  
                     Vter, teri, a wombe, a bealy.
                  
                     Vterum gerere, to be great with childe.
                  
                     Vter, tra, trum, which of the twoo.
                  
                     Pli
                           •
                        .
                     Vter alteri dixerit neſcio, which of them told it to the tother, I can not tell.
                  
                     Cicer. pro Milo.
                     Vter vtri inſidias fecerit, which of them layd awayte for the tother.
                  
                     Terentius in Phorm.
                     
                        Vter
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            utri
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            eſt cord
                              •
                           ,
                      They do lyke wel the one the other.
                  
                     Vter
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         alterum uerberauit, the tone beete the tother, eche dyd beate other.
                  
                     Vterculus, a litle bealy.
                  
                     Vterlibet, which ye will.
                  
                     Vterque, bothe, the one and the other.
                  
                     Vteruis, which of them thou wilt.
                  
                     
                        Vti, for vt.
                     
                  
                  
                     Vtica, a citye in Affrike, where Cato dyd ſle hym ſelf, and therfore was afterward called Cato Vticenſis.
                  
                  
                     Plautus in Trinūmo. Plautus in Mercator. Plautus in Aul.
                     
                        Vtibilis, le, for vtilis,
                      profytable.
                  
                     
                        Vtibilitas, for vtilitas,
                      profyte.
                  
                     Vti, ſometyme ſygnifyeth to haue. Et te vtar iniquiore, & mens me ordo irrideat, that I may haue the, the warſe toward me, & that my company maye mocke me.Ter. in 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                      
                     Mihi ſi vn
                           
                              
                           
                           quam
                         ſilius erit, vt ille facili me vtetur patre, It euer I haue a ſonne, he ſhal haue me a gentyll father.
                  
                     Vti amore, to loue.
                  
                     Vti amicitia, to ſauoure, or be in amytye.Plaut. in Aſi.
                  
                  
                     Vti eadem diſciplina, to be of the ſame lernynge.
                  
                     Vti oculis, to ſee perfytely, or well. Maris cauſſa hercle hoc ego oculo vtor minime,
                     Plautus in Mili. In good fayth the ſe maketh that I ſe not well with this eye, or I ſe not a whit with this eye.
                  
                     Vti officio, to do the office or part.
                  
                     Vtilis, le, profytable, conuenient.
                  
                     Vtilitas, profyte.
                  
                     Vtiliter, profytably.
                  
                     Vtinam, wolde to god.
                  
                     Vtique, lyke as, veryly.
                  
                     Vti valitudine, to be in helth.Plin.
                  
                  
                     Vti foro, to take the market as it cometh, a prouerbe applyed to theym, which canne take the ſtate of euery tyme and chaunce, as it commeth. alſo it may ſignifie, to apply him ſelf to the facions and condicions preſent.
                  
                     Vtor, teris, ti, to vſe, to be conuerſaunt with one, to occupye.
                  
                     
                        Vtere vt vis mea opera,
                        Plautus i
                              •
                            Per. Plautus i
                              •
                            Aul.
                      Take my ſeruyce at youre commaundement. Da mihi operam amabo. M. tua eſt, vtere, at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         impera ſi quid uis, A good felowſhyp lend me thy helpe. M. It is redye for the, haue here, commaunde what thou wilt.
                  
                     Vtpotè, bycauſe that he was, as.
                  
                     
                        Vt puta, for quemadmodum,
                      as.
                  
                     
                        Vtquid, for quamobrem,
                      for what cauſe, wherfore.
                  
                     Vtraque, by both places, by the tone place and the tother.
                  
                     Vtricularius, he that pypeth in a botell.
                  
                     Vtriculus, the place in a woman wherin the childe lyeth.
                  
                     Vtrinque, of the one part and the other,Plautus in Amphitri of thone and thother.
                  
                     Vtris, a ſkynne blowen full of wynde, alſo a ball filled onely with wynde.
                  
                     Vtrobique, in the one place and the other,Plautus in Mili. on thone ſyde and the other.
                  
                     Vtroque, to thone place and the other.
                  
                     Vtroque verſum, on both partes, on thone part and thother, on euery part.
                  
                     Vtrum, whyther.
                  
                     Vtut, how ſo euer it be, in what facyon. Haec adeo mea culpa fateor fieri, non me hanc rē patri, vtut erat geſta, indicaſſe, I confeſſe, all this happened by my defaulte, that I ſhewed not to my father the mater, in what facyon it was done.
               
            
            
               
               
                  ¶V ANTE V.
                  
                     VVa, a grape, it is alſoo that, whyche is in the roufe of a mannes mouth, whyche ſometyme wyll ſwelle, and is alſo callyd Vuula. It is alſoo a ſwarme of bees hangynge rounde.
                  
                     Vua paſſa, a greatte reaſon.
                  
                     
                        Vueu
                              •
                           , a, um,
                      of a grape.
                  
                     Vueus ſuccus, wyne.
                  
                     Vuidus, da, dum, moyſte.
                  
                     Vulcanus, called Iupyters ſmythe. Alſo it is taken for fyre.
                  
                     Vulcanius, a, um, of Vulcane.
                  
                     Vulga, a ſkryppe or ſachelle, ſommetyme a womannes bealy.
                  
                     Vulgaris, re, commune, moche vſed.
                  
                     Non. Mar.
                     
                        Vulgaria, for vulgaris.
                     
                  
                  
                     Vulgatus, ta, tū, commonly knowen or vſed.
                  
                     Vulgo, abrode amonge all men.
                  
                     Vulgo conceptus, whoſe father is not certayne.Vide com.
                  
                  
                     Vulgo, gare, to publyſhe, to manyfeſte, to make commune.
                  
                     Vulgus, uulgi, the common people.
                  
                     Vulnerarius, a ſurgeon.
                  
                     Vulnerarius, a, um, belongynge to woūdes.
                  
                     Vulnero, rare, to wounde.
                  
                     Vulnus, a wounde, ſometyme griefe.
                  
                     Vulpes, a Foxe.
                  
                     Vulpecula, a cubbe or a yonge foxe.
                  
                     Vulpinus, na, num, of a foxe. ſometyme ſubtyll and crafty.
                  
                     Vulpinor, naris, nari, to be wyly.
                  
                     Vulſinus, a ryuer in Italye.
                  
                     Vulſinienſes, people dwellynge aboute the ryuer of Vulſinus.
                  
                     Vultorij, certayne dyſe.
                  
                     Vultuoſus, ſa, ſum, heuye, ſorowfulle of countenaunce.
                  
                     Vultuoſé, dyſdaynfully, heuyly, with frownynge countenaunce, with geſture agreable vnto the matter.
                  
                     Vultur, turis, & vulturius, a rauyn.
                  
                     Vulturinus, na, num, of a rauyn.
                  
                     Vulturnum, a towne in Campania.
                  
                     Vulturnus, the northeaſte wynde.
                  
                     Vulta, Lucretius vſed for the plurell number of Vultus.
                  
                  
                     Vulticulus, a lyttell vyſage.
                  
                     Vultus, of olde wryters is taken for wylle, a Volendo.
                  
                  
                     Vultus, vultus, & vultum, countynaunce or ch
                        •
                     ere.
                  
                     Vulua, the wombe or mother of anye female kynde. It is alſoo a meate vſyd of the Romaynes, made of the bealye of a ſowe, eyther that hathe farowed, or is greatte with farowe.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶V ANTE X.
                  
                     VXor, vxoris, a wyfe.
                  
                     Vxorius, he that doteth on his wyfe.
                  
                     Vxorius, a, um, of the wyfe.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶X ANTE A.
                  
                     
                        XANTHA, a nymphe.
                  
                     Xanthij, a people in Aſia whoſe citie beinge beſieged of the captayne of Cirus, they brought into the caſtelles theyr wyues, ſeruantes, and goodes, and puttynge thervnto fyre, bourned all togyther, and afterwarde iſſuinge out of the citie, faught vntyll that they were all ſlayne.
                  
                     Xanthicus, amonge the Iewes was the moneth of Aprylle.
                  
                     Xanthus, a, um, yelowe.
                  
                     Xanthus, a riuer of Troy, callid alſo Scamā
                        der, alſo a citie in Licia, alſo He
                        •
                     tors horſe.
                  
                     Xantippe, the wyfe of Socrates the phyloſopher.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶X ANTE E.
                  
                     XEnia, preſētis ſent by one to an other.
                  
                     Xeniolum, a ſmalle preſent.
                  
                     Xenodochium, an hoſpytall.
                  
                     Xenocrates, a philoſopher diſcipleto Plato.
                  
                     Xenophon, a philoſopher, whiche as wel in marcial actes, as in eloquence excellyd.
                  
                     
                        Xerampellinae ueſtes,
                        Probus.
                      garmentes of a colour, whyche I ſuppoſe is callyd Murrey. Somme doo ſuppoſe it to be blacke garmentes.Calepinus
                  
                  
                     Xeria, drye playſters.
                  
                     Xerophagia, eatynge of drye meates.
                  
                     Xerophthalmia, whanne the eyes be ſoore without droppynge or ſwellynge.
                  
                     Xerxes, a kynge of Perſia.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶X ANTE Y.
                  
                     XYlinae ueſtes, garmentes of cotton.
                  
                     Xyloaloes, a ſwete and precious wod callid Lignū aloes, our women hauing beades made therof callyd it Acellula.
                  
                  
                     Xylobalſamus, the wodde wherof baulme naturall commeth.
                  
                     Xylophagus, a worme breding in old wode, whiche is white and great belyed, and hath a blacke heed.
                  
                     Xilon, cotton.
                  
                     Xiphiae, certayne blaſynge ſterres, whiche haue beames lyke to a ſworde.
                  
                     
                     Xiſticus, he that exercyſeth hym ſelfe in a place couered out of the ſonne or rayne.
                  
                     Xyphius, a fyſhe named a ſworde fyſhe, whiche hath in his noſe a bone, lyke to the ſea berde of a ſworde, ſuche one haue I ſene.
                  
                     Xyſtus, et Xyſtum, a place, wherin menne do exercyſe wraſtlynge and other like paſtyme in wynter. It may be taken for a galerye or place to walke in out of the rayn.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶Z ANTE A.
                  
                     
                        ZACANTHEI, people in the mountaynes callyd Pyrenei, by the riuer of Hiberus.
                  
                     Zacharias, the name of a prophete. Alſo the father of ſayncte Iohan Baptiſte.
                  
                     Zacynthii, people of the yle of Zacynthus.
                  
                     Zacynthos, an ylande in the ſee callyd Ionia, wherin is a cytie of the ſame name.
                  
                     Zagrus, a mountayne, which diuideth Media from Babilonia.
                  
                     Zancle, a citie in Grecia, an other in Sicile.
                  
                     Zaphyrus, a fyſhe of the kynd of gylt hedes but that he is ſomwhat blewe in colour.
                  
                     Zathene, a ſtone lyke to aumber, now black, nowe yelowe.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶Z ANTE E.
                  
                     ZEa, a kynde of wheate.
                  
                     
                        Zelo, are, & zelor, lari, for ae mulari.
                     
                  
                  
                     Zelor, zelaris, ari, to be angrye, or to haue zeale.
                  
                     
                        Zelotes, for aemulator, he that hathe enuye at one, or aſſayeth to folowe an nother in lyuynge.
                  
                     Zelotypia, ialowſye.
                  
                     Zelotypus, ialowſe.
                  
                     Zelus, ſometyme enuy, ſomtyme loue, ſome tyme emulation.
                  
                     Zenobia, a quene of Siria, which in greke and latyne was very well lerned, and was alſo valyant in armes.
                  
                     Zephyrus, the weſte wynde.
                  
                     Zeros, a kynde of chriſtall, whyche hathe ſpottes whyte and blacke.
                  
                     Zera, & zetecula, a place made in a chaumber, wherein was a bedde and three ſtoles, whyche with courtaynes was ſo diuided from the chaumber, that ſometyme it was parte therof, ſometyme it was ſeparate from it, and it hadde three wyndowes or lowpes, by the whiche the ſonne mought entre into it.
                  
                     Zeugma, a fygure, wherby many ſences 
                        •
                     r ioyned togyther with one verbe, as, Ne
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         is es Catilina, ut te, aut pudor a turpitudine, aut metus a periculo, aut ratio a furore reuocarit, Ne thou arte ſuche a man Catilyne, as eyther ſhamefaſtneſſe canne withdrawe from diſhoneſtie, or feare from daunger, or reaſon from vengeable angre.
                  
                     Zeuſis, an excellent paynter, which ſo painted a boy caryeng grapes, that byrdes cam to the table and pecked on the grapes, wenynge that they had ben very grapes, whiche Zeuſis, beholdynge, was with hym ſelf angrye, and ſayd, If I had made the boye, aſwel as I haue done the grapis, the birdis durſt not haue come ſo nygh to the grapes.
                  
                     Zeus, a fyſſhe taken about Calys in Spain, whiche is blacke, but he is very delicate.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶Z ANTE I.
                  
                     ¶Zigena, a fyſſhe of the ſee.
                  
                     Zigari, people, whyche we doo calle Egyptians, that wander about in euery royalme and be horrible theues.
                  
                     Zigarum, the contray from whens the ſaid people doo come.
                  
                     Zizania, cockle, whiche groweth in corne.
                  
                     Zinziber, gynger.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶Z ANTE O.
                  
                     ZOdiacus, a cerkle in heuen, wherein be the .xii. ſygnes.
                  
                     Zographia, the pycture of beaſtes.
                  
                     Zoilus, was a poete, whyche enuyed Homerus, and therfore the enuiers of welle lerned men are callyd Zoili.
                  
                  
                     Zoelicum, certayne flaxe, that commeth out of Spayne, whereof threde is made for nettes to take byrdes.
                  
                     Zomos, gruelle.
                  
                     Zona, a gyrdell.
                  
                     Zonatim, in compaſſe aboute.Non. Mar.
                  
                  
                     Zopiſſa, pitche taken from ſhyppes, whiche being tempred with waxe and ſalte, is of more efficacie than other pytche.
                  
                     Zopyron, an herbe, which ſome do ſuppoſe to be Puly ol mountayne.
                  
                     Zopyrus, was a man, whiche by phiſnomye knew euery mās cōdicions. And whā in beholding Socrates he iudged him to be vnthrifty, & therfore was ſcorned of many mē
                     ▪ Socrates anſwered, Zopyrus is not deceiued, for in dede I had ben ſuche one as he ſaith, if I had not by philoſophy ſubduid nature. Alſo Zopirus was a noble Perſian, ſeruant to Darius, which whan the citie of Babylon rebellid ageinſt king Dariꝰ, & that he had madelong warre, & coulde not ſubdue thē, vnwares to any mā, did cut of his owne noſe, & woūded him ſelf, & fled to Babylon,

ſayinge, the kynge had ſo diſfygured hym, bycauſe that he perſwaded hym to haue peace with the Babylonians, whiche they heryng, made him their chiefe capitayne. Than by lytell and lytle declaryng to them the ſtrength of the kynge, and howe they mought not indure longe agaynſte hym, at the laſte he cauſed them to ſubmit them ſelues to the kynge, & to receyue hym into the citie. Wherfore Darius was wonte to ſaye, that he had leauer haue one Zopyrus, than twenty Babylons.
                  
                     Zoroanda, a ryuer, whiche the great water of Tigris maketh on the one ſyde of the mountayne Taurus.
                  
                     Zoroaſtes, the fyrſte fynder of Magike.
               
            
            
               
                  Z ANTE V.
                  
                     ¶Zura, bearies of whyte thorne.
                  
                     ¶Zygia, a pype, wherin menne dyd playe at weddynges.
                  
                     Zithus, drynke made with barley ſodden. It maye be taken for ale or biere.
               
            
            
               ❧Finis Dictionarii.
         
         
            THE ADDICION OF SYR THOMAS ELIOT KNIGHT vnto his Dictionarye.
            
               
                  ¶A ANTE B.
                  
                     Varre.
                     
                        ABAGIO, gere, to fetche a compaſſe in ſpeaking, & not to conſiſt or abide in one oratiō or ſentēce.
                  
                     Abalienatio, alienation.
                  
                     Abalienator, he that doth aliene or putte awaye a thinge, or altereth the poſſeſſion therof, an alienour.
                  
                     Abanec, a gyrdel, which prieſtes did weare, wrought with colours of ſcarlet & purple, in ſuche wiſe that there ſeemed to be in it floures and precious ſtones ſet in order.
                  
                     Abania, is interpreted the father, vnto god acceptable, or gratifienge vnto god.
                  
                     Abarceo, cui, cêre, to prohybyte or put of.
                  
                     Abauia, my great grandames mother.
                  
                     Abbreuio, are, to abbreuiate or make ſhorte.
                  
                     Abbatia, the dignitie of an abbotte. Sometyme the monaſterie.
                  
                     Abdicatio, a renoūcing of one whom I take for myn heire,Cic. in Piſonem. & ad Att. a puttyng out of fauour.
                  
                     Abdidit ſe domum, he kepte hym at home.
                  
                     Abdere ſe ex conſpectu heri, to kepe hym away that his maiſter ſee hym not.
                  
                     Abdere ſe literis, to lyue vnknowen in continuall ſtudy. Abducere clauem, to take the kaye oute of the doore.
                  
                     Abecedarius, he that ſetteth any thynge in order by letter.
                  
                     Abedo, dere, to conſume.
                  
                     Aberuncare iram deorum, to withdrawe the vengeance of god with prayers.
                  
                     Aberuncaſſo, ſere, to tourne vppe.
                  
                     Cicero.
                     Abhorreo ab urbe relinquenda, I haue noo mynde to forſake the cytie.
                  
                     Abhorret ab illo mea ſententia, myn opynion is contrary to his.
                  
                     Abhorret a ſuſpitione, it is contrarye to my ſuppoſalle.
                  
                     Abhorret a charitate uulgi, he tendreth not,Cicero de Amic. Plautus in ciſtell. or paſſeth nothynge on the poore people.
                  
                     Abhorret hilaritudo, thy myrthe is tourned into ſadneſſe.
                  
                     Abhortatio, a contrary aduyſe.
                  
                     Abhortor, tari, to gyue contrary aduyſe.
                  
                     Abi in malam rem, go hens with a miſchefe.Plautus in Mercator.
                  
                  
                     Abibitur, I or he wyl depart or go away.
                  
                     Abiectus, a vyle perſone.
                  
                     Abiegnus, na, num, of firre tree.
                  
                     Abigena bos, was amonge the diuinours,Varro. callid Augures, the oxe, whiche was to be ſacrifiſed, aboute whom the other beaſtes to be ſacrifiſed, were ſette.Plautus in Aſinar.
                  
                  
                     Abigere ex aedibus, to driue out of the dores
                  
                     Abijcio, cere, to poure oute. ſommetyme to gyue awaye.
                  
                     Abijcior, ci, to be out of reputation.
                  
                     Abijt hora, the tyme paſſed.
                  
                     Abijt ſol, the ſonne is gone downe.Terent. in Eunucho. Plautus.
                  
                  
                     Abitus, tu, a departynge.
                  
                     Abyla, a mountain in the ſe ageinſt Spain in affrica, callid one of the pillers of Hercules
                  
                  
                     Ab incunablis, from his infancy.
                  
                     Ab ineunti aetate, from his chyldehode.
                  
                     Abitio, a departure or going away, old writers toke it for deth, as we may call it, the deceſſe of one. Abiudicare a uita,
                     Plautus in Aſina. to put to dethe. Abiudicabit nun
                           
                              
                           
                           quam
                         ab ſuo triobolum, He wylle neuer be of the mynde to gyue thre halfe pens of his owne.
                  
                     
                     Abiuratio, a forſwearynge, an abiuration.
                  
                     Ablectae aedes, nete faire & pleaſant houſes.
                  
                     Abludo, luſi, ludere, to ſpeake of a thynge couertly, that other ſhall not eſpie what the matter dothe meane.
                  
                     Ablutio, a waſhynge.
                  
                     Abluuium, a vnyuerſall floudde, wherwith a countray is drowned.
                  
                     Abneco, care, to ſtrangle.
                  
                     Abneptis, a daughter in the fourth diſcent.
                  
                     Abnormis, out of rule.
                  
                     Abolitus, ta, tum, raſed oute, putte oute of remembrance.Feſtus.
                  
                  
                     Aboloes, olde writers vſed for ab illis.
                  
                  
                     Abominalis, le, abhomynable.
                  
                     Abortor, & aborto, idem quod abortio.
                  
                  
                     Abraham, the name of a patriarche, ſignifienge father of many nations.
                  
                     Abradere de bonis, to polle or ſpoyle a man of his goodes.
                  
                     Abripuit repente ſeſe, he wēt away ſodeinly
                  
                     Abrogare fidem, to bring out of credence.
                  
                     Abrogatio, the diſſoluynge or repellynge of a lawe.
                  
                     Abrupta loca, rockes & hylles here & there broken or dygged, ſo that one may vnethe go or crepe vp to them.
                  
                     Abruptum, that whiche hath ſuche a fall or ſ
                        •
                     epeneſſe downe, that no man maye paſſe by it,
                        
                           〈1 paragraph〉
                        
                      but onely fall downe.
                  
                     
                        Ab
                              •
                           te 
                              ••
                           at,
                      it ſtandeth vppon the, or it lyeth in the.
                  
                     
                        Abs qui
                              ••
                           s homine,
                      of euery man what ſoo euer he be.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈1 paragraph〉
                        
                     
                     Abſciſsus, a, um, broken, ſharpe.
                  
                     
                        Abſciſsior iuſtu i
                              •
                           ,
                      ſharpe iuſtyce.
                  
                     Abſconſus, a, um, hydde.
                  
                     
                        Abſolue
                              •
                           e vno uerbo,
                      to telle at a worde, to make an ende ſhortely.
                  
                     Liuius. 2.
                     Abſoluere ſuſpitione, to diſcharge or putte of all ſuſpition.
                  
                     Plautus in capt. in Amphitri.
                     Abſoluere, to depeche of buſyneſſe.
                  
                     Abſolutè, perfytly.
                  
                     Abſolutio, a diſcharge, or depeche.
                  
                     Abſolutus, ta, tum, diſcharged, depeched.
                  
                     Abſonum fidei, not credible.
                  
                     Abſonus uoce, he yt hath an vntunable voice
                  
                     Abſtergeo, ſi, gére, to wype, to wipe awaye.
                  
                     Abſterrere, to feare awaye, or dryue awaye with feare.
                  
                     Plautus in Mili. Plautus in Ruden.
                     Abſtinenter, with abſtinence.
                  
                     Abſtinere incōmoditate, to behaue him honeſtly. Abſtinere manum, to hold his hand.
                  
                     Abſtineas me manum, take hede that thou ſtryke me not.
                  
                     Sueton. in Clau. Pli. in epi.
                     Abſtinuit diu publico, it was long or he came abrode. Abſtinere uerbis, to take heede, what he ſpeaketh.
                  
                     Abſtinens alieni, he that medleth not with other mennes goodes.
                  
                     Abſtraxi me illinc, I gatte me thens.
                  
                     Abſtractum, taken by force.
                  
                     Abſtrudere colaphos, to buffet or giue blowꝭ.
                  
                     Abſtruſus, a, um, hydde or ſhutte vp.
                  
                     Abeſt mihi animus, I haue no courage.
                  
                     Abſit uerbo inuidia, a forme of ſpeking whā one wolde not be ſuſpected of arrogāce in ſome thynge that he wyll ſpeake.
                  
                     Abſente nobis, whyle I was away.
                  
                     Abſento, tare, to kepe from a place, or cauſe to be abſente.Plaut. in Moſtel.
                  
                  
                     Abſumpti ſumus, we are vndone.
                  
                     Abſumedo, dinis, diſpence, waſte of money or other lyke thynge.
                  
                     Abſumptio, a waſtynge, waſte.
                  
                     Abſurdé, without purpoſe or reaſon, to no purpoſe. Abſynthium marinū, wormefede.
                  
                     Abſynthium ſantonicum, maye ſeeme to be Lauander cotton.
                  
                     Abundanter, abundantely.
                  
                     Abunde eſt, it is ynoughe.
                  
                     Abundans, a ryche manne.
                  
                     Abundare ingenio, to haue a great wytte.
                  
                     Abuerto, tere, to tourne from a place.
                  
                     Abuſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         mané ad ueſperam, frome the mornynge to nyghte.
                  
                     Ambuſtus, ta, tum, bourned vp.
                  
                     Abuſum, worne out.
                  
                     Abuſus, us, & abuſio, abuſe, yll vſe.
                  
                     Abutor, ti, to weare out.Terentius in Prolog
                           •
                         Andri.
                  
                  
                     Abutitur operam, he loſte his labour.
                  
                     Abydeus, a man borne in the ile of Abydos.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶A ANTE C.
                  
                     ACananthide, the olde name of the yle of Cypres.
                  
                     Acanthus, is an herbe cōmonly callid Brankurſyn. Loke afore in Acanthis.
                  
                  
                     Acapis, a ryuer in Aſia.
                  
                     Acarpos, vnfruytefull. Acaſta, a nymphe.
                  
                     Acar, & Acarus, a lyttell worme that breedeth in waxe.
                  
                     Acatia, a thorne growynge in Egipt, wherof commeth a gumme. whyche is medycynable for many diſeaſes.
                  
                     Acatium, a bote.
                  
                     Accede adiutare, come helpe me.Plautus in Truculen.
                  
                  
                     Accedit huc, more ouer than that.
                  
                     Accedere obuīam, to mete with one.
                  
                     
                        Accedere periculum,
                        Plautus in Epidic.
                      to take on hym the daungiere.
                  
                     Accedere alicui, to graunt to an other, to be of an other mans opinion.
                  
                     Accelerare gradum, to go apace.
                  
                     Acceleratio, haaſte or ſpede.
                  
                     Accento, tare, to ſynge often.
                  
                     Acceſsio, an augmentacyon, increaſe. Alſo a commynge. Acceſsio morbi, the begynnynge of a ſyckeneſſe.
                  
                     
                     Accerſio, ſire, to ſende or call for one.
                  
                     Accerſitus, ta, tum, callyd for.
                  
                     Accerſi iube filiam, commande thy daughter to be ſent for, or callyd for.
                  
                     Liuius.
                     Accido cidere, to extenuate or make feeble, to deſtroye.
                  
                     Acciſus, a, um, made feble, decayed.
                  
                     Accidit, there happened, it is chaunced.
                  
                     Acecinere, to ſynge to an inſtrument, or to ſynge a parte, as a treble to a tenoure, or a deſcant to a playne ſonge.
                  
                     Accipenſer, a fyſhe hauynge the ſkales turned forewarde, contrary to other fyſſhes. which in the old time was of moſt eſtimation at the tables of kynges and princis.
                  
                     Plautus in caſina. Ci. Tyro.
                     Accipere auribus, to here.
                  
                     Accipere cauſam, to holde excuſed.
                  
                     Accipere cladē. to haue great loſſe in bataile.
                  
                     Accipere corde, to perceiue well. Pol haud ſatis meo corde accepi querelas tuas, in good faythe I do not well perceyue the cauſe of thy griefe.
                  
                     Accipere conditionem, to take the offre.
                  
                     Cicero de Amic.
                     Accipere dolorē, to take thought, to be heuy
                  
                     Accipere nomen, to take accounte.
                  
                     Accipere poteſiatem, to haue leaue.
                  
                     Accipere uulnus, to be wounded.
                  
                     Acceptus, receyued, entertayned.
                  
                     Acceptus, ta, tum, accepted, acceptable.
                  
                     Accepti & expenſi ratio, accompte of receites and expenſes.
                  
                     Accipiter humipera, a ſparhawke.
                  
                     Accipiter hierax, an hawke callid a ſakre.
                  
                     Accipiter pecuniarum, a poller of people.
                  
                     Accipitiarius, a faulconer.
                  
                     Accliuitas, a rayſynge vp of a hylle.
                  
                     Accommodatus, ta, tum, applyed to a thyng beſemyng, couenable.
                  
                     Accommodus, dà, dū, apt, mete, conuenient.
                  
                     Accreduo, duis, duere, idem quod accredo.
                  
                  
                     Accubatio, a ſyttynge at the table.
                  
                     Accubitores, they that ſytte at the table.
                  
                     Accumbere alicui, to ſyt by one at the table.
                  
                     Plautus in Trucu.
                     Accurare, to do a thynge dylygently.
                  
                     Accurare prandium, to make redy the diner.
                  
                     Accurata malitia, malyce prepenſed.
                  
                     Accuratum habere, to prepenſe.
                  
                     Accuſatio, an accuſement.
                  
                     Accuſatorius liber, a bylle of complaynt.
                  
                     Accuſare, to blame.
                  
                     Accuſabilis, le, worthy to be blamed.
                  
                     Accuſator, an accuſer, a rebuker.
                  
                     Accuſatrix, a woman rebuker.
                  
                     Acedaria, ſalettꝭ or meate lyghtly p̄pared.
                  
                     Acri ingenio, quycke wytted.
                  
                     Acer equus, a ſwyfte horſe.
                  
                     Acerrimi inimici, mortall ennemies.
                  
                     Acer morbus, a greuous ſyckenes.
                  
                     Acres oculi, cleere eyes.
                  
                     Acerrima uxor, a very ſhrewde wyfe.
                  
                     Acere, a cytie by Naples.
                  
                     Acerátum, mortar, or claye myxte with hey or ſtrawe, wherwith walles are daubyd.
                  
                     Acerbè, bitterly, vnripely, cruelly, vehemētly.
                  
                     Acero, rare, to myxte with chaffe.
                  
                     Acernus, na, num, of the tree callyd Acer.
                  
                  
                     Acerra, a ſhyppe, wherein frankyncenſe is put. ſome do name it an aultar, which was ſette before a deed corps, wheron incenſe was burned. Some call it a cuppe, wherin they dyd ſacrifyce wyne.
                  
                     Aceroſus panis, browne bredde not ranged.
                  
                     Aceſinus, a great ryuer in Perſia, whiche runneth into the ryuer of Indus, wherein do growe canes of ſuche greatneſſe, that they doo make betwene euery knotte or ioynt therof, botes to rowe in.
                  
                     Aceſis, an herbe, which is yelow in colour.
                  
                     Aceſtis, a great ryuer in India.
                  
                     Acerabulum, a meaſure contayninge in it of water meaſure, two ounces.
                  
                     Acetoſitas, a
                        •
                     greneſſe or ſowrenes.
                  
                     Acetofus, a, um, eygre, ſowre.
                  
                     Acetum in pectore. Nunc experiar, ſit ne acetum tibi cor acre in pectore, Howe wylle I proue, yf thou haſte any thynge that doth prycke the in the ſtomacke.
                  
                     Aceum, a citie in Colchis, on the banke of the ryuer callyd Phaſis.
                  
                     Achantia, a fyſhe, whiche ſome men do ſuppoſe to be thornebacke.
                  
                     Achar, a citie in Siria, nowe callyd Niſibis.
                  
                  
                     
                        Acha
                              •
                           eon,
                      the mayne ſayle of a ſhyppe.
                  
                     Achelous, a ryuer in Grecia, ſo named of a kynge of that name.
                  
                     Acheloeus, of that ryuer. ſommetyme it is put for aqueus.
                  
                  
                     Achemenia, a countray in Perſia.
                  
                  
                     Acherontinus, & Acherontius, of the ryuer of Acheron.
                  
                     Acheruſia, a fenne in the realme of Naples.
                  
                     Achilleias, a kynde of barly, peraduenture that whiche is callyd beare corne.
                  
                     Achilleon, ſome do ſuppoſe to be mylfoyle.
                  
                     Achras, a wylde peare.
                  
                     Achylus, without lyppes.
                  
                     Aciale, harde yron.
                  
                     Acidalia, a name of Venus, of a foūtayn in a citie of Boeotia, callyd orchomenae.
                  
                  
                     Acidylus, a knotte in the gyrdell of Venus.
                  
                     Aciem trahere, to ſette in edge.
                  
                     Acies animi, the capacitie of a mans wytte.
                  
                     Acinaceus, a, um, full of kernels.
                  
                     Aciritani, were a people in Spayne.
                  
                     Acis, a ryuer in Sycil, which cometh from the mountayne of Aethna.
                  
                     Acitia, an Ilande callyd alſo Melos in the ſea by Candye.
                  
                     
                     Acilon, the bearye of holy.
                  
                     Aclaſsis, a garmēt vnſowed frō the ſhulders
                  
                     Acon, aconis, a fyſhe, whiche after the deſcription of Paulus Ioutus, I ſuppoſe to be that, whiche at London is callid a ſhad.
                  
                     Acopus, an herbe callyd alſo Anagyris, full of braunches, and hathe flowres lyke to colewortes, and hath an ylle ſauoure, the ſede therof is in longe coddes, harde and lyke in facion to kydneys.
                  
                     Acorus, an herbe with longe leaues, lyke the blade of a ſworde. I ſuppoſe it be that, whiche is callyd Gladwen or Gladen.
                  
                     Acratiſmus, & acratiſma, a breakefaſt.
                  
                     Acris, a ryuer of Italye.
                  
                     Acrodria, be all frutes, which haue an hard rynde or ſhale, as pomegranades, nuttes, cheſtyns, piſtaces, and other lyke.
                  
                     Acre, ſwyft, ſowre, cruell, valiant, vehemēt, dyligent, circumſpecte.
                  
                     Acritas, ſowreneſſe, crueltie, dilygence.
                  
                     Acriter, ſwiftly, cruelly, vehemētly, diligētly
                  
                     Acriſius, kynge of Argiues, the father of 
                        •
                     anaes, on whom Iupiter begate Perſeꝰ.
                  
                     Acroama, a ſubtyle ſentence, which requireth an exquyſite ſtudy to perceyue.
                  
                     Acroamata, were certayne lectures of Ariſtotle, whiche he radde to his ſcholers, wherin was the moſte ſubtylle and counnynge parte of philoſophie.
                  
                     Acroecraunia, mountaynes of wonderfulle heyght, betwene Armenia and Hiberia.
                  
                     Acrocomus, one hauynge longe heare.
                  
                     Acrocorinthus, an high mountayne in Morea, betwene the two ſees Aegeū & Ioniū.
                  
                  
                     Acropolis, a caſtell ſette on a hylle.
                  
                     Acte, an elder tree.
                  
                     Action, the bearye of an elder.
                  
                     Acteus, a, um, of Athenes.
                  
                     Actia, orum, plays made ones in fiue yeres.
                  
                     Actitatus, ta, tum, determyned by iugement.
                  
                     Actitatio, a debatynge of a caſe in lawe, or pleedynge.
                  
                     Actius, a noble poete that wrate tragedies.
                  
                     Actiuus, actyue.
                  
                     Actualis ſcientia, a ſcience that declarethe thinges by their operation, of the which ar thre partes, morall, diſpenſatiue, and ciuile.
                  
                     Acta aetas, age whan youth is paſte.
                  
                     Acta agere, to doo that whiche is all redye done, to loſe laboure.
                  
                     Actus, put in feare.
                  
                     Actus, a braid in tillage, it is alſo a cartway.
                  
                     Actuoſus, alway in buſyneſſe.
                  
                     Actuoſus ignis, fyre whiche alway burneth.
                  
                     Seneca.
                     Aculeatus, ta, tum, any thyng that prycketh.
                  
                     Acupedius, he that hath a quycke and apte foote to runne with.
                  
                     Paul. Iouiꝰ
                     Acus, a fiſhe, whiche is longe and ſomwhat grene, and hath a beke, as it were the byll of a crane, I ſuppoſe it is that, which ſom calle an hornekeke.
                  
                     Acuſtici, they whiche do here all, and ſpeke nothynge them ſelfes.
                  
                     Acuté, quyckely, ſubtilly.
                  
                     Acuti oculi, cleere eyes.
                  
                     Acuti cibi, ſharpe meates.
                  
                     Acutum ingenium, a ſubtyll or quycke wyt.
                  
                     Acylon, an holye beary.
                  
                     Acyphantes, a cytie in Theſſaly, whiche is alſo callyd Pindus.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶A ANTE D.
                  
                     ADAD, in the Syrian tounge, is the ſonne, alſo it ſignifieth onely.
                  
                     Ad me, with me. Commodum ad te dederam literas, de pluribus rebus,
                     Cice. Atti. lib. 9. 
                     cum ad me bene mane, Dionyſius fuit. I had ſcarſly ſent my letters vnto the, whan Dionyſe was with me erly in the mornynge.
                  
                     Ad breuiſsimū tempus, for a very ſhort time.Pli. in pan.
                  
                  
                     Ad id tempus, at that tyme.
                  
                     Ad ſapientiam huius, nimius nugator fuit, In regard of his wyſedom he was but a fole.
                  
                     
                        Ad illam faciem, ita ut illa eſt, ut emerem ſibi,
                        Plautus in Mercator. 
                        mandauit mihi,
                      He commaunded me to bie for hym one, whiche had ſuche an nother face as ſhe hath.
                  
                     Ad cyathum ſtare, to awayte on the cuppe.Sueton. in Caeſare Ci de ora
                           •
                        tore. 2.
                  
                  
                     Ad manum ſeruus, he that is clerke to one, or wryteth for hym.
                  
                     Ad pedes, a lakay.
                  
                     Ad manus venire, to come to handeſtrokes, to cope togyther.
                  
                     Ad meridiem, vntyll noone.
                  
                     Ad multam noctem, late in the nyght.Terentius Cice. Atti.
                  
                  
                     Ad tempus, in ſeaſon. ſometyme accordyng to the tyme alſo for a tyme.
                  
                     Ad dextram, on the ryght hande.
                  
                     
                        Ad hoc exemplum, nun
                              
                                 
                              
                              quam
                            a maui,
                        Plautus in mercator.
                      I neuer louyd of that facyon, or in that maner.
                  
                     Ad hunc modum, this way or in this maner.
                  
                     Ad extremum, fynally, in concluſyon.Plin. Plautus in Au
                           •
                        ul. Cicero. Plinius. Cicero de Amic. Plinius. Plautus in Ruden. Plautus. Terentius in Phor
                           •
                        .
                  
                  
                     Ad poſtremum, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Ad ſummum, at the moſte.
                  
                     Ad uerbum, worde by worde.
                  
                     Ad vnum, not one lefte.
                  
                     Ad vnum idem ſentiunt, they be all of oone opynyon.
                  
                     Ad aſſem, to the vttermoſte penye.
                  
                     Ad annos ſedecim, ſyxtene yeres herafter.
                  
                     Ad rauim poſcere, to aſk vntil one be hoorſe
                  
                     
                        Ad reſtim res red
                              •
                           t,
                      It is come to the poynt that be wyl hange him ſelfe. it is a ſentēce ſignifienge deſperation.
                  
                     
                        Ad rem ſuam ſapere,
                        Plautus in Trucu.
                      to be wyſe for his own profytte.
                  
                     
                     Cicero.
                     Adaequo, are, to make or be equall.
                  
                     Adaggero, rere, to gather and lay togither.
                  
                     Adam, the fyrſte manne, whyche ſygnifyeth redde.
                  
                     Adamanteus, & Adamantinus, of a diamand, or as harde as a diamande.
                  
                     Adamaſter, a gyaunt, whiche was of an incredible greatteneſſe.
                  
                     Adamiani, were certayne heretykes, whiche went naked aboute all their buſyneſſe, ſayenge that they dyd folowe the nakydnes of Adam beinge in Paradiſe, who beleuyd that there ſhulde haue ben no mariage, if no man had ſynned.
                  
                     Adaperio, rire, to open a thynge.
                  
                     
                        Adapertilis, le, for apertum,
                      open.
                  
                     Adarca, a ſalte fome, whiche cometh of the ryndes of caanes or reedes grownyge in fennes.
                  
                     Adaſia, an olde ewe, which hath late eaned or hadde a lambe.
                  
                     Adaſſo, olde wryters vſed for Adigo, to compelle.
                  
                     Non. Mar.
                     Adaucto, tare, to augment or increace.
                  
                     Adaugeo, gêre, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Adauctus, ta, tum, augmented.
                  
                     
                        Adaxi
                              •
                           t, for adegerint,
                      lette them compelle, or conſtrayne.
                  
                     Adcenſi, ſouldiors put in the place of them whiche are deed.
                  
                     Addico, cere, to ſette to ſale.
                  
                     Addicere animū, to gyue or apply his mynd.
                  
                     Terent. in Eunucho.
                     Addictus, bounden to one.
                  
                     Addebat hoc, he ſayde moreouer.
                  
                     Addere animum, to gyue courage.
                  
                     Addere gradum, to make hym go faſter.
                  
                     Vergilius.
                     Additus, for an ennemie. Nec Teucris addita Iuno, us
                           
                              
                           
                           quam
                         aberit, Neither Iuno ennemy to the Troyans ſhall lacke or be away.
                  
                     Addo, dare, to gyue to one.
                  
                     Addormiſco, ſcere, to ſlepe.
                  
                     Addubito, tare, to doubte.
                  
                     Adducere habenas, to hold ſtrait the bridel.
                  
                     Adductus, ta, tum, brought, ledde, moued.
                  
                     Adduplico, care, to double any thynge.
                  
                     Adelphi, bretherne, it is alſo the name of a comedie in Terence.
                  
                     Adeo res redijt, the matter is comme to that poynte.
                  
                     Adeouſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , vntyll that.
                  
                     Adeſt ei animus, he hath a good courage▪
                  
                  
                     Adeſt, he is at hande.
                  
                     Adeſſe, to ayde or ſuccour one.
                  
                     Terent. in Andria.
                     Adeſdum, come hyther.
                  
                     Adeor, the paſſyue of adeo.
                  
                  
                     Ader, a place by Bethlem, where angelles dydde ſynge at the byrthe of Chriſte, and Iacob kepte there his ſhepe.
                  
                     Non. Mar.
                     Adeſus, a, um, conſumed.
                  
                     
                        Ad exitam aetatem, for ad ultimam aetatem,
                        Feſtus.
                      at the vttermoſte age.
                  
                     Adfabrum, well wrought.
                  
                     Adhaereſco, ſcere, idem quod adhaereo.
                  
                  
                     Adhaeſus, a, um, cleaued to.
                  
                     Adhibere animū, to take hede what is ſpokē
                  
                  
                     Adhibere aures, to harken, to gyue an eare.
                  
                     Adhibere in conſilium aliquem, to aſke coū
                     ſayle of oone.
                  
                     Adhibere modum, to vſe moderacyon or temperaunce.
                  
                     Adhibere parſimoniam, to ſpare.
                  
                     Adhibere ſermonem, to deuyſe or talke togyther.
                  
                     Adhibêre teſtes, to brynge forth wytnes.
                  
                     Adhibere uim, to doo a thyng by vyolence, to inforce.
                  
                     
                        Adhinnio,
                        Cic. in Piſonem.
                      to neye as a horſe dothe after a mare. Cicero by a metaphore maketh it to ſygnyfie to reioyce.
                  
                     
                        Adhuc locorum, for adhuc.
                        Plautus in capt.
                     
                  
                  
                     Adiabene, a countray beyonde Armenia.
                  
                     Adiantum, an herbe growinge about ſpringes of water, hauynge ſmalle leaues lyke to Coriander. ſomme doo nowe take it for Maydenheare.
                  
                     Adiaphoron, indifferente.
                  
                     Adij te heri de filia, I came yeſterday to talk with the for thy doughter.
                  
                     
                        Adijcere album calculum,
                        Plin. epiſt.
                      to approue a thing
                  
                     Adijcere animum, to ſet his mynde or loue on oone.
                  
                     
                        Adijcere oculum haereditati.
                        Ci. in Ver. 
                        Plane uidebant adiectum eſſe oculum haereditati,
                      They ſaw playnely, that the other wente aboute to gette the inheritaunce.
                  
                     Adimere animam, to kylle.
                  
                     Adimere ius, to prohybyte.Pli. de uiris illuſtr.
                  
                  
                     Adimere ueſtem, to pulle of his garmente.
                  
                     Adimere ſuum alteri, to take an other mannes goodes from hym.
                  
                     Adinuenio, to inuente a thynge.
                  
                     Adinuentum, an inuention.
                  
                     Adipiſci ſenectutem, to come to age.Cicero de ſenectu. Plautus in Epidic.
                  
                  
                     Adipiſci, to ouertake one.
                  
                     Adipoſus, ryche.
                  
                     Adipſon, a ſwete roote callyd lykorys.
                  
                     Adipſos, a certayne date tree growynge in Egypte, the fruite wherof hath no ſtone. Plinius callyth it Myrobalanum.
                  
                  
                     Adire ad pactionem, to come to a poynt.
                  
                     Adire diſcrimen, to put hym in daunger.
                  
                     Adire haereditatē, to take on me, the, or him, the inherytaunce.
                  
                     Adire periculum, to take a daungerouſe thynge on hym.
                  
                     Aditiculus, a lyttell entrie.
                  
                     Adiungere, to wynne or optayne.Terent. in Andria. 
                     Errat lōge mea quidem ſententia, qui imperium credat

grauius eſſe aut ſtabilius, ui quod fit, quàm id quod amicitia adiungitur, He is foule deceyued in myne opynion, that thinketh, that rule to be more ferme and ſtable, whiche is goten by vyolence, than that which is obtayned by frendſhip.Plautus in M
                           •
                        n.
                  
                  
                     Adiurgium, debate.
                  
                     Adiuratio, a con
                        •
                     uringe.
                  
                     Adiurati, confederate or alied togither by othe.
                  
                     Adiutor, an helper, Adiutrix.
                  
                  
                     Adiunamen, helpe.
                  
                     Adlino, nere, to enoynt, or rubbe a thinge with any thinge liquide.
                  
                     Adminiſter, a ſtuarde of houſeholde.
                  
                     Adminiſtro, rare, to do ſeruyce, to exployte, to fournyſhe
                  
                     Adminiſtratio, exploytynge or doynge of a thinge, ſeruice.
                  
                     Admirabilis, wonderfull.
                  
                     Admirabundes, he that doeth wonder or maruayle at a thinge.
                  
                     Admiſceo, ſcui, cere, to myngle or mixte one thinge with another.
                  
                     Admiſtio, onis, a menglynge or mixture.
                  
                     Admiſte, an aduerbe ſignifyenge, one menglyd with another.
                  
                     Admiſtura, idem quod admiſtio.
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           〈1 paragraph〉
                        
                     
                     Admittere uitam, to retayne lyfe, to lyue.
                  
                     Admittere, to do. Quid tandem admiſi in te? what haue I offended the?
                  
                     Admittere noxiam, to pardon an offence.
                  
                     Admittere diem, to open the wyndowe, that the lyght maye come in.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈1 paragraph〉
                        
                     
                     Admittere equum, to lyte vp to horſebacke, or as we ſaye, to take his horſe.
                  
                     Admittere, to put the male beſte to the female for genera
                        •
                     ion.
                  
                     Admittere ſumptum, to do great coſte.
                  
                     Admodum. ye.
                  
                     
                        Ad
                              ••
                           to, tare,
                      to ſwym to a place.
                  
                     Adnecto, tere, to knyt to a thynge.
                  
                     Feſtus.
                     Adnexio, a knyttynge or faſtning to a thing.
                  
                     Adnicto, nixi, nict ere, to wynke on one.
                  
                     Adnitor, niteris, niti, to leane to a thinge, to beare or ſuſtayne it.
                  
                     Adnotatio, a titillinge, or ſhort notinge of that, which we do reade or here.
                  
                     Adnumero, rare, to adde to.
                  
                     Adolabilis, withoute grief or ſorowe.
                  
                     Adoleſcens, tis, a yonge man, whiche is yet growynge.
                  
                     Adoleſcentulus, a ladde.
                  
                     Adonat, the name of god amonge the Iues, which ſignyfyeth, The Lorde of all creatures.
                  
                     Adoperio, rire, to kouer or hyde.
                  
                     Adoptatitius, he whome a manne ordayneth to be his heyre, and taketh vnto him in the ſtede of his ſonne.
                  
                     Adoptio, where a manne maketh one his heyre, and taketh hym for his ſonne, beinge of his owne kynne or a ſtraunger.
                  
                     Ador, & Adoreum, a kynde of wheate, called alſo far, which by the deſcription ſemeth to be the wheate, whiche we calle ducke byll.
                  
                     Adorno, nare, to apparayle, to prepare, to prayſe.
                  
                     Adquiro, quiſiui, quirere, to geate, to conquere.
                  
                     
                        Adquo, for quouſ
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                           ,
                      vntyll.
                  
                     Adramelech, an ydolle of Syria, whome alſo the Samaritanes honoured.
                  
                     Adraſtia, a contraye not ferre from Troye, alſo the name of a citye there. It was alſo called a goddeſſe, which toke from manne both memory and wytte.
                  
                     Adraſtus, a kynge of Argyues in Greece. who hadde two dawghters, of the which the one was maryed to Tideus, the other to Polym
                        •
                     es, reade the hiſtorye of the ſyege of Thebes.
                  
                     Adrepo, pſi, pere, to reache at a thynge, to take it with vyolence.
                  
                     Adſciſco, ſcere, to ioyne or take to, as whan one ioyneth another with hym in auctority, or taketh one to ayde him in his office.
                  
                     Adſcriptitii, were men of warre, whyche were taken into an armye to ſupplye the places of them that were ſlayne, or other wyſe lacked.
                  
                     Aſcripti, were they that were appoynted to inhabyte townes or cityes, made by the Romanes, called Coloniae.
                  
                  
                     Adſcriptiui, idem quod Adſcriptitii.
                  
                  
                     Adſitis domi facite, Se that ye be bothe at home.
                  
                     Aduallas, a mountayne, frome the whyche the great ryuer called the Rene, runneth Northward.
                  
                     Adubanus, the famouſe ryuer called alſo Danubius and Hiſter.
                  
                     Aduelitatio, a mutuall reprochinge, or contention in wordes.
                  
                     Aduentus, tus, a commynge.
                  
                     Aduerbialiter, lyke an aduerbe.
                  
                     Aduerſaria, a reknynge booke of expenſis. wryten fyrſt afore the booke of accompte be made.
                  
                     Aduerſa aerumna, aduerſyty, dammage.Terentius in Phorm.
                  
                  
                     Aduerſa valetudo, ſyckeneſſe,
                  
                     Aduerſatus, ta, tum, agaynſt or contrary.Pli de uiris illuſt
                           •
                        .
                  
                  
                     Aduerſis vulneribus, with woundes in the forepart.
                  
                     Aduerſo flumine, agaynſt the ſtreme.
                  
                     Aduerſus, ſa, ſum, that whereof onely the fore parte is ſene, as Auerſus, wherof only

onely the hynderpart is ſene.
                  
                     Aduorſo animo, agaynſt my wyll, thy wyll, or his wyll: agaynſt his hart.
                  
                     Aduerſum, agaynſt. Quis eſt hic, qui aduerſum mihi fit? Who is he that commeth agaynſt me, or marchyth towarde me?
                  
                     
                        Aduerſum, for erga.
                  
                  
                     Aduertere, to perceyue.
                  
                     Aduertere animum, to take hede, or herken.
                  
                     Pli. in pan.
                     Aduertere oculos, to perceyue, to ſee, to beholde.
                  
                     Adueſperaſcit, the euenynge, or euentyde is commen, or it waxyth late, or it is nyght.
                  
                     Aduigilo, uigilare, to watche, to take good heede.
                  
                     Adulteror, rari, idem quod Adultero.
                  
                  
                     Adumbratus, a, um, fayned, countrefayted, portured.
                  
                     Adumbratio, portrayture.
                  
                     Adulator, toris, a flaterar.
                  
                     Adulatrix, a woman that flatreth.
                  
                     
                        Aduocito, 
                              •
                           are,
                      to call for one often.
                  
                     Aduocatus, he that defendeth an other mans cauſe.
                  
                     Aduocatio, pleadynge.
                  
                     Aduoluo, uere, to wrappe rounde togither.
                  
                     
                        Aduorſor, for Aduerſor.
                     
                  
                  
                     Aduorſem, olde wrytars vſed for Aduerſarium.
                  
                  
                     Aduro, uſsi, urere, to roſt, to burne.
                  
                     Aduſtio, roſtinge, or burnynge.
                  
                     Aduſtus, ta, tum, roſtyd, or burned.
                  
                     Adyticulum, a dyminutif of Adytum.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  ¶A, ANTE E.
                  
                     AEantion, a towne in the promontory or hill of Troye, called Sigeum.
                  
                     Aeas, aeantos, a ryuer of a contraye called Epyrus, whiche runneth oute of Macedonia, and falleth into the Se called Ionium.
                  
                     Aeacus, was the ſonne of Iupiter and Europa, whome Paynymes dyd ſuppoſe to be of ſuche iuſtice, that he was appoynted by Pluto, called godde of hell, to be one of the iuges there, with Minoes and Radamanthus, to diſcuſſe the tranſgreſſyons of menne beynge deed, and to aſſigne to theym punyſſhement accordinge to their merites.
                  
                     Aedificatio, buyldynge.
                  
                     Aedificator, a buyldar.
                  
                     Aeditio, a publication of a thinge.
                  
                     Aeger, aegra, um, ſycke, ſorowfull.
                  
                     Aegerrime, very greuouſly.
                  
                     Aedes, a chambre.
                  
                     Aedilitius, a, um, pertayninge to Aediles.
                  
                  
                     Aeditimus, idem qui Aedituus.
                  
                  
                     Aedon, a Nightingale.
                  
                     Aegae, a citie in Cilicia, alſo an Ile in the Se called Aegeum.
                  
                     Aegaeon, a gyant called alſo Briareus, alſo it is one of the names of Neptunus.
                  
                     Aegaea, a cytye in Macedonia, another in Mauritania.
                  
                     Aegeria, a Nymphe or goddeſſe, with whō Numa Pompilius the ſeconde kynge of Romanes, fayned to haue familiar company and communicacion concernyng religion and worſhyppynge of goddes, to the intent that he mought thereby withdrawe the people frome the appetyte of warres, wherewith they were inflamed.
                  
                     Aegaeum mare.
                  
                  
                     Aegeus, the father of Theſeus.
                  
                     Aegealus, was a countraye called alſo Achaia, in Greece▪
                  
                  
                     Aegides, of Aegeus, patronymicum.
                  
                  
                     Aegylops, wylde otes.
                  
                     Aegina, a citie ioynynge to Peloponeſo or Morea, agaynſte the countraye of Athenes, alſo an Ile frome Pireum .xii. myles.
                  
                     Aeginenſes, the people of Aegina the citie.
                  
                     Aeginitae, people of the Ile of Aegina.
                  
                     Aegineticus, ca, cum, of Aegina.
                  
                     Aegimuros, an Ile called alſo Capraria, beyonde Corſe.
                  
                     Aegiochus, a name of Iupiter.
                  
                     Aegis, gidis, an haubergeon, whiche onely the goddis were paynted with.
                  
                     Aegium, a towne in Peloponeſo, now called Morea, where they fayned that Iupiter was noryſſhed with a gote.
                  
                     Aegle, a Nymphe.
                  
                     Aegloga, a communication of ſhepeherdes togither.
                  
                     Aegocephalus, a byrde,Ariſtot. de animali. 2. which is withoute a ſplene.
                  
                     Aegocerus, idem quod Capricornus.
                  
                  
                     Aegonomus, a gote herde, or kepar of gotes.
                  
                     Aegos, a ryuer in Thracia.
                  
                     Aegré, with moche payne, or difficulty.
                  
                     Aegrefero, tuli, ferre, to be ſory.
                  
                     Aegreſco, ſci, ſcere, to be ſycke.
                  
                     Aegrum, idem quod aegritudo, ſorowe, diſpleaſure.
                  
                     Aegrius, more ſorowfully, more diſpleaſauntly.
                  
                     Aegrio, I am ſycke.
                  
                     Aegritudo, dinis, grief of mynde, or ſorow.
                  
                     Aegrotare, to fayle, or be feble of courage.
                  
                     Aegrotus, feble of courage.
                  
                     Aegula, a kynde of brymſtone, wherewith in ſome places they doo perfume wulle to make it whyte.
                  
                     Aegylops, a fiſtula in the corner of the eye

by the noſe of a manne, whiche rounneth mattier.
                  
                     Aegyptini, people of Ethiope, marchynge on Egypte.
                  
                     Aegyptius, & Aegyptiacus, a, um, of Egypt.
                  
                     Aegyptus, the countrey callyd Egypte.
                  
                     Aegyſtus, he that ſlewe Agamemnon.
                  
                     Aelius, the propre name of a Romayne.
                  
                     Feſtus.
                     Aelutus, a catte.
                  
                     
                        Aemi
                              ••
                           um,
                      ſwollen.
                  
                     Aemilius, the propre name of a Romayne.
                  
                     Aemilia, a countray in Italy, callid alſo Flaminia, & Romandiola.
                  
                  
                     Aemulatio▪
                      enuye, or imitation.
                  
                     Aemonia, a countray callyd alſo Theſſalia.
                  
                     
                        Aen
                              ••
                           s,
                      a noble man of Troy, which with Anthenor betrayed the citie of Troy.
                  
                     
                        Aenoba
                              •
                           bus,
                      the name of a Romain, ſo callyd bycauſe he had a berde as red as braſſe.
                  
                     
                        Aeolium ma
                              •
                           e,
                      the ſee ioynynge to Aſia.
                  
                     
                        Aeo
                              ••
                           s,
                      callyd the kynge of wyndes.
                  
                     
                        Aequ
                              •
                           li
                              ••
                           s,
                      equalitie.
                  
                     
                        Aequ
                              •
                           tio,
                      the equall diuiſion of a thyng, or where one thing is made equal to an other.
                  
                     
                        Aequ
                              •
                           dium, idem quod equinoctium.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Aequ
                              •
                           anium, ſeu acquilaneum,
                      the half deale of the hele.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈1 paragraph〉
                        
                     
                     Aequimentū, hyre of a horſe, or other beeſt.
                  
                     
                        A
                              ••••
                           po
                              •
                           ien
                              •
                           a,
                      equalitie in eſtymation or 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
                  
                     
                        A
                              •••
                           ipondium,
                      of equall or lyke weight. 
                        〈◊〉
                     , taſtely.
                  
                     
                        Aeq
                              •••
                           talentia,
                      equall value.
                  
                     
                        Aeq
                              •••
                           ocatio,
                      makynge dyuers ſignificati
                        •
                     ns to one worde.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        , dyuerſely ſygnyfyenge in oone worde or terme.
                  
                     
                        Aeq
                              ••••
                           us, 
                              •
                           a, um,
                      of the ſee.
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           , a, um,
                      of the ayre.
                  
                     
                        Ae
                              •
                           ati
                              •
                           s,
                      he that was put from his fredom of a cyteſin, & payd tribute as a ſtraunger.
                  
                     Cicero. Plautus.
                     Aera, rae, dernel, whiche groweth in corne.
                  
                     Aeratus, indetted.
                  
                     Aerarii Tribuni, were treaſourers, whiche payde to the ſouldiours their wages.
                  
                     Aerarii praefectus, hygh Treaſourer.
                  
                     
                        Aere meo. Multi
                              •
                           n anni ſunt, cum ille in aere meo eſt,
                      It is longe time paſſed, that I accompted hym in the nūbre of my frendes, or for one of myne.
                  
                     Aerificium, the crafte to make any thynge of braſſe or copper.
                  
                     Aero, rare, to dreſſe with copper or braſſe.
                  
                     Aeromantia, diuynation or coniecture of thynges to come by the ayre.
                  
                     Aeroſus, a, um, that wherin braſſe or copper is, or wherof it is made.
                  
                     Aerumnalis, le, where in is greatte peyne or laboure.
                  
                     Aerumnatus, brought to myſerye.Plautus.
                  
                  
                     Aerumnoſus, a, um, myſerable, full of peyne or trauayle.
                  
                     Aerumnulae, lytell croked ſ
                        •
                     aues, wherwith menne doo carye fardelles and truſſes on theyr backes.
                  
                     Aes circumforaneum, money layd in banke.
                  
                     Aeſculapius, the ſonne of Apollo, callid god of medycine.
                  
                     Aeſopus, an auncient wryter of fables. alſo the name of a famous player in tragedies.
                  
                     Aeſtimare litem, to taxe the damages and coſtes, that a man hath ſuſteyned by wrong.
                  
                     Aeſtus, doutfulnes, or flittyng of the minde.Pli▪ in epi.
                  
                  
                     Aeta, an hylle in Theſſalye.
                  
                     Aetabula, chyldehode.
                  
                     Aetalia, an Ile in the ſee by Geane.
                  
                     
                        Aetatem meam me viduam eſſe mauelim,
                        Plautus. 
                        quā i
                              ••
                           aec flagitia tua pati, quae tu facis,
                      I hadde leauer be a wydowe all my lyfe, than to indure this trouble that I haue with the.
                  
                     
                        Aetatem uelim ſeruire,
                        Plautus. 
                        Litanum modo ut cō
                           ueniam,
                      I wolde do ſeruyce all the dayes of my lyfe, on the cōdicion that I mought mete with Litanus.
                  
                     Aetas acta eſt mihi, my tyme is paſſed.Cicero.
                  
                  
                     Aetas bona, the flowre of youthe.
                  
                     Aetate adulta, of full age.
                  
                     Aetate affecta, of olde age.
                  
                     Aetate exacta, very aged, in extreme age.
                  
                     Aetate confectus, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Aetate integra, in the floure of youth.
                  
                     Aetate prouecta, aged, or of great age.
                  
                     Aetatem, an aduerbe, ſignifieth longe time. lam dudū aetatem lites ſunt inter eos, There hath bē variance betwene them long time.
                  
                     Aeterné, euerlaſtyngely,
                  
                     Aeterno, nare, to make perpetuall.
                  
                     Aethereus, a, um, of the firmament. Anaxagoras putteth it for the element of fyre.
                  
                     Aethiopia, a great countrey in Affrike, conteynynge many regyons, callyd Ethiope: wherin be founde people, beaſtes, and ſerpentes of meruaylous forme. It hathe on the weſt, the mountaynes callid Athlantes, on the eaſte it extendeth to the marches of Egypt: on the ſouth it hath the ſee occean: on the northe parte, it is incloſed with the ryuer callyd Nilus.
                  
                     Aethiopicus, ca, cum, of Ethiope.
                  
                     Aethiopiſſa, a woman of Ethiope.
                  
                     Aethiops, aethiopis, a man of Ethiope.
                  
                     Aethon, one of the horſes of Phebus.
                  
                     Aethruſci, the olde Inhabytauntes of the countray in Italy, callid nowe Tuſcana.
                  
                     Aetiologia, a reherſynge of the cauſe.
                  
                     Aetites, a precious ſtone, whiche hath the colour of an egles tayle that is whyte.
                  
                     Aetius, the name of a famoꝰ writer in phiſik.
                  
                     
                     Aetolia, a countrays in Grece.
                  
                     Aeuitas, eternitye.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶A, ANTE F.
                  
                     AFfecta, almoſte fynyſſhed, or nyghe at a poynt.
                  
                     Sue
                           •
                        on. in Veſp. Plautus
                     Affecta fides, credence almoſt loſt.
                  
                     Affectus uirgis, beaten with roddes.
                  
                     Affectus morbo, vexed with ſyckneſſe.
                  
                     Cice.
                     Affectum bellum, warres nyghe at a poynt.
                  
                     Affecta aeſtas, Somer well nyghe paſſed.
                  
                     Cice.
                     Affectio, affection, ſometyme trouble of mynde.
                  
                     Varro.
                     Affector, taris, idem quod Affecto.
                  
                  
                     Afferre auxilium, to helpe, to ayde.
                  
                     Varr. de re 
                           •
                        uſt.
                     Afferre dentes, to byte.
                  
                     Afferre manus, to ſet violent handes on one.
                  
                     Afferre uim alicui, to make aſſault on one.
                  
                     Afferre moleſtiam, to do diſpleaſure to one.
                  
                     Afferre morbum, to make ſycke.
                  
                     Catullus.
                     Afferre pedem, to come. Abite, vnde malum, pedem attuliſtis, Goo henſe, frome whenſe with a myſchief ye came.
                  
                     Affero ad te ſalutem, I come to ſalute you.
                  
                     Afficere cura, to brynge in care.
                  
                     Afficere lucro, to make one to wynne or gayne.
                  
                     Afficere bonis nunciis, to brynge good tydynges.Plaut. 
                     Vti bonis uos, ueſtroſque omnes nuntiis me afficere nultis, As ye will that I brynge to you and yours good tydinges. Affecit praeda at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         agro populares ſuos,
                     Plaut. He made his countray men ryche both of landes and goodes.
                  
                     Cicero.
                     Afficere ſtipendio, to paye to hym his wages.
                  
                     Affici, to be moued with affection.
                  
                     Affinis negociis publicis, he that medleth with the affaires of a communalty.
                  
                     Affinitas, tatis, affinity, aliance.
                  
                     Affinis rei capitalis, gylty of a great offence, which deſerueth deth.
                  
                     Affinis ſceleris, gylty of the treſpace.
                  
                     Affirmatiuè, with an affirmaunce.
                  
                     Afflatus, tus, a blaſt.
                  
                     Plautus.
                     Affleo, affleui, flêre, to wepe in the remembraunce of a thinge.
                  
                     Saluſt.
                     Afflictus, ſtryken downe to the grounde.
                  
                     Affligere, to throwe or beate downe to the grounde.
                  
                     Plaut.
                     
                        Affligam te ad 
                              •
                           erram ſcelus, ſi me uno digito attigeris,
                      I will beate the downe to the grounde wretche, yf thou toucheſt me but with one fyngar.
                  
                     Affluenter, abundantly.
                  
                     Affluentia, abundance.
                  
                     Affluens, tis, abundant.
                  
                     Afformido, dare, to haue greate feare.
                  
                     Affricus, ca, cum, of Affrike.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶A ANTE G.
                  
                     AGar, the mayden of Sara, on whom Abraham begate Iſmael.
                  
                     Agaricum, a thynge lyke to a whyte muſſheron growyng on the ſtem of a tree, and is called Agarike, which is medicinable in pourginge of fleame.
                  
                     Agaſo, ſonis, a horſe kepar, a muletour.
                  
                     Agatho, the name of one of the ſonnes of Priamus, alſo a boye, whom Plato louyd.
                  
                     Agathyrſi, people by Scithia, whyche be ryche of golde, and yet be neyther couaytouſe nor enuyouſe, and their heares are blue.
                  
                     Agathocles, was a kynge of Sicile.
                  
                     Age dicat, let hym ſpeke on, let hym ſpeke hardyly.
                  
                     Age, age ut lubet, well go to, do what ye wyll.
                  
                     Age, & agite, go forth, furth on.
                  
                     Agea, a way in a ſhyppe.
                  
                     Agelaſtus, he that neuer lawghyd.
                  
                     Agenor, the father of Europa, whome Iupiter rauyſſhed, & of Cadmus, who buylded the citye of Thebes.
                  
                     Agere, to here, to perceyue.Plautus. 
                     Vos agite ſpectatores, ye that beholde, heere, or take heede. Hoccine agis, an non? Perceyueſt thou this matter or no? alſo to conclude.Terentſus▪
                      
                     Herus me relictis rebus, iuſsit Pamphilum hodie obſeruare, ut quid ageret de nuptiis ſcirem, My maſter hath commaunded me, that layenge all thinges apart, I ſhoulde awayte vppon Pamphilus, to thintente I mought knowe, what he wolde conclude, touchinge the mariage.
                  
                     Agere, to go. Quo hinc te agis?
                     Terentius Whyther goeſt thou from henſe? Sometyme it ſignifieth to come. Vnde agis te nunc Dorpale? from whenſe commeſt thou now Dorpalus.
                  
                     
                        Agere. Pectus mihi agit nunc cubiro:
                        Plautus.
                      She hitteth me on the hart with her elbowe.
                  
                     Agere ad praeſcriptum, to do that, that he was appoynted.
                  
                     Agere aetatem, to lyue.
                  
                     
                        Agere ambages.
                        Plautus. 
                        Quid opus me multas agere ambages?
                      what nedeth me to make many wordes? or to ſpeke by circumlocution?
                  
                     Agere animam, to dye.
                  
                     Agere annum octingenteſimū, to lyue eight hundred yeres.
                  
                     Agere apologum, to tell hym a fable.Plautus.
                  
                  
                     Agere amicum, to do lyke a frende,Pli. in pan▪
                      or playe the part of a frende.
                  
                     
                     Agere cum aliquo, to treate with one, or to ſpeke. Cum mecum ſaepe ageres, ut de amicitia ſcriberem: Where often tymes thou dyddeſt intreate me, that I ſhulde wryte of frendſhyppe. Illo praeſente, mecum agito,
                     Plautus. 
                     ſi quid uoles: If thou wilt any thinge with me, ſpeake it in the preſence of that manne.
                  
                     Agere iniuriarum, to ſue one for treſpaſe or wronges done.
                  
                     Agere ſummo iure, to procede with rigour.
                  
                     Agere ſou iure, to execute his auctority
                  
                     Agere lege, to ſue, to procede by the waye of Iuſtice.
                  
                     Plautus.
                     
                        Agere di
                              •
                           is malis,
                      to curſe.
                  
                     Agere menſuras fideliter, to meaſure thinges iuſtly.
                  
                     Cicero.
                     
                        Agere 
                              ••
                           gas,
                      to mocke, to tryfle.
                  
                     Agere orationem, to pronounce an oration.
                  
                     Agere uineas, to laye ordinaunce to a thing.
                  
                     Actum de me eſt, I am vndone.
                  
                     Ageſilaus, a kynge of Lacedemony, which was lytle of ſtature, and haltyd on the one foote, but in vertue, wyſedome, and proweſſe he exelled all princes of his tyme, whoſe lyfe is wryten by Plutarche and Xenophon.
                  
                     Plautus.
                     Aggerre, to brynge to one. Nam
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         ecaſtor, amor & melle & ſelle eſt foecundiſſimus, gu
                        
                           •••
                         it dulce, amarum uſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         ad ſacietatem agge
                           •
                        t, for in good fayth, loue hath abundance both of hony and galle, in taſte it is pleaſaunte, but it bryngeth with it bytterneſſe, ſo moch that it becometh lotheſome.
                  
                     Aggrauatio, a grief, a bourdon.
                  
                     Aggraueſco, ſcere, to waxe more greuouſe.
                  
                     Aggredi, to aſſayle.
                  
                     P
                           •
                        s.
                     Aggretus, idem quod Aggreſſus.
                  
                  
                     
                        Ag
                              ••
                           iter,
                      nymbly, quyuerly.
                  
                     Aginor, nari, to marchandyſe vyle thinges, or of ſmall value.Cicero.
                  
                  
                     Agis rem actam, thou leſeſt thy labour.
                  
                     Agit rem ſuam, he goeth aboute his owne buſyneſſe.
                  
                     Plautus.
                     Agit hic perpetuum diem ſol, The ſone ſhyneth here all the daye longe.
                  
                     Terentius Plautus.
                     Agitare, to intreate well, to compell to go. lam calcari quadrupedem agitabo aduerſum cliuum: Nowe will I with a ſpurre make my horſe runne vppe the hill.
                  
                     Plautus.
                     Agitare cōuiuium, to banket and make good chiere. Age ergo, hoc agitemus conuiuium, uino et ſermone ſuaui, Therfore go to, lete vs banket, drynke talke and make goode chiere.
                  
                     Plautus.
                     Agitare cuſtodiam, to take good hede in kepynge of one.
                  
                     Plautus.
                     Agitare diem, to paſſe forth the daye.
                  
                     Agitare imperium, to gouerne. In pace vero, beneficiis magis quàm metu imperium agitabant: In the tyme of peace, they gouerned, more by gentyllneſſe, than by feare.
                  
                     Agitare iuſtitiam, to exerciſe iuſtice.Pli in ep. Saluſt.
                  
                  
                     Agitare letitiam, to make ioye.
                  
                     Agitare mente, to conceyue in the mynde, to thinke.
                  
                     Agitare cum animo, to reuolue in the mynd.Saluſt. Saluſt.
                  
                  
                     Agitare praeſidium, to be in garyſon.
                  
                     Agitare uigilias, to kepe watche.
                  
                     Agitare uitam, to lyue.
                  
                     Agitatio, a meuynge or ſtyrringe. alſoo exerciſe.
                  
                     Agitator, a dryuer of a cart, or of beaſtis.
                  
                     Agitedum, ite mecum, than forth, and come ye on with me.
                  
                     Agitur mecum bene, I am in good condiciō.Val. Ma
                           •
                         de Mi
                           ••
                        ia 
                     Agere bene, ſometyme is of a lyke ſignyfication.
                  
                     Agitur de capite, de fama, &c. whan the life or renomme is in daunger to be loſt.
                  
                     
                        Agitur res capitis,
                        Terent.
                      the queſtion or mater in debate, concernyth lyfe.
                  
                     Aglaia, one of them which are called Charites, gracis.
                  
                     
                        Agnaſcentia membra,
                        Plinius.
                      membres whiche are ſuperfluouſe, as where one hath thre legges, or ſyxe fingars on one hande, and other lyke.
                  
                     Agnitio, knowlege.
                  
                     Agon, agonis, a contention in fourme of batayle, or a wraſtlyng, alſo the place where it was exercyſed.
                  
                     Agonalia, certayne feſtiuall dayes kepte amonge the Romaynes.
                  
                     Agonenſis porta, a gate of Rome callyd alſo Colina.
                  
                     Agones, were ſometyme callyd hylles.
                  
                     Agônia, ſacrifice done on hylles.
                  
                     Agonius, was named a god, whiche hadde preemynence ouer thynges to be done.
                  
                     Agraria lex, a lawe made for the cēmon diſpoſition of landes, as be oure ſtatutes of incloſures and decayenge of huſbandry. but amonge the Romaynes they were ſuche lawes as dyd appoynte, howe moche lande a Senatour ſhuld haue, and not excede, and howe moche ſhulde be dyuided amonge the people.
                  
                     Aggrigentinus, tina, num, of the towne of Agrigentum, whiche is in Sicile.
                  
                     Agricolatio, tyllage or huſbandry.
                  
                     Agricultura, huſbandry.
                  
                     Agricultor, an huſbandeman.
                  
                     Agrippina, the name of the mother of Nero the Emperour. Alſo the dawghter of Octauyan.
                  
                     Agrippina, Colonia, the citie of Coleyne.
                  
                     Agylla, a citie in Thuſcana.
               
            
            
               
               
                  ¶A ANTE H.
                  
                     ¶Ah, a voyce of lamentyng or ſorowyng.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶A ANTE I.
                  
                     AIax, the name of .ii. noble mē of Grece
                  
                     Terentius
                     
                        Ain, for aisne,
                      is it as thou ſayſt▪
                  
                  
                     Ain uero, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Non, Mar.
                     Aiutamini, for adi
                        •
                     uate.
                  
                     Aizon, an herbe callyd Syngrene, it groweth on a tyled houſe.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶A ANTE L.
                  
                     ALabandae, a citie in Grece, in the coū
                     trey of Ionia.
                  
                     Alabandicus, ca, cum, of that citie.
                  
                     Alabarches, he that hath the rule ouer ſ
                        •
                     l
                        ••
                      and amonge the Egyptians it was an honourable name.
                  
                     Alabaſter, & alabaſtrum, a kynde of marble callyd alabaſter.
                  
                     Alacriter, promptly, couragiouſly, gladly.
                  
                     Alacré, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Alania, a region of Seithia in Europa, whiche ſtretcheth vnto the greatte termes of Meotis.
                  
                     Alani, people callyd alſo Maſſage
                           •
                        ae.
                  
                  
                     Alaricus, a kynge of Gothes, whyche dyſtroyed Rome.
                  
                     Alarij equites, horſemen, whyche are in the wynges of a battayle.
                  
                     Alauorſi, people in the vttermoſte parte of the Northe.
                  
                     Alba, the name of two cities in Italy.
                  
                     Albana, a cite in Arabia. alſo a region in the eaſt, wherein is alſo a citie callyd Albania
                     ▪
                  
                  
                     Albanus, a riuer not farre from the citie of Rome. alſo the name of two cities, one in Macedonia, the other in Armenia.
                  
                     Albanus, a, um, of Alban in Italy. albani paeres, the Senatours of Alba.
                  
                     Albegmina, parte of the inward of beſtes, which was offred to Dis, callid god of hel.
                  
                     Albeuſes, people of Alba.
                  
                     Albeſto, ſcere, to be white.
                  
                     Albicaleull, whyte ſtones, with the whiche the people of Creta dyd note or mark the dayes, wherin they had good fortune like as they marked yll dayes with blacke ſtoones, callyd nigri calculi.
                  
                     Albia, a ryuer, whyche paſſeth through the 
                        •
                     a
                        •
                     ime of Boemia.
                  
                     Albiecra, is kynde of olyue tree.
                  
                     
                        Alb
                              ••
                           era
                              ••
                           fleus,
                      brode fygges, with a ſmall ſtalke. Albidus, da, dum, ſomewhat white
                  
                     
                        Albing
                              •
                           ,
                      
                     
                        •
                     rowne in Laguria.
                  
                     
                        Albi
                              •
                           us,
                      the name of an emporour.
                  
                     Albion, the ancient name of England: 
                        〈…〉
                      ſonnes of Neptianꝰ.
                  
                     
                        Albi
                              ••
                           ,
                      
                     
                        〈…〉
                     , whyche cometh to the citie of 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
                  
                     
                        Alboga
                              •
                           erus,
                      a hatte, whyche the greatte prieſtis of Iupiter, callyd Flamines Dialis, dydde weare.
                  
                     Albot, albugo, & albumen, the whyte of an egge. albugo, is alſoo a whyte ſpotte in a mannes eye.
                  
                     
                        Albo
                              ••
                           a,
                      ſhieldes or targates.
                  
                     Albula, the olde name of the ryuer of Tiber. alſo a water in the felde callyd Tiburtinus, which was medicinable for fore eien.
                  
                     Album plumbum, tynne.
                  
                     Albunia, a wodde and fountayne by the riuer callyd Aniene, in Italy.
                  
                     
                        Albu
                              ••
                           us,
                      a hyll in Lucania,
                  
                     
                        Ale
                              •
                           a,
                      a lyon.
                  
                     Alce, a wylde beaſt in the woddes of Germany, in facion and ſkyn lyke to a gote, but greter, which haue no iointes in theyr legges, & therfore they do neuer ly, but only do leane to trees, whan they do reſt thē, which the hunters knowyng, doo ſawe the trees that they leane to, halfe a ſonder, whereby they falle downe, and be taken.
                  
                     Alces, a beaſt in France lyke a mule, but he hath his ouer lyppe ſo longe, that whā he ſedeth, he goth backewarde, or els he can not bi
                        •
                     e of the graſſe and herbes, whiche he ſhulde eate. The horſekynde of them haue hornes on their ouer browes.
                  
                     
                        Alceſte
                              •
                           ſeu Alceſtis,
                      the wyfe of Admetus the kinge of the people callid Pherei, who being ſicke, and hauing anſwere of the goddis, that he ſhuld eſcape dethe, if any of his kynne or frondes wold die for him willingly, whan all men and women refuſed it, only Alceſte his wife conſented therto, and willyngly dyed.
                  
                     Alcaeus, a famous poete.
                  
                     Alchech, in the Araby tongue, is the beaſt, whiche is callid Linx, whiche is begotten betwene a lyon and a lybarde.
                  
                     Alcibrades, a noble capitayne of the Athenienſes, whiche in nobilitie, beautie, proweſſe, 
                        〈◊〉
                     , & eloquēce, paſſed al other in his tyme, nat withſtandynge his yyçes were accompted equall vnto his vertues.
                  
                     Alcides, idem quod Hercules.
                  
                  
                     
                        Alcinous,
                        Homerus Odyſſ.
                      the name of a kyng of a peple callid Phaeaces, excellēt in Iuſtice, which had a fayre and 
                        〈…〉
                      palyce, with or charde a which 
                        •
                     are moſt plentuouſely fruites 
                        •
                     wyſe in the 
                        〈◊〉
                     . A
                           •
                        cman, a famous poete.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        , the mother of Hercules.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        , a cunnynge grauou
                        ••
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        , a good archer of Creta, which beholdynge a dragon redy 
                        〈…〉
                      are his ſonne of dyd 
                        〈…〉
                      ſo craftily, 
                        〈◊〉
                      as the dragon 
                        〈…〉
                      of the chylde, the arowe paſſed vnto his harte, and hurte not

his ſon, ſo that the dragon immediatly died.
                  
                     Alcyonae, the name of .ii. ladies, wherof the one was wife to Ceiſis, who ſeing the deed body of her huſband caſt on land, threw her ſelf into the ſee, whom the poetes fained to be turnid into a bird of that name: the other was doughter of Euene, callid alſo Marpeſia
                  
                  
                     Aleatoriū, a dice playing, or a dycyng hous. Suetonuis calleth it aleatorium forum.
                  
                  
                     Alebria, thinges whiche do nouriſhe well.
                  
                     Alec, is a ſauce made of the liuers of fiſhes, alſo a fyſhe, callyd a hearyng.
                  
                     Alecto, one of the furies of Hell.
                  
                     Alectoria, a ſtone founde in a cockes gyſar or mawe, of the greatenes of a beane, of the colour of chriſtall.
                  
                     Alemani, peple of Germany, callid Germaīs
                  
                  
                     Aleo, aleonis, a dyſar, or dyſeplayer.
                  
                     Aletudo, fatteneſſe of the body.
                  
                     Alexander, the name of a man, ſpecially of a king of Macedony, which conquered al the caſt part of the world, and was in proweſſe and wyſedom incōparable: but being drowned in ouermoche felicitie, he felle into excedinge pride and crueltie, and was at the laſte poyſoned, and died in Babylon, excedynge lyttell the age of thirty yeres.
                  
                     Alexandria, the name of a great citie in Egypt▪ alſo of dyuere other cities.
                  
                     Alexandrinus, na, num, of Alexandria.
                  
                     Algenſes, fyſhes callyd alſo purpurae.
                  
                     Algidenſe, a kynde of radyſſhe, longe and clere through.
                  
                     Algidus, a mountain .xii. myles from Rome.
                  
                     Algida ſylua, a wod at the fote of that moū
                     tayne. Algo, idem quod algeo.
                  
                  
                     Alguaſen, an herbe like to a lyly.
                  
                     Plautus.
                     Algus, uel algu, colde.
                  
                     Alia, a ryuer .xi. myles from Rome.
                  
                     Alias res agis, thou thinkeſt on other matters. Vnde anulū iſtū nactus? di
                           •
                         mihi, ille alias res agere ſe ſimulare, Tel me where gatteſt thou this ryng? he made ſemblance as yf he thought on an other matter.
                  
                     Alicarij, they that do ſell alicam.
                  
                     Alicariae, common harlottes.
                  
                     Alicaſtrum, a diminutiue of alica.
                  
                     Alienatio, an alienation or alteration.
                  
                     Alienator, he that altereth a thynge.
                  
                     Terentius
                     Alienior▪ aetate, of nōage, not of cōpetēs age.
                  
                     Alienus animus, Iam primum illum alieno animo a nobis eſſe, res, ipſa indicat: The thing▪ ſelfe declareth, that euen nowe he hath no fauour toward vs, that he is not my frend.
                  
                     Alieno more mihi uiuendum eſt, I muſt lyue after an other mans facion.
                  
                     Saluſt.
                     Aliena conſilii, vnmete for the counſell.
                  
                     Alienum ſuis rationibus, vnprofytable for his purpoſe.
                  
                     Alienatus, a, ū, put away altered, eſtranged.
                  
                     
                        Alieu
                              •
                           s agimus,
                      we become ſtrāge vnto thē
                  
                  
                     Alimentarius, a, um, pertaining to liuinge or ſuſtinance. Alimonia, idem quod alimentum.
                  
                  
                     Alimodi, idem quod aliuſmodi, of an nother facion or maner.
                  
                     Aliouerſum, towarde an other place.
                  
                     Aliptes, he that annoynteth a man.
                  
                     Aliquis, aliquae, aliquod, ſome.
                  
                     Alirei, Plautus vſeth for aliae rei.
                  
                     Aliſma, an herbe callyd alſo barba ſyluana, water plantayne.
                  
                     
                        Aliter ac, aliter at
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                           , aliter qu
                              •
                           ,
                      otherwiſe thā.
                  
                     Alites, byrdes.
                  
                     
                        Aliubi, for alicubi,
                      ſomewhere.
                  
                     Aliuta, olde writers vſed for aliter.
                  
                     Aliuſmodi, ī an other man̄, of an other faciō
                  
                  
                     Alligare aliquē furto, to apech one of felony
                  
                     Alligare ſe furti, to charge him ſelf of felony
                  
                     Alligatos, he that byndeth.
                  
                     Alligatura, a bonde.
                  
                     Allobrox, allobrogis, a man or womā of the countray in Fraunce, callyd Dolpheny.
                  
                     Allocutio, a ſpeakynge to one.
                  
                     Allocutum ire, to commune with one.
                  
                     Alloquium, communication, ſpeche.
                  
                     Aludor, idem quod alludo.
                  
                  
                     Alluuium, idem quod alluuies. Alluuio, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Almities, quietenes, ſecretenes.
                  
                     Almopia, parte of Macedonia.
                  
                     Aloe, aloes, is vſed cōmonly for a iuyce of an herbe congeled lyke a gūme, wherof be two ſortes, one is named Succotrina, which is like a lyuer, redde, bright, & bronkle: the other is callyd Caballina, and is ſandy and groſſe▪ The fyrſte clenſeth and confirmeth the ſtomake of a man, and therfore is mixt with purgatiue medicines, bicauſe they ſhal not anoy or hurt the ſtomake, the laſt is occupied about horſe and other beaſtis.
                  
                     Aloe lignum, or lignū aloes, is a ſwete & precious wod, which beinge receiued in medicine, comforteth the ſtomake, and all the inferior partis of a mā, & maketh ſwete breth.
                  
                     Alogia, vnreaſonable or beaſtly feding, and ingurgitation of meate and drinke.
                  
                     Alopecus, he that hath a pylde heed, that is to ſay, the heares fallynge with ſcurſe.
                  
                     Aloſa, a fyſhe callyd alſo Laccia, and Clupea, is that, whiche by the deſcription of Paulus Iouius ſemeth to be a cheuyn.
                  
                     Alphabetarii, they whiche do lerne firſt the order of letters.
                  
                     Alphabetum, the order of letters, as a. b. c.
                  
                     Alpheus, a riuer in Archadia, alſo the name of a manne.
                  
                     Alphos, a morphy or ſtaining of the ſhinne
                        •
                     
                  
                  
                     Alpinus, a, ū, of the mountain
                        •
                      of Alpe
                        •
                     .
                  
                     Alpus, pale, carefull, or ſtudious.
                  
                     
                     Alſine maior, an herbe callyd wodbynde.
                  
                     Alſine minor, an herbe callyd the ſeconde mouſe eare.
                  
                     Alſioſus, a, um, colde of nature▪ alſo whiche are ſoone hurt or anoyed with colde.
                  
                     Altanus, a wynd, which is on the depe ſees.
                  
                     Alte, on hygh.
                  
                     Altellus, a ſurname of Romulus the founder of Rome.
                  
                     Alter & viceſimus, one and twentie.
                  
                     Alter quis
                           
                              
                           
                           quam
                        , any other.
                  
                     Alteras, olde waiters vſed for alias.
                  
                     Altercatio, a contention in wordes, where one man purpoſeth, an nother replyeth.
                  
                     Altercum, ſiue altercagenum, an herbe callyd alſo faba porcina.
                  
                  
                     Alterplex, plicis, old writers vſed for duplex double.
                  
                     
                        Alter
                              •
                           a, idē quod alterutra.
                     
                  
                  
                     Altior, altius, hygher.
                  
                     Altiſsimus, ma, mum, hygheſt.
                  
                     Altimetor, an Inſtrument wherwith highe thinges are mette.
                  
                     Altinū, an old citie by the riuage of Venice.
                  
                     Altinates, people of Altinum.
                  
                     Plautus.
                     Altitudo, height, or depenes.
                  
                     Altrouerſum, on the other parte, or on the other ſyde.
                  
                     Altum otium, longe reſte, great leyſure.
                  
                     Aluini, they whiche haue frettyng in theyr bealyes with contynuall fluxe.
                  
                     Alumnatus, nouryſhed.
                  
                     Alyba, a countraye not farre frome Miſ
                        •
                     a, where as Homerus dothe write, were mines of ſyluer.
                  
                     Alyſius, the name of Bacchus.
                  
                     Alyſina, an herbe callyd water plantayne.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶A, ANTE M.
                  
                     AMalthea, a woman, whiche with her ſyſter callyd Meiſſa, nouryſhed Iupiter with the milke of a gore. Alſo the name of a propheteſſe.
                  
                     Amantior, more louynge.
                  
                     Amantiſsimus, moſte louynge.
                  
                     Amantiſsimè, moſte louyngely.
                  
                     Solinus.
                     Amantlies, people in Affrike, whiche haue ſuche plentie of precious ſtones, that they buylde therwith houſes.
                  
                     Amanus, a mountayne callyd alſo Taurus.
                  
                     Amaracinum, an oyle made of maioram.
                  
                     Ioſephus.
                     Amaramis, the father of Moyſes.
                  
                     Amarantus, an herbe, which groweth a fote in height, & hath leues like baſile, and hath a floure facionid like an ere of wheat, 
                        •
                     f crimſon colour, which neuer dieth: in frenche it is callid Paſſ
                           •
                        uelute
                     ▪ ſome there be, whiche do ſuppoſe it to be callid in englyſh Baldar.
                  
                     Amarico, are, to make bitter, to make angry
                  
                     Amaror, idem quod amaritudo.
                  
                  
                     Amarus, ra, rum, bytter, very angry.
                  
                     Amariſcus, an herbe callyd de Mathis, or Dogge ſenell.
                  
                     Amarillis, the name of a ſhepeherde in the bucolic is of Vergile.
                  
                     Amaſenus, a ryuer in Italy.
                  
                     Amasias, a kyng of Iewes: whiche ſignyfieth as moche as populum tollens.
                  
                     Amaſis, was a noble kynge of Egypt, whiche made a lawe, that euery yere, ech
                        •
                      mā ſhulde make a rekeninge to the heed offycer of his realme, of his life, & ſhew wherby he liued, or by what occupation he was ſuſteined, and he that dyd not make ſuche accompt, ſhulde be put to deathe.
                  
                     Amaſſo, idem quod amauero.
                  
                  
                     Amatio, a louynge.
                  
                     Amaſtrum, uel Amaſtris, the principall citie of Paphlagonia.
                  
                     Amatli, the ſonne of Chanaan.Ioſephus.
                  
                  
                     Amathus, thūtis, a cite in Ciprꝰ, dedicate to Venus. Amathuntius, a, um, of the ſayd citie.
                  
                     Amathuſa, the yle of Ciprus.
                  
                     Amautoſis, the dymneſſe of the eyen.
                  
                     Amazones, womē of Scithia, which wāne a great part of Aſia: who ſlewe all the men chyldren, and kept the women chyldren, of whom they burned the right pappe, bicauſe it ſhulde not lette them to throwe their Iauelyns, or to ſhote.
                  
                     Amazonicus, ca, cū, pertayning to the Amazones. Amazonius, a, ū, idē qd Amazonicus.
                  
                  
                     Amazonicus, nici, a countraye callyd afterwarde Ceſaria.
                  
                     Ambarualis hoſtia, was a ſacrifice made for the fieldes, with a ſowe great with farowe.
                  
                     Ambedo, ere, to eate or gnaw about a thing
                  
                     Ambegni, were an oxe and a ramme, where on euery ſide of them lambis were brought to be ſacrificed. Ambeſus, a, ū, eaten rounde.
                  
                     
                        Ambeſt▪ 
                           
                              •
                           dem quod circum eſt.
                     
                  
                  
                     Ambiani, ſeu Ambianenſes, people in Frāce about Languedoke.
                  
                     Ambidentes, ſhepe of two tethe, of ſomme callyd hogges, of ſome theaues.
                  
                     Ambiguitas, doubtfulneſſe.
                  
                     Ambitus, ta, tum, enuyronned or compaſſed.
                  
                     Ambitus, tus, incloſure, alſoo ambycion or deſyre of promotion.
                  
                     Ambra, a very ſwete thyng, whiche is foūd on the ſee, as muſherons are on the erth▪ wherof is made very precious and cordial medicines.
                  
                     Ambracia, a cite in the coūtray callid Epirꝰ in Grece. Ambracienſes, peple of Ambracia
                  
                     Ambrices, tyles, which be layd ouerthwart betwene other tyles.
                  
                     Ambrones, people in France.
                  
                     Ambroſia, 
                     
                        •
                     n herbe, whiche ſome men doo ſuppoſe to be Tanſey.
                  
                     
                     Ambubeia, the commune cykorye with the longe leafe, and the blewe floure, whyche wyll be cloſed at the goinge downe of the ſonne, and opened at the ryſynge.
                  
                     Ambubeiae, dronken drabbes, whiche wander about the ſtretes.
                  
                     Ambulatiuncula, a lyttell walke.
                  
                     Ambuſtus, ta, tum, bourned.
                  
                     Amecus, & ameca, olde writers vſed for amicus, & amica.
                  
                  
                     Amen, a worde of Hebrue, which after the interpretation of Aquila, ſignifieth fideliter, faythefully, after the .lxx. interpretours, it ſignifieth fiat, be it.
                  
                     Amentia, foly.
                  
                     Amento, tare, to bynde a thonge aboute any thynge.
                  
                     Amentior, tius, madder.
                  
                     Amentiſsimus, a, um, maddeſt.
                  
                     Ameria, an olde citie in Italy.
                  
                     America, a countrey late founde in the eaſt by Amercum Veſputium.
                  
                  
                     Amerinum, a citie in Italy.
                  
                     Amethyſtus, a precious ſtone of vyolet colour, an ametyſt.
                  
                     Amethyſtinus, a, um, of an ametyſt.
                  
                     Amia, a fyſhe lyke to a Tuny, but he hathe no ſcales, but a playne ſkynne, which ſhyneth lyke to ſyluer mixte with blue, and his tayle is in facyon lyke a newe moone.
                  
                     Amica, a woman that is loued. alſoo a concubyne.
                  
                     
                        Amicibor, for amiciam,
                      I wyll clothe or put on a garment.
                  
                     Amicior, ciri, to be cladde.
                  
                     Amiciſsimé, moſte frendely.
                  
                     Amicè, frendely. Amiciter, idem.
                  
                  
                     Amiciſsimus, a, um, moſte frendely.
                  
                     Amicius, more frendely.
                  
                     Amictorium, a lynnen rayle that womenne doo weare.
                  
                     Amicula, a diminutiue of amica.
                  
                  
                     Amiculum, a ſhort cloke.
                  
                     Amiculatus, he that weareth a ſhort cloke.
                  
                     Plautus.
                     Amicabilis, le, frendely.
                  
                     Amineae vites, vynes growynge in a countrey by Salerne.
                  
                     Amyſon, a famous citie in the royalme of Pontus.
                  
                     Amiſsio, the loſſe of a thynge.
                  
                     Amiſsus, a, um, loſte.
                  
                     Amiternum, a towne in Campania, where Saluſt was borne.
                  
                     Plautus.
                     Amites, perches, wheron haukes be ſette.
                  
                     
                        Amittere iusiu
                              •
                           andum,
                      to breake an othe, to loſe credence. Quod ſi non dederit, atque hic dies praeterierit, ego argentum, ille iusiurandum amiſerit, If he doo not paye it, and this day do paſſe, I ſhall loſe my money, but he ſhall loſe his credence.
                  
                     
                        Amittere libidinem. Iam non poſſum,
                        Plautus. 
                        amiſ
                              •
                            omnem libidinem,
                      I may do no more, I am paſte all pleaſure.
                  
                     Ammon, a ſurname of Iupyter, worſhypped in Egypte.
                  
                     Amneſtia, forgetfulnes of thynges paſſed.
                  
                     Ammoniacum, a certayne gumme.
                  
                     Amnicus, ca, cum, of the broke.
                  
                     Amo, are, to loue.
                  
                     Amaene, merily, pleaſantly.
                  
                     Amomum, a ſpyce growynge in India, lyke to a wylde vyne, and is in colour ſomwhat yelowe or browne, & very ſoote in ſauour.
                  
                     Amorthei, peple beyond Hieruſalem, & had their name of Amorrheꝰ the ſon of Canaan.
                  
                     Amores, wanton paſſetymes, or affections of lecherye.
                  
                     
                        Amoſio, for annuo.
                        Feſtus.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Amouere ſeg
                              •
                           itiem,
                      to caſte away ſlouth.
                  
                     
                        Amouere crapulam,
                        Plautus.
                      to parbreake whan one is dronke.
                  
                     Ampendices, old writers vſid for appēdices.
                  
                     Ampelos agria, a wylde vyne.
                  
                     Amphibea, beaſtes or byrdis, which do liue as well on the water, as on the lande.
                  
                     Amphilogia, a forme in ſpeakyng, where a ſentence may be taken two ſondry or contrary wayes.
                  
                     Ampeluſia, an yle callyd nowe Tinge.
                  
                     Amphibolum, a doubtefull ſentence.
                  
                     Amphibrachus, a foote in meter, beynge of thre ſyllables, the fyrſte and laſte ſhort, the mydell ſyllable longe, as Cupido.
                  
                  
                     Amphilochus, a phyloſopher.
                  
                     Ampheſibene, a ſerpent, hauynge two heddes, wherof the one is before, the other behynde, where his tayle ſhulde be.
                  
                     Amphimacrus, a foote in meter, hauing the fyrſt ſyllable and the laſt longe, the myddell ſyllable ſhorte.
                  
                     Amphimalla, garmētis rough on both ſides
                  
                     Amphitapetes, garmentes of Cotton on bothe ſydes hearye.
                  
                     Amphimerimon, a feuer co
                        •
                     idyane, whiche commeth of fleume.
                  
                     Amphion, a man, whiche with naturall eloquence, brought rude and wilde people to a c
                        •
                     uile forme of lyuynge: and as ſome do ſuppoſe, ſounde firſt harmony.
                  
                     Amphipolis, a citie nigh to Macedonia.
                  
                     Amphiroe, a nimph or maidē of the ryuers.
                  
                     Amphitana, a precious ſtone, the brimme or edge wherof ſhineth lyke to golde.
                  
                     Amphitheatrū, a roūd place made with ſeates or ſcaffoldis, where men beh
                        •
                     ld plays.
                  
                     Amphitreatrales ludi, playce exercyſed in thoſe places. Amphitrite, the wyfe of Reptunus. it is alſo taken for the ſee.
                  
                     
                     Amphitrio, trionis, the huſband of Alcmena, mother of Hercules.
                  
                     Amphitrionides, he that comith of the ligne of Amphitrio.
                  
                     Amphictyones, the generalle or commune counſayle of all Grecia.
                  
                     Ampiruo, are, is proprely where in daūcing like mening or coūtenāce that one maketh, he vnto whom it is made, ſhal do the ſemblable, it was firſt vſid of the priſtꝭ callid Saly.
                  
                     Amplant, olde writers vſid for amplificant, they enlarge.
                  
                     Ample, amply, largely.
                  
                     Non. Mar.
                     
                        Amplexa, for amplexare,
                      imbrace or take to you.
                  
                     
                        Amplexati, for amplecti.
                     
                  
                  
                     Amplexus, imbracynges.
                  
                     Ampliatio, a deferrynge of iudgement.
                  
                     Amplificatio, an augmentation.
                  
                     Amplifico, care, to augment.
                  
                     Amplior, larger, greatter.
                  
                     Ampliſsimus, a, um, greatteſt, largeſt.
                  
                     Ampliſsimus ordo, was vſed for the Senate of Rome.
                  
                     Ampliſsimus magiſtratus, the higheſt office.
                  
                     Ampliter, largely, abundantly, magnifikely.
                  
                     Plautus.
                     Ampliter occupatus, let with moch buſines.
                  
                     Ampliter teſtis, witnes of al the hole matter
                  
                     Amplius, more ouer, more largely.
                  
                     Caeſar.
                     Amplius horas quatuor fortiſsimé pugnauerunt, They foughte mightily more than foure houres. Coeperunt amplius tria millia hominum,
                     Liuius. They toke priſoners thre thouſande men and aboue.
                  
                     Cicero.
                     Ampliare, to deferre or delaye a thynge in iugement, to reprie.
                  
                     Amplius pronuntiare, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Ampron, a corde or chayne faſtened to the yokes, wherby beaſtes do drawe a wayne.
                  
                     Ampullarius, a bottell maker.
                  
                     Amuleus, the gret vncle of Romulꝰ & Remꝰ
                  
                     Amuſsitatus, tata, tum, made by lyne, welle proporcyoned.
                  
                     Amyclae, a citie in Lacedemonia, where Caſtor & Pollux were borne. alſo an other citie in Italy. Amyclaeus, a, um, of that citie.
                  
                     Amylum, is wheate laide in water .iii. days, and euery day the water chaunged fyue times, and being ſoft, to poure out the water ſoftly, that none other thing do paſſe, than to poure in a litle & rubbe the corne, and to ſkymme away the huſkes and the branne, & ſtrayn the reſidue, and being ſomwhat dried in a clothe, than to lay it on newe tyles, and ſet it in the ſonne, and drye it.
                  
                     Anagallis, an herbe, whiche hath a ſquare ſtalk, & leues like to peritory of the wal, but moche leſſe, the male hath red floures, the female blewe. ſome do ſuppoſe it to be our pympernell, ſome take it to be chykweede.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶A ANTE N.
                  
                     ANabaſius, he that rideth by poſt horſis. Hieronymus contra Rufinum.
                  
                  
                     
                        Anabathrum,
                        Iuuenalis.
                      a pulpyt or other lyke place, whiche ſtandeth on hygh, whervnto a man muſt go vp by a ladder or grie
                        •
                     es.
                  
                     Anabula, a beaſte in Aethiope,Plinius. hauynge a heed like a camell, a necke like a hors, legges lyke an oxe, and is of colour a bryght redde, full of white ſpottes.
                  
                     Anacephaleoſis, a ſhorte recapytulation or repetition of thynges before reherſed.
                  
                     Anacharſis, a philoſopher of a meruaylous wyſedom, all be it that he was borne in the barbarous coūtrey of Scithia, whom Pliny ſuppoſeth to haue fyrſt foūden the potters whele: And beinge in the tyme that Solon made lawes to the Athenienſes, He ſayde, that lawes were lyke to copwebbes, which tyed faſt lyttell flyes, & the great flyes brake them, and went clene through them. In like wyſe the poore & meane men are faſt woū
                     den in the penalties and dangers of lawes, but lordes and men in great auctoritie daily breake lawes, and are not corrected.
                  
                     Anachorita, an hermite: the interpretation therof is, he that lyueth a parte, and oute of companye.
                  
                     Anaclinterium, a mattreſſe.
                  
                     Anadiplôſis, is a doublynge of a worde,Spartianꝰ in Ceiouio. as the laſt worde of the fyrſt verſe, is the fyrſt word of the ſecond verſe: as, Certent & ſignis ululae, ſit Tytirus Orpheus, Orpheus in ſyluis inter delphinas Arion.
                  
                  
                     Anaglypha, & anaglypta, veſſell or plate of golde or ſiluer chaced, as cuppis or bolles beaten with the hammer, & not ingraued.
                  
                     Anaglyptes, he that worketh ſuche veſſell.
                  
                     Anagliptice, ye craft to chace or īboce plate.
                  
                     Anagnoſtes, he that redeth to other men, as bible clerkes, or any other clerke, whiche redeth whyle an other writeth.
                  
                     Anagoge, the high and ſubtylle vnderſtandynge of ſcripture.
                  
                     Analecta, fragmētis of meat, which fal vnder the table, & be afterward ſwept awaye.
                  
                     Analeſia, is a ſicknes of the heed, which taketh away ſenſiblenes from the hole partis of the heed, & cometh of the weakenes of the ſtomak, or of to moch meat, or of to moche lechery, or drinking moche cold water, or to moche ſtudy, drinke, or of indigeſtion.
                  
                     Analogia, conueniēcy or proporcion, whoſe propretie is to cōferre that which is doutfull, with that whiche is like to it, whiche is more certayne, to make it more playne.
                  
                     Analogos, proporcionable.
                  
                     Anapeſtus, a fote in meter of .iii. ſillables, hauing .ii. the fyrſt fete ſhort, the laſte longe.
                  
                     
                     Anapis, a ryuer in Sicyle, tenne furlonge from the citie of Syracuſis.
                  
                     Anarchos, without a prynce, or withoute a begynnynge.
                  
                     Anaſtrophe, a tournynge out of a commune order, as, Italiā contra, for contra Italiam.
                  
                  
                     Anaticula, a lyttell ducke.
                  
                     
                        Anato
                              •
                           ius,
                      a keper of duckes.
                  
                     Anautos, a ryuer in Theſſalia.
                  
                     Anaxagoras, a famous philoſopher, noble of bloode, but more noble in vertue & wiſedome, whiche abandonynge all his poſſeſſyon, gaue hym all holly to the ſtudy of naturall philoſophie: and whan one ſaid vnto him, Haſte thou no care for thy countreye, he aunſwered, Yes verily. I haue exceding care for my countrey, poyntynge vp to heuen with his fynger. Alſo whan he hadde ben longe out of his countray, and was eftſones returned, and behelde his poſſeſſions diſtroyed and waſted, he ſayd, I had nat bē ſafe, except theſe thinges had be loſte.
                  
                     Anaxarchus, a philoſopher, whiche fallyng in the indignation of a tyrant, callyd Nicoc
                        •
                     e
                        •
                     n, kyng of Cipres, was by hym apprehēded, and put into a great morter of ſtone, where he was beaten or pounde with yron peſtyls: whiche tourment he toke ſo paciently, that he doubled theſe wordes, worthy of remembraunce, Beate on, beate on Anaxarchus wynd bagge, for Anaxarchus thou beareſt not. By the which wordes he accoūted his body but a bagge ful of wind.
                  
                     Anaximander, a philoſopher, which fyrſte ſounde the deſcription of the compaſſe of the ſee and land, and made firſt the ſphere.
                  
                     Anceſa, grauen veſſell.
                  
                     Anceps, cipitis, doutfull. ſometyme it ſignifieth double. alſo cuttyng on bothe ſydes.
                  
                     Anchiſes, the father of Aeneas.
                  
                     Anchoratius, a, um, pertayning to an anker.
                  
                     Ancillula, a lytle or poore wenche ſeruant.
                  
                     Anclabra, veſſels whiche prieſtes vſed.
                  
                     
                        Anclare, ſeu antla
                              •
                           e,
                      to empty a veſſell.
                  
                     Ancona, a Cytie in Italye, vppon the ſee of Venyce.
                  
                     Anculi, & Anculae, goddis and goddeſſis of ſeruynge womenne.
                  
                     Ancus, he that hath a croked elbow. it was alſo the name of a kynge of Romaynes.
                  
                     Anchuſa, an herbe, of whoſe rote commeth a redde iuyſe, wherwith ſanguyne colour is dyed.
                  
                     Ancyra, the name of two cities, the one in Phrigia, the other in Galatia.
                  
                     Andabatae, certayne men that faughte with ſwordes wynkynge.
                  
                     Andegauia, a countray in Fraunce, callyd Angiewe.
                  
                     Andrachne, an herbe callyd purcelan.
                  
                     Andrago, a woman hauyng a mans harte.
                  
                     Andricus, an hylle in Cilicia.
                  
                     Androdamas, a ſtone, which is like to ſiluer
                  
                     Androgeus, the ſonne of Minoos, kyng of Crete, whiche by enuye was ſlayne of the Athenienſis. For the whyche many yeres after the ſonnes of Athenienſes were ſent to Crete, to be delyuered to the monſter callyd Minotaurus, whiche was afterward diſtroyd by Thefeus. It was alſo the name of a noble Briton, whan Iulius Ceſar came hither into this realme of Britayne.
                  
                     Androgynae, people in Aſia, beinge of both kyndes in one perſon, man and woman.
                  
                     Androgynos, a man hauyng both membres of a man, and alſo of a woman.
                  
                     Andromache, the wife of the valiāt Hector.
                  
                     Andromede, the wyfe of Perſes, whom he ſaued from a monſter of the ſee.
                  
                     Andron, a chaumber, whereinto men onely do come, and not women. Alſo a ſpace betwene two houſes, wherinto the rayn falleth. Andronitis, idem.
                  
                  
                     Andronae, feſtis, whervnto only mē do com.
                  
                     Andros, an ile betwene Grece and Aſia, directly agaynſt the citie of Epheſum.
                  
                     Andruare, olde writers vſed for Recurre, to runne ageyne.
                  
                     Anellus, a lyttell rynge.
                  
                     Anemonae, wylde popie, with red floures.
                  
                     Anethum, an herbe callyd dyll.
                  
                     Anger, a certaine ſerpent, after whoſe ſtingynge hapneth intollerable peynes.
                  
                     Angerona, was callid the goddeſſe of pleaſure, callyd alſo Volupia.
                  
                  
                     Angilae, people in Affrike, of whom the women, the fyrſt nyght that they be wedded, do accompany with al men, which come to the wedding, but euer after they be chaſt.
                  
                     Anglia, Englande.
                  
                     Angaria, a conſtrayned ſeruyce.
                  
                     Angariae, arum, ſome doo expounde it for a poſte or a currour.
                  
                     Anguimanus, an Elyphant.
                  
                     Anguinus, na, num, of a ſerpent, or winding and crepynge lyke a ſerpent.
                  
                     Anguſtitas, a ſtrayte or ſtrayte place.
                  
                     Anhelator, he that fetcheth his wynde often, or bloweth moche, pourſike.
                  
                     Ania, a Romayne woman, whyche beynge fayre & yonge, after that her huſband was deed, was counſailed to take an other, but ſhe wold nat conſent therto, For if ſaid ſhe, I ſhall hap to haue as good as I haue had, I wyll not be in feare to loſe him: If I ſhall haue an yll huſbande, what ſhall I nede, after a good man, to ſuffre a ſhrewe?
                  
                     Anicetum, idem quod Anethum, dyll.
                  
                     
                     Anicula, a lyttell olde woman.
                  
                     Animam adimere, uel extinguere, to kyll.
                  
                     
                        Animam debe
                              •
                           ,
                      he oweth more than he is worthe, he oweth ſoo moche, that he hath not his lyfe but in lone.
                  
                     Anima, ſomtime ſignifieth brethe. Dic amabo, an foetet anima uxori tue? Telle me of good feloſhip, doth thy wiues dreth ſtink?
                  
                     Plautus.
                     Animam comprime, holde thy brethe.
                  
                     Anima, ſometyme ſignifieth wynde, ſomme time water. Si ſitulam lamiam caepero, 
                           ••
                        m
                           
                              
                           
                           quam
                         aedepol tu mihi diuino quid credas poſt hunc diem, ni ego illi puteo, ſi occepſo, animam omnem intertraxero, If I take the buckerte, neuer beleue me for a prophete after this day, if I drawe not cleane out, if I ones begynne, all the water of the welle.
                  
                     Animitus, from the very ſoule or lyfe.
                  
                     Animo male eſt, it greueth hym at the verye harte.
                  
                     Animum eijcere, to putte awaye affection or fantaſye.
                  
                     Anio praeſenti, with a bold ſpirite or corage
                  
                     Animo obſequi, to take pleaſure, to folowe appetyte or wylle.
                  
                     Animo morem gerere, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Animum explere, to accōpliſhe wil or deſire
                  
                     Animum adiungere, to applye or ſet mynde to a thynge.
                  
                     Animum aduertere, to take hede.
                  
                     Animum appellere, to diſpoſe or apply hym to do a thynge.
                  
                     Animum adiſcere ad uirginem, to ſette his loue on the mayden.
                  
                     Animum recipere, to take harte or courage.
                  
                     Animus tibi pendet, thou ſtandeſt in doubte what thou mayſte do.
                  
                     Animo bono eſſe, to be of good chere.
                  
                     Animus impotens, an vnpacient courage.
                  
                     Animo iniquo pati, to ſuffre vnpaciently.
                  
                     Animos lactare, to draw mens hartes with fayre promyſes, to make fooles fayne, to brynge men in fooles paradyſe.
                  
                     Anime mi, my dere harte.
                  
                     Animule, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Plautus.
                     Animi cauſa, for pleaſure. Cur eam emit? T. Animi cauſa, Wherfore dydde he bye hir? T. For his pleaſure.
                  
                     Animatus, ta, tum, hauynge a fantaſye or fauour to a thynge, or to be diſpoſed. Ita animatus fui,
                     Plautus. 
                     ita
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         nunc ſum, ut ea te patera donem, I had ſuche a fantaſy, and yet haue, that I wold gyue the cuppe to you. Amabo ſ
                           •
                         quid animatus eſt facere, fac iam vt ſciam, If he be diſpoſed to do any thyng, let me knowe it.
                  
                     Animaduerto, uertere, to take hede, to perceyue. Experrecta nutrix animaduertit dormientem,
                     Plautus. 
                     circumplicatum ſerpentis amplexu, The nouryce awaked, and perceyued the childe beinge on ſlepe, wrapped all about in the wyndynge of the ſerpent.Terent. 
                     Da
                           •
                        e operam & cū ſilentio animaduertite, Take you hede, and with ſylence perceyue what I wylle ſaye to you. It is alſo to punyſſhe or correcte,Cicero. 
                     Ea ſunt animaduertēda peccata maxime, quae difficillimé praecauentur, Thoſe offences ought to be moſte ſharpely corrected, whiche mooſte hardlye are eſchewed.Caeſar▪
                      
                     Hac re animaduerſa, Caeſar iubet ſigna conuerti, After that that matter was punyſhed, Ceſar commaunded to aduance the ſtanderdes.
                  
                     Animaduerſio, punyſhement, correction.
                  
                     Animaduerſi, they whyche are punyſſhed or corrected.
                  
                     Animaduerſor, he that punyſheth.
                  
                     Anio, anienis, a ryuer in Italye in the felde callyd Tibu
                           •
                        tinum.
                  
                  
                     Aniſum, an herbe callyd Anyſe, wherof cometh anyſe ſeede.
                  
                     Annarius, a, um, aged. Anicularis, re, idem.
                  
                  
                     Annibal, the moſte valyant captayne of the Carthaginēſis, a mā moſt expert in marcial proweſſe, who at .xxv. yeres of age ſubdued Spayne, percyd the mountaynes, callyd Alpes, where afore neuer was paſſage, dyſtroyed all Italy, and ſlewe the more parte of the nobylitie of Rome, and kept warres with the Romaynes .xxx. yeres.
                  
                     Anniuerſalis, the compaſſe of the yere.
                  
                     Anniuerſarius, a, um, that euery yere returneth at one tyme.
                  
                     Annonarius, & annotinus, a, um, pertayning to vyttayle.
                  
                     Anodina, thynges, whyche do putte away payne or grefe.
                  
                     Anomalum, vnequall, dyuers, rough.
                  
                     Anonymum, without a name.
                  
                     Anonium, an herbe callyd deade nettylle or archaungelle.
                  
                     Anophytus, ſprongen or growen vppon a thynge.
                  
                     Anſatus, ta, tum, hauynge a handell.
                  
                     Anſanctus, on euery parte holy.
                  
                     Anſula, the diminutiue of anſa.
                  
                  
                     Antae, Iambes. alſo poſtes of a doore.
                  
                     Antaeus, was a gyant in Libia, whiche was xl. cubites longe, as it appered by his ſepulchre founde by Sertorius in a cite callyd Tigena.
                  
                     Antandros, a citie in Phrigia.
                  
                     Antarcticus, the fyfthe cerkle in heauen, callyd the ſouthepole.
                  
                     Antariū bellū, bataile before a cite or towne.
                  
                     Anteambulo, lonis, a lackey or other ſeruāt that gothe afore his mayſter.
                  
                     Antefixa, thynges caſte in mouldes, and ſet

ouer doores.
                  
                     Antêlapides, ſtones ſette at bothe the ſydes of a doore for ſtrength.
                  
                     Antelucani uēti, wyndes that do blowe from the water, or from ſome creeke.
                  
                     Anteluco, an aduerbe, before day.
                  
                     Anteluculo, an houre afore ſonne.
                  
                     Antenor, a prince of the Troianes, whiche betrayed the citie of Troy: he fyrſt inhabited the countray of Venice.
                  
                     Ante oculos, before his eyes: but it ſignifieth further of than Coram oculis.
                  
                  
                     Antermini, the inhabitantes of the marchis or frontiers of a contray.
                  
                     Anterote, loue mutually ſette betwene two perſones.
                  
                     Anteſum, antefui, antceſſe, to excel an other in any thynge.
                  
                     Anteuibanus, a, um, nyghe to the citie: as
                  
                     Anteurbanum praedium, a manour nygh to the citie.
                  
                     Antexpectatus, ta, tum, come before that he was loked for.
                  
                     Anthedon, a kynde of medlars, which hath leues lyke an almonde tree, the fruite laſſe then the common medlar, but moche pleſaunter, and wyll be lengar kepte.
                  
                     Anthemis, an herbe called chamomyll.
                  
                     Anthrax, cis, a ſtone called a carbuncle, whiche ſhyneth in the nighte: it is alſo an apoſleme or ſwelling callid a carbūcle or botch.
                  
                     Anthracides, a ſtone, in the which there ſemeth to be ſparkes as it were of fyre.
                  
                     Anthracinus, na, um, blacke as a cole.
                  
                     Anthraceus, a colyar.
                  
                     Anthracia, a burnynge cole.
                  
                     Anthropophagi, people in Aſia, which eate men.
                  
                     Anthropomorphitae, were heretikes, which of a folyſhe ſymplicitie affirmed, that god had membres lyke a man.
                  
                     Antibacchius, a foote in metre, hauynge the firſte ſyllable and the laſte ſhorte, and the myddell ſyllable longe.
                  
                     Anticthones, people dwellyng in the vttermoſt part of the world, directly againſt vs.
                  
                     Anticyra, an Ile in Aſia, where the herbe called Elleborus groweth, which purgeth melancoly, and there it may be taken with out any daunger: wherof grewe this prouerbe ſpoken to men in theyr melancholy, Nauiga ad anticyras: Go ſayle to Anticyra.
                  
                     Antidora, gifte for gift, one for a nother.
                  
                     Antigerio, olde writars vſed for very ſhortly, forthwith, or the thynge were done.
                  
                     Antimerabole, a fygure in ſpeache, where wordes are repeted to a contrary ſentēce: as, Non vt edam uiuo, ſed vt viuam edo. I lyue not to eate, but I eate to lyue.
                  
                     Antiochia, a great citie in Siria, another at the riuage of Perſia.
                  
                     Antiochus, the name of dyuers kynges of Siria.
                  
                     Antiperiſtaſis is that thinge, wherby where heate commeth colde is expelled, where colde is, heate is expelled: by this, well water in the wynter time is warme, for as moche as the hygh partes of the ayre beinge colde, the heate withdraweth him to the loweſt partes. like wiſe in the body of man the ſpirite is kepte in more feruente by the outwarde colde, by the ioynt conſcent & tolleratiō of al partes of the body.
                  
                     Antipater, was a philoſopher, borne in the citie of Tirus, of the ſect of Stoici, whiche from the tyme of his byrthe, vntyl his deathe, had alway a feuer, and not withſtandyng he lyued vntil he was olde.
                  
                     Antipathia, a naturall dyfference or repugnancy of thynges.
                  
                     Antipelargeſis, one good torne for another.
                  
                     Antiphraſis, a worde or ſentence hauynge a contrary meanynge: as, Parcae, the myniſters of deathe be ſo called, bycauſe they ſpare no man.
                  
                     Antipodes, people whiche doo inhabite the part of the world, in reſpect of the roundnes therof, vnderneth vs, that it ſeemeth that theyr feete be agaynſt our feete.
                  
                     Antiqui homines, men of the olde facion.
                  
                     Antiquus hoſpes, myne hoſt of longe tyme.
                  
                     Antiqua ratio, the maner of tyme paſſed.Vergilius.
                  
                  
                     Antiqua terra, a noble countray. Terra antiqua, potens armis, et vberae glebae, A noble countray puiſſaunt in warres, and of a fertile ſoyle.
                  
                     Antiquatio, an abolicion of a lawe.
                  
                     Antiquum obtinere, to kepe the olde facion.
                  
                     Antiſtitor, he that ſtādeth before them that do worke and controlleth them.
                  
                     Antitheſis, a fygure, where one letter is ſet for a nother: as olli, for illi.
                  
                  
                     Antitheton, a fygure, wherby one contrary is ioyned with a nother.
                  
                     
                        Frigida pugnabant calidis, humentia ſiccis.
                        Quidius i
                              •
                            Metamor.
                      
                     Mollia cū duris, ſine pōdere habentia pōdus. Colde thynges contended with them that were hote, moyſt thynges with dry, Hard thynges with ſofte, lyghte thynges with heuy kept not one note.
                  
                     Antium, a citie in the parte of Italy called Latium.
                  
                     
                        Antlia,
                        Martialis.
                      a pumpe or lyke thynge to drawe vp water.
                  
                     Antaeci, people whiche dwel in the contrary Zone or gyrdell, to Anticthones.
                  
                     Antrum, a denne vnder the erthe.
                  
                     Anubis, was a god of the Egiptians, which

they honoured for Mercurius.
                  
                     Anxur, a citie, called alſo Tarr
                        •
                     ſins.
                  
                     Anygrus, a ryuer in Theſſalia.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶A, ANTE O.
                  
                     AOnia, the countray called Thracia.
                  
                     Aonius, a, um, of that countr
                        •
                     y.
                  
                     Aornos, a place, whervnto no birde maye come.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶A, ANTE P.
                  
                     Plautus.
                     APage, fy, fy. Apage, haud nos deceat fugitiuos imitari: Fy, fy, it wyll not beſeme vs to play the michers.
                  
                     Apage te, gette the hens.
                  
                     Apage a me, haue away from me.
                  
                     Apalaeſtris, he that can neither wraſtell nor do any other maiſtrie.
                  
                     Apamia, the name of oone citie in the laſſe Aſia, an nother in Parthia.
                  
                     Aparine, an herbe that growethe in corne feldes, whiche is rough. and cleaneth to the garmentes of them, which paſſe by it, and hath a white floure, the ſtede lyke to a nauyll: I ſuppoſe that it be gooſe graſſe or clyuers.
                  
                     Apathes, were phyloſophers, whiche of a frowarde and ſtubborne nature, held opinion that a wyſe man had none affections or paſſions.
                  
                     Apedes, a by
                        •
                     de, whoſe fete be ſo lytle, that they ſeeme to haue none. I ſuppoſe they be martlettes.
                  
                     Apelles, the moſte excellen
                        •
                     e paynter that euer was.
                  
                     Apello, lere, pulſum, to amoue or putte of from 
                        •
                      thynge.
                  
                     
                        Appenni
                              •
                           us,
                      the part of the mountaynes of Alpes, whiche begynne at Grane.
                  
                     Aperté, openly, playnly, euidently, without diſſimulation or colour.
                  
                     Apertus, ta, tum, open, playne, euident, diſcouered, without colour or cloke.
                  
                     Apeſus, ſuntis, a mountayne in Grece
                        •
                     
                  
                  
                     Apexabo, bone, a pudding callid a bludding
                  
                     Aphaereſis, a figure, wherby a letter or ſyllable is taken from a worde: as Pone met
                           •
                        , for depone metum, mi, for mihi, tun, for tu ne.
                  
                  
                     Aphilos, he that hath no frende.
                  
                     
                        Aphr
                              •
                           ct
                              •
                           ,
                      a lyttell barke or baygantine.
                  
                     Aphrodiſia, days dedicate to Venus, or veneriall paſtymes.
                  
                     Aphronitrum, the ſome of ſaltepeter, callid of the Arabiens, Maurach.
                  
                     Apiculus, the diminutiue of Apox.
                  
                  
                     Apinus, a tree, wherof commeth pitche.
                  
                     Apina, a tryfle.
                  
                     Apirla, 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      enaſſe.
                  
                     Apis, callyd alſo Serapis, 
                     
                        〈…〉
                     , whome the Egypri
                        •
                     s honored Sspan
                        •
                      chief god.
                  
                     
                        Apla
                              •
                           es,
                      the parte of heuen, whiche neuer moueth.
                  
                     Apluda, wh
                        ••
                     ien 
                        ••
                     oone.
                  
                     Apluſite, et apluſtris, erum, the taklynge of a ſhyppe.
                  
                     Apoculypſis, ſlos, a reuelation.
                  
                     Apocleti, counſaylors of the priuie coūcel.
                  
                     Apocope, a fygure, by the whiche a letter or fillable i
                        •
                      takē away, is peculi, for peculij.
                  
                     Apocopi, men beinge golded.
                  
                     Apocroti, 
                     
                        ••
                     on that be harde and myſerable in lyuynge.
                  
                     Apocryphus, a um, hydde, not knowen.
                  
                     Apocryphi libri, bokes, the authors wherof be 
                        •••
                     nowen.
                  
                     
                        Apocyno
                              •
                           ,
                      a lyttell bone in the left ſyde of a frogge, wherwith it is ſuppoſed, thinges may be done, whiche were not expedient to be openly knowen.
                  
                     Apodixia, an euydence, demonſtration.
                  
                     Apodyterium, the place by a bayne, where 
                        〈◊〉
                      whyche wyll be bayned, do putte of t
                        ••
                     yr clothes.
                  
                     Apogaei, wyndes that doo aryſe out of the grounde.
                  
                     Apogeum, an habytation vnder the groūd.
                  
                     Apolactizo, are, to ſtrike with the heles alſo to deſpiſe or ſet at nought.
                  
                     Apollinaris, an herbe callyd a henbane.
                  
                     Apollinares ludi, playes made in the honor of Apollo.
                  
                     Apollo, linis, whom the gentyles honored for god, referrynge to hym the inuencion of muſyke, of poetrie, and of phiſike: It is ſometyme taken for the ſonne.
                  
                     Apollonia, the name of a cite in Epiro, now callid Malonis, an other in Creta, an other in 
                        ••
                     ri
                        •
                     , alſo an ile by Thracia.
                  
                     Apolloniarae, people of Apollonia.
                  
                     
                        Apo
                              ••••
                           ,
                      a broke of hotte water by Padus.
                  
                     Apopleſticus, he that is takē with the palſy.
                  
                     
                        Apoſtope
                              ••
                           s,
                      where ſ
                        •••
                     what is lefte our, ſpecially in ſpeakyng, and left to the conie
                        ••
                     u
                        ••
                      of them that be herers.
                  
                     Apoſtaſia, rebellyon or forſakyng of a mans profyſſion or allegiance.
                  
                     
                        Apoſta
                              •
                           a,
                      a rebelle or rennagate.
                  
                     
                        Apoſt
                              •
                           ophe,
                      a conuertion in ſpeakyng from one to an nother.
                  
                     Apoteleſma, a prouoſ
                        •••
                     tion▪ or declaratiō of the ſignyfications of ſterres at a mans natiuitie, or the beginnyng of any thynge, what therof ſhall happen.
                  
                     
                        Apo
                              •••
                           pſi
                              •
                           ,
                      a dedycation or conſecration, proprely of men into goddes.
                  
                     
                        Apo
                              •••••
                           ,
                      a decoction of dyuers herbes and ſpyces.
                  
                     
                     Apparere quaeſtioni, to ſerue proceſſe as ſergeantes and baylyffes done.
                  
                     Apparo, are, to apparayle or trymme, to be redy to do a thinge, to prepare or ordeine.
                  
                     Apellare Caeſarē, to apele to the Emperour.
                  
                     Appendicula, a diminutiue of Appendix.
                  
                     Appia uia, the name of a high way at Rome
                  
                     Appiana poma, a kynde of appulles as gret as quinces, and hauyng as great a ſauour as they.
                  
                     Applicat primum ad Chriſidis patrem ſe: He fyrſte made repayre to Chriſts father.
                  
                     Apronia, an herbe called alſo Vitis nigra, a blacke vine, whiche runneth vp, and wyndeth about trees and ſtalkes of herbes, & hath a leafe lyke an yuy, but greatter, and beareth beryes in cluſters, whiche at the begynnynge are greene, and blacke whan they be rype, alſo the rote is blacke without, and within is yelowe lyke boxe.
                  
                     Approbo, aui, are, to approue or allowe.
                  
                     Appropinquo, are, to approche, to drawe nyghe to.
                  
                     Appropinquatio, an approchynge or drawinge nyghe to.
                  
                     Appropero, aui, are, to make haſt to come.
                  
                     Aprurius, et Aprugnus, a, um, of a bore.
                  
                     Aprunum, uei Aprugnum callum, the brawne of a bore.
                  
                     Apſis, the fely of a carte wheele.
                  
                     Apſorus, an Ile in the Venecian See.
                  
                     Aptera, a citie in the countray of Licia, and a towne in Crete.
                  
                     Apud eum eſt primus, he is his pryncypall mynyon.
                  
                     Terentius
                     Apud me priores partes habet, he maye doo moſte with me.Terentius 
                     Facio te apud illum deum, I wyll make hym to take the for a god. Per eam te obſecramus ambae, ſi ius, ſi fas eſt, uti aduerſa eius per te tecta,
                     Terentius 
                     tacitaque apud omnes ſint, we bothe deſyre you on her be halfe, if it may be by any meanes poſſible, that by your polycy her myſfortune maye be keuered, and from al men kept ſecrete.
                  
                     Apud aliquem mentiri, to make a lye to one.
                  
                     Apud nos imperium tuum eſt, we remembre your commaundement.
                  
                     Saluſt.
                     Apud animum meum ſtatuo, I determyne in my mynde.
                  
                     Apud forum, In the market, apud aedes, In the houſe. apud horcum, in hell.
                  
                     Cic. in off.
                     Apud quem, in whoſe preſence.
                  
                     Apud maiores noſtros, In the tyme of our forefathers.
                  
                     Terent.
                     Apud ſe non eſt, he is out of his wytte, or he is not in his ryght mynde. Vix ſum apud me, ita animus cōmotus eſt metu, ſpe, gaudio. mirando hoc tanto, tam repentino bono: I am well nyghe out of my wytte, my mynde is ſo vexed with feare, hope and ioye, with this good chaunce, whiche is ſo wonderfull, ſo great, and ſo ſodaynely hapned.
                  
                     Apud te ſis, thynke what thou haſte to doo, remembre thy ſelfe.
                  
                     Apud ignem, by the fyre. apud aquam,
                     Saluſt. 
                     apud quem, by whome, apud eum, by hym.
                  
                     
                        Apud te exemplum experiendi 
                              •
                           abes,
                        Plautus. 
                        noneges foria:
                      ye haue the experience at home, ye neede not to ſeeke for it abrode.
                  
                     Apulia, a countraye in Italy, marchynge on the ſee called Hadriaticum.
                  
                     Apus, odis, a byrde lyke a ſwallowe, but he hath larger winges, and is moſt commonly about the ſee coſte a where alway he eyther flyeth or houereth in the ayre, & bredeth in a rocke.
                  
                     Apyrena, ſwete pomegranates.
                  
                     Apyrotus, a ſtone that no fyre may damage, or deface.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶A ANTE Q.
                  
                     AQuaelicium, rayne water vſed in medicine.
                  
                     Aquaintercus, cutis, water which runneth betwene the ſkynne and the fleſſhe, the dropeſy.
                  
                     Aquarioli, boyes whiche do attende vppon common harlottes.
                  
                     Aquarius, one of the .xii. ſygnes.
                  
                     Aquarius, a, um, partaynynge to water, as aquarius ſulcus, a forow, by the which water is drayned.
                  
                     Aquifolia, a wylde medlar,Vide The
                           •
                         ophraſtū. or a tree lyke a wylde medlar.
                  
                     Aquilegium, a gourde of water, which cometh of rayne.
                  
                     Aquileia, a citie in Italye, in the countreye wherof the people are called Carni.
                  
                     Aquula, a lyttell water.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶A ANTE R.
                  
                     ARabarches, a lorde of Arabi
                        •
                     .
                  
                     Arabia, a great countrey ioynyng to Iudea and Siria, Araby.
                  
                     
                        Araba, a
                              •
                           abi
                              •
                           ,
                      a man or woman of Araby.
                  
                     Arachue, the name of a woman, whiche firſt inuented ſpynnyng of lynnen, and making of nettes. it is alſo taken for lynnen yarne, or the woufe.
                  
                     Arachneus, a lyttell beaſte, whiche gothe a ſofte pace.
                  
                     Arachnion, fyne threde.
                  
                     Arachoſia, a countrey in Aſia.
                  
                     Araciae ficus, fygges brode and whyte, whiche do growe on a lyttell ſtalke.
                  
                     Aracynthus, a mountayne in Grece, in the countray callyd Aetolia.
                  
                     
                     Araneolus, a yonge or lyttell ſpyder.
                  
                     
                        Araris, 
                              〈◊〉
                            arar,
                      a ryuer in Fraunce, whiche runneth out of the countray of Languedocke by Barbone and Burgoyn, into the ryuer of Rone.
                  
                     Ararus, a ryuer of Scithis, whie he r
                        ••••
                     oth throughe the realms of Armeny.
                  
                     Arath, a countraye in A
                        ••
                     eny wonderfull fertyle.
                  
                     
                        Aratro, a
                              ••
                           , ari,
                      to ploughe eftſones lande that is ſowen, to make the grounde fatte.
                  
                     Araxis, a ryuer in Armeny, where it is ſuppoſed, that the arch of Noyabode, wh
                        •
                     n the ſtodde ceaſed.
                  
                     Arbea, a citie in Iudea, where Adam and other thre patriarches were buryed.
                  
                     Arboſes, olde writers vſed for Arbos,
                  
                  
                     Arcadia, a countray in Greece, in the parte called Peloponeſus, nowe Morea.
                  
                     Arcadicus, ca, cum, of Arcadia.
                  
                     
                        Arcas, ca
                              •
                           is,
                      one of the ſonnes of Iupiter. it is alſo a man or woman of Arcadia.
                  
                     Arcatus, ta, tum, bent lyke a bowe.
                  
                     
                        Arce
                              ••
                           laus,
                      a philoſopher, which affirmid by Sophemes, that he nor none other knewe any thynge.
                  
                     Arceſſere, to purchace or gette a thynge.
                  
                     Archarius, a treaſorer, or coferer.
                  
                     Archidamus, a noble man of Sparta, who being demanded howe moch money wold ſerue to the warre of Peloponeſus, aunſwered, ſayinge, that warre ſought for no certaynty.
                  
                     Archigenes, the name of a famous phiſition. it is alſo he that wold be taken for the wiſeſt of his kynne.
                  
                     
                        Archigr
                              •
                           mateus,
                      a chauncellour or chyefe ſecretary.
                  
                     Archimedes, was a geometricion of Siracaſts, in S
                        •
                     eile, whiche inuented a ſphere of glaſſe, in the whiche all the mo
                        •
                     ſons of heuen were playnely perceyued. he made alſo a doone of woode, whiche conteyned ſuche an equall poyſe, that it wolde hange in the ayre.
                  
                     Archyias, a noble philoſopher of the citie of Tarentum in Italy, whiche was of the ſect of Pythagoras, and was a great frend vnto 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
                  
                     Archox, was the chief dignitie in Athenes.
                  
                     
                        Archin
                              ••
                           aus,
                      the mayſter or chyefe of the players.
                  
                     
                        Architectoniae, 
                              〈◊〉
                            idem quod archirectura.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Archon
                              •••
                           ,
                      certayn hare
                        ••
                     kes, whiche affirmed that the vniuerſal ſtate of thinges was not made by god, that by princi
                        •
                     , and they al 
                        •
                     o denied the reſurrection of the body.
                  
                     Arcirna, a lyttell vnto, a whalebarowe.
                  
                     Arconitum, wiſhynge called Arcenyke.
                  
                     Arctophylax, a certayne figure of ſterres, folowynge Charles wayne.
                  
                     Arctos, a fygure of ſterres callyd Charles wayne. alſo Vrſa maior.
                  
                  
                     Arctous, & arcticus, ca, cum, of the northe.
                  
                     Arcturus, a ſterre whiche is at the tayle of that, whiche is callyd arctos, or vrſa maior.
                  
                  
                     Arcuor, ari, to be made bent like a bowe,Liuius. Plinius. Ouidius in Metamor. 12. or to be vaulted. Arcatus, ta, tum, idem.
                  
                  
                     Ardeates, people of the citie of Ardea.
                  
                     Ardeola, an herneſewe.
                  
                     Ardêre cupiditare, to couete ardently.
                  
                     Ardère itacundia, to be diflamid with anger.
                  
                     Ardêre maximo flagītio, to haue done, or to be in
                        ••
                     med of a myſcheuous dede.Plautus.
                  
                  
                     Ardêre, to ſhine. Tyrio
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         ardebat murice laena, His mantell dydde ſhyne of fyne purple of Tyre.
                  
                     Ardens, burnyng, ardent, feruent in doinge.
                  
                     Ardum, olde writters vſid for arduum.
                  
                     Arelate, a citie in France, callid Orleance.
                  
                     Arenarius, a, ū, ꝑtaining to a fighting place.
                  
                     Areopagitae, were Iudges, whiche ſate in a place by Athenes, and iudged cauſes of murder, and weighty thynges concerning the cōmune weale.
                  
                     Areopagus, Marces towne, where the ſaid iudges dyd ſytte in iudgement.
                  
                     Areopolis, a cite in Araby, callid alſo Moab
                  
                  
                     Areopolitae, the inhabitātes of Areopolis.
                  
                     Arete, in latine virtus, in engliſhe vertue. It was alſo the name of the wife of Alcinous kyng of Phoeacis, of whom Homere writeth in Odyſſea.
                  
                     Arethyſſa & Aretliuſa, a ryuer in the greate Armenye.
                  
                     Arethuſa, the companion of Diana. it is alſo the name of a fountayne in Sicile, and of dyuers other.
                  
                     Arerium, a citie in Tuſcan
                        •
                     .
                  
                     Aretinus, a, um, of that citie.
                  
                     Arferis, wyne or water offred to the infernall goddes, or rather deuyls.
                  
                     
                        Argentarius cōme
                              ••
                           us,
                      prouiſyon of money.
                  
                     
                        Argentari
                              •
                            cura,
                      care for money
                        •
                     .Plautus.
                  
                  
                     Argētariae illecebre, thinges getting money
                  
                     Argentaria mopia, lacke of money.
                  
                     Argentaria, a banke of exchaunge.
                  
                     Argentum uiuum, quycke ſyluer.
                  
                     Argeſſes, the weſterne wynde.
                  
                     Argeus, a, um, of the citie of Argos.
                  
                     
                        Arg
                              ••
                            plurali,
                      a citie in Laconia.
                  
                     Argiletum, the ſepulchre of Argus. it is alſo a place to here poſters clay is dygged. it was alſo a ſtrete in Rome, where the boke ſellers 
                        ••••
                     lled.
                  
                     
                        Arg
                              ••••
                           ,
                      boke ſellers dwelling in the ſaid ſtrete callyd argilerum.
                  
                  
                     Argimyſſy, thre lytle iles in Aſia,S. ra. li. 13. by the iles

of Mitelenae, and Leſbus.
                  
                     Argis, at the citie of Argos.
                  
                     Argo, the ſhyppe wherin Iaſon and his cō
                     panye ſayled in to Colchos, to wynne the f
                        •
                     y
                        •
                     e of golde.
                  
                     Argolicus, ca, cum, of Argos.
                  
                     Argonautae, were the noble men, which accompanyed Iaſon vnto Colchos.
                  
                     Argos, ſingulari: Argi plurali, a citie not far from Athenes, a nother in Achara. it is alſo a countray, part of Greece.
                  
                     Plautus.
                     Arguere, aliquē pecuniae interuerſae, to accuſe one for ſtealynge of money.
                  
                     Arguta diuiſio, a ſubtill diuiſion.
                  
                     Argutū caput, a ſharpe or pikyd hedde lyke a ſugar lofe.
                  
                     Argyranche, the ſyluer ſykeneſſe.
                  
                     Argyraſpidae, men bearyng ſhildes of ſyluer
                  
                     Argytitis, the ſpume or fome of ſyluer.
                  
                     
                        A
                              ••
                           adne,
                      a lady, the wife of Theſeus, whom he forſoke, notwithſtandyng that ſhe hadde ſauyd his life.
                  
                     Aricia, a city in Italy.
                  
                     Aricinum noemus, a woode by the ſayd citye where Numa kynge of Romaynes fayned to ſpeke with Aegeria the fayry.
                  
                     Plautus.
                     Aricinus lacus, a brooke by Aricia.
                  
                     Aridus homo, a dry felowe, of whom no thynge maye be goten: ſome do call hym, a pelt,Plautus. or a pynchebeke.
                  
                     Arimaſpi, peple in the north part of Europa whiche haue but one eye, & that is in theyr ſorched, which do fyght contynually with 
                        •••
                     phons.
                  
                     Ariminū, a citye in Italy.
                  
                     Arimphaei, people in the north part of Aſia, whiche all though that they haue onely woodes for theyr dwellynge, and onely beryes for theyr ſuſtynance, yet kepe they iuſtice and peace amonge them ſelues, and be temperate of maners.
                  
                     Herodotꝰ. Ge
                           ••
                        us. Plinius.
                     Arinca, a corne called Rye.
                  
                     Arion, a famouſe harper, whom the maryners wolde haue throwen into the ſee, for to haue his money: but he deſyryng them to let hym play a ſonge on his harpe or he dyed, afterwarde lepte into the water, but a dolphyn receyuyng hym on his backe, & brought hym to lande a lyue.
                  
                     Ariſtathea, the malowe with the greatleſe.
                  
                     Ariſtarchus, a famouſe grāmarien, whiche corrected the bookes of Homere, tryeng out what verſes were his, and what verſes were counterfayt. Therfore they vſe to call hym Ariſtarchus, that is a ſharpe co
                        •
                     
                     rectour of other mennes workes.
                  
                     Ariſtides, a noble man of Athenes, who for his playne and iuſt. dealing, as well in deedes as in wordes, hadde the ſurname gyuen hym, Ryghtuous, or Iuſte: He that readeth this mannes lyfe, in the lyues of Plutarche, ſhall thinke hym before all other to be folowed by a coūſaylour or gouernour vnder a prynce.
                  
                     Ariſtippus, a philoſopher, whiche fyrſt dyd put the principall good thynge in the pleaſaunt mocions of the mynde: the pryncipall yll thinge, in gryefe.
                  
                     Ariſtocratia, the fourme of gouernaunce of a weale publike, where they do rule, which are of moſte vertue.
                  
                     Ariſtolochia, an herbe, wherof be two kyndestone is called longe, the other round. The rounde hath leues in facion like yuy, but ſomwhat rounder, wherin is a ſharpe and ſoft odoure, the floure white lyke a lytle bonet vpon a redde knoppe, the rootes are rounde and many. The longe Ariſtolochia, hath lenger leues, ſmall braunches, and a purple floure, which ſtynketh: and whan it ſpryngeth, it is of the facyon of a peare, the rote therof is long, and of the greatneſſe of a mannes fyngar: bothe of them do beare beryes lyke to capers, within of box coloure, whiche are bytter and ſtynkynge.
                  
                     Ariſtomenes, a man of Meſſene, whiche was called Iuſtiſsimus, moſte iuſte. This man, whan he was dead, was founden to haue his hart all heary.
                  
                     Ariſtophanes, a famous poete, which wrate Comedies, wherin he taūted them, whom he dyd not fauoure: all be it he was very eloquent, and moch myrth is in his workes
                  
                     Ariſtophorū, a diſſhe, wherin meate is borne to dyner.
                  
                     Ariſtoteles, a philoſopher, of whom Quintylyane writeth in this wyſe: whatte ſaye you by Ariſtotle, whome I wote not, whither I maye iudge more excellent in knowlege of thinges, or in abundaunce of wrytynge, or in ſwetneſſe of eloquence, or in ſharpneſſe of witte, or els in diuerſyte of workes. Notwithſtandynge he was lytle of perſonage, crooke backed, yll ſhapen, and ſtuttynge.
                  
                     Ariuido, drythe, or dryeneſſe.
                  
                     Arma coquinaria, vtenſyles of the kechyn▪
                  
                  
                     
                        Arm
                              •
                           n
                              ••
                           ,
                      a royalme in Aſia, lyeng betwene the two great mountaynes, Taurus and Caucaſus, and ſtretcheth from Cappadocia to the ſee called Caſpium.
                  
                     Armeniacum pomum, a pome citron, or a Eitton, whiche is lyke an orenge, but that he is ſomwhat in length.
                  
                     
                        Arme
                              ••
                           a
                              •
                           iu
                              •
                           ,
                      the keper of an a
                        •••
                     ry: ſomtyme Eſqui
                        ••
                      de Eſquyry.
                  
                     Armille, an inſtrument of falſhode or craft.
                  
                     
                     Armiluſtrum, was a feſtiual day, in the whiche the Romaynes dyd ſacr
                        ••
                     es armed, and trompettes dyd blowe bluddy ſoundes. alſo the place wherin ſuche ſacrifyce was made.
                  
                     Palladus. Columel.
                     Armocea, a wylde radyſhe.
                  
                     Armoradum, the tendrels or yonge ſtalkes of wylde radyſhe.
                  
                     Ioſephus.
                     Armon, a ryuer that cometh from the hilles of Arabye, and dyuydeth Moabiride from Amoni
                           •
                        ide.
                  
                  
                     Arnogloſſa, an herbe callid brode Plantain or waybred.
                  
                     Aroma, atis, pleaſant ſauour, alſo ſpyce.
                  
                     Aromatites, a precious ſtone, whiche hathe the ſauour of Mirre.
                  
                     Aromatorius, & aromatopola, he that ſelleth thynges hauynge ſwete ſauour.
                  
                     Aros, an herbe, callyd wake Robyn. It is callyd of ſome Serpentaria minor, bycauſe it hath leaue
                        •
                      lyke to Dragons, but broder, and hauynge blacke ſpottes, it groweth moche about hedges.
                  
                     Arpinum, an auncient towne in Italye, famous and noble by the byrthe of Plautus, Tulli, and Marius.
                  
                     Arpinas, a man or woman of Arpinum.
                  
                     Arquires, olde wryters vſed for an arche
                        •
                     .
                  
                     Arquus, arqui, the raynbowe.
                  
                     Arrideo, ere, to ſmyle on one. alſo to lyke or ſeme pleaſant.Plaut 
                     Aedes mihi arridebant, The houſe lyked me well.
                  
                     Terentius.
                     Arrige aures, lay to thyn eares, or gyue an care to that whiche is ſpoken.
                  
                     Saluſt.
                     Arrexit animos, it aduanced their courage.
                  
                     
                        Arrecta
                              •
                           ii parietes,
                      walles made with tymber and parget, to diuide chambers.
                  
                     Arripere ſe foras, to gette hym oute of the 
                        ••
                     otes.Plautus.
                  
                  
                     
                        Arripere ſermon
                              •
                           ,
                      to take hym at his word.
                  
                     Arripere maledictum, to take hede of an yll reporte.Cicero. 
                     Quare cum iſta ſis auth
                           •
                        ri
                           ••••
                        non debes Marce arripere male dictum 
                           〈…〉
                        , aut ex ſcurrarum aliquo, conuitio, Wherfore in as moche as ye are in this auctoritie, or of this eſtimation, ye ought not Maro, to take hede of an yll worde ſpoken a 
                        •••
                     de, or of the rebuke of a raylynge 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                     ▪
                  
                  
                     The. eſt. de claris grā.
                     Arripere conditionem, to take the offer.
                  
                     Arrugia, a Conen,
                  
                     Ars paraſitica, the feate of flatterye.
                  
                     
                        Ar
                              •••
                           es,
                      was the ſeueral name of the kynges of Parthia.
                  
                     Ariſtotel.
                     
                        
                           〈…〉
                        , beaſte, whiche is both male and female as ſome do ſaye that a 
                        〈◊〉
                      is one yere male, 
                        〈◊〉
                      other yere female.
                  
                     Arraba, a meaſure of the Egyptian
                        •
                      contaynynge 
                        〈…〉
                      and .xii. Romayn meſures, called Sextarii.
                  
                     
                        Artaxa
                              ••
                           ,
                      a cytie in 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
                  
                     Artaxerxes, the name of dyuers kynges of Perſia, of the whiche one of theym callyd Artaxerxes with the longe hande, vſe
                        •
                      to ſay, that it was moche more kingly to giue, than to take.
                  
                     Artemiſia, was the name of a noble princeſſe whiche was the wyfe to Manſ
                        •
                     lus, kynge of Caria, who was of a notable chaſtitie, & in loue towarde her huſband ſo excelled, that whan he was deade, ſhe cauſed his harte to be dried in a veſſelle of golde into pou
                        •
                     er, and by lyttell and lyttell dranke it vppe ſayenge, That theyr two hartes ſhulde neuer departe a ſonder, and that ſhe thought, that there mought be made noo worthye ſepulchre for it, but her owne body. Natwithſtā
                     dynge ſhe made for his body ſuche a ſepulchre, that for the excellents wark
                        •
                     manſhyp that was in it, alſo the beautie, and coſtlyneſſe, it was taken for one of the meruayles of the worlde, and for the notable ſaame therof, all ſumptuous and great ſepulchres were afterwarde callydde Mauſole
                        •
                     . She found alſo an herbe called Artemiſia, M
                        •
                     gwort, or Motherwort in englyſhe, of great vertue in womens diſeaſes.
                  
                     Artemiſius, the moneth of Maye amonge the Macedonians. alſo a hyll in Arcadia.
                  
                     Artemon, monis, a trouble, wherby ropes do runne. It may alſo be taken for any inſtrument, which hath troukles.
                  
                     
                        Artitu
                              •
                           ,
                      well inſtructed in ſciences.
                  
                     
                        Art
                              •••
                           rica paſ
                              •
                           io,
                      callyd alſo Morbus articularis, the ioynt ſyckeneſſe, is thus diuided into Coxendix, callyd Sciatich, whyche is in the 
                        •
                     uckle bone, Podagra, the goute of the legges & fete, and Chiragra,
                     Galenus. Plautus. the goute of the fyngers.
                  
                     
                        Ar
                              ••
                           ue
                              ••
                           is, 
                              •
                           dem.
                     
                  
                  
                     Articularius, he that hath the gout.
                  
                     Articulaté, articulately, as whan one dothe expreſſe euery ſyllable.
                  
                     
                        Arth
                              ••••••
                           ,
                      
                     
                        •
                     am do ſuppoſe it to be that herb and floure, whyche is callyd Prym
                        ••
                     oſe.
                  
                     Artocrea, maye be callyd a paſtye or pye, with fleſhe or fyſhe bakes.
                  
                     
                        Artolag
                              •••••
                           ,
                      
                     
                        •
                     y
                        •
                     e cake breade.Plautus.
                  
                  
                     
                        Artop
                              •
                           a,
                      a bakynge panne, wherein they brake tarte
                        ••
                      or other, thinges, made of fyne paſte. Some take 
                        〈◊〉
                      veſſelle to 
                        〈…〉
                     .
                  
                     Artopteſtie, tartes or cake shaken in a panne
                  
                     
                        
                           〈…〉
                        , browed bread, or breadde 
                        〈…〉
                      wheate.
                  
                     
                        Arto
                              ••••••
                           ,
                      people, whiche did
                        ••
                      offer vnto god 
                        〈◊〉
                      and theſe.
                  
                     Aruales fratres, were ſuppoſed to be the foſter brethrē of Romulus, to whom he gaue the dignitie of prieſthode, to make ſacrifice

for growynge and increace of corne, and preſeruation of the corne feldes.
                  
                     Aruiſium, an hyll on the ſee coſte of the ile callyd Chium, where groweth the wynes callyd Aruiſia vina.
                  
                  
                     Arunca, a towne in Italy.
                  
                     Aruncus, the bearde of a gote.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶A ANTE S.
                  
                     ASarum, an herbe, whoſe leaues are lyke vnto yuie, but they be leſſe and roūder, and hath a good ſauour, the floure is purple, lyke to the floure of henbane, but it ſauoreth ſwetely, and groweth betwene the leaues by the roote, the ſtalke is edged, and ſomwhat roughe, the rootes ar ſmal, croked, & like to graſſe, full of knottes: it is commonly callid Aſarabaccha, ſom calle it wylde Spikenarde.
                  
                     Aſarotum, pauynge tile with pictures enelyd, which may nat be ſwept with a beſom, but the duſt and other thing muſt be ſwept with a wynge and gathered vp.
                  
                     Aſcalon, a citie in Paleſtina.
                  
                     Aſcaloniae, a kind of onyons called ſcalions.
                  
                     Aſcanius, the ſonne of Eneas.
                  
                     
                        Aſci
                              •
                           ae,
                      Arabians.
                  
                     
                        Aſclep
                              •
                           ades,
                      the name of a famous phiſitian. Alſoo of a philoſopher, whiche beinge blynde, was demaunded in ſkorne, what his blyndnes dyd profit him, and he anſwered, that he had the more company by one boye that dyd leade hym.
                  
                     Aſcopera, a bagge of lether.
                  
                     Aſcra, a citie in Boeotia, where Heſiodus the poete was borne.
                  
                     Aſcriptus, ta, tum, inrollyd.
                  
                     Aſcripti milites, ſowldiours, whoſe names are regyſtred or entred with other.
                  
                     Aſcriptiuus, idem quod aſcriptius, he that is regyſtred with other.
                  
                     Aſellus, a lyttell or yong aſſe. alſo the name of a ſee fyſhe, callyd an haddocke.
                  
                     Aſianus, a, um, of Aſia.
                  
                     Aſiaticus, a ſurname gyuen to oone of the Scipyons, bycauſe that he ſubdewed the laſſe Aſia.
                  
                     Aſilus, a great flye, whiche byteth beaſtes, and is callyd a horſe flye.
                  
                     Aſion, an owle, whiche hath fethers on euery ſyde of her heed lyke vnto eares.
                  
                     Aſiortum, a kynde of ſpyders, with whyte ſtrakes, of whom if that one be ſtunge, his knees ſhall bowe and waxe faynt.
                  
                     Aſomatos, vnpalpable, or that cā not be felt
                  
                     Aſopus, a ryuer in Achaia.
                  
                     Aſotia, ryotte.
                  
                     Aſotus, ryottous.
                  
                     Aſpalathus, a thorne growynge in the eaſte partes of the worlde, the rynde wherof is ſomwhat redde, and within, the wodde is of a ſadde purple, and ſmellith very ſwete, and therfore is vſed in parfumes.
                  
                     Aſparagus, an herbe callyd of cōmon apotycaries Sparagus, in englyſhe Sperage.
                  
                     
                        Aſpello, aſpuli, aſpellere,
                        Plautus▪
                        
                      to dryue awaye from one.
                  
                     Aſperum uinum, a roughe wyne.
                  
                     Aſper numus, money newe coyned.
                  
                     Aſperſus infamia, ſtayned with diſhonour.Cicero▪
                     
                  
                  
                     Aſpergere comitatem ſeueritate, to myxt famyliaritie and grauitie togyther.
                  
                     Aſphaltum, a water in Syria, wherein nothynge that hath lyfe may be drowned. It is callyd Mare mortuū, the deed ſee. It is ſuppoſed, that in that place ſtoode the cyties of Sodoma. It is alſo a certayn lyme myxte with brymſtone, whiche being ones hette, may neuer be extinete.
                  
                     Aſphodelus, an herbe callyd daffadyll.
                  
                     Aſpidiſca, a lyttell tergate or ſhielde.
                  
                     Aſpilates, a ſtone lyke to ſyluer.
                  
                     Aſſae, drye ſtones.
                  
                     Aſſatura, roſted meate.
                  
                     Aſſectator, a companyon.
                  
                     Aſſentio, to perceyue.Plaut. 
                     Sed aſſentio aperiti fores, quae abſorbent quicquid uenit infra peſſulos, But I perceyue the doores are opened, whiche deuouren all that commethe within the boltes.
                  
                     Aſſentatio, flatterye.
                  
                     Aſſentatiuncula, a flatterynge tale.
                  
                     Aſſequor, aſſequi, to render as moch to one as he hath deſerued.Cicero 
                     Nullam partem uidear tuorum meritorum aſſecutus, It may not be founde in me, that I haue rendred to you any thynge after youre merytes, or haue doone ſoo moche for you, as ye haue deſerued.
                  
                     Aſſequi nomen, to gette renoume.Plinius.
                  
                  
                     Aſſer, aſſeris, a pole.
                  
                     Aſſerculi, & aſsiculi, lytel bourdes or lathes.
                  
                     Aſſerere aliquem manu, to ſet one at libertie or to manumyſe a bondman.
                  
                     
                        Aſſerere in ſeruitu
                              •
                           em,
                        Plautus.
                      to brynge in bondage or ſeruytude.
                  
                     Aſſerere ab iniuria, to defende from wronge or daunger.
                  
                     Aſſerere ſe ſtudijs, to leaue al other beſynes, to applye ſtudy.
                  
                     Aſſertor, totis, he that ſetteth one at libertie, or defendeth hym from bondage.
                  
                     Aſsidela, a byſhops ſeate or chaire, wherin he ſytteth whan he miniſtreth.
                  
                     Aſsidere literis, to be alwaye in ſtudye of letters.
                  
                     Aſsiduus ſcriptor, an author apꝓued, whoſe

ſentence▪ is holden for certayne and true.
                  
                     Aſsiduitas, continuance in a thinge.
                  
                     Cicero.
                     
                        Aſsidue, & aſsidu
                              •
                           ,
                      aduerbes, whiche do ſignifie continually.
                  
                     
                        Aſsigna
                              •
                           a fame,
                      to applye hym ſelfe to get renoume.
                  
                     Aſsimilo, are, to do a thynge lyke to an nother man, to 
                        〈…〉
                      or folowe one.
                  
                     Aſsimilis, le, lyke or ſemblable.
                  
                     Aſsimiliter, al ſemblably.
                  
                     Plautus.
                     Aſsimulo, are, to fayne to do a thynge, and not to doo it.
                  
                     Aſsipondium, a pounde weight.
                  
                     Aſsiſia, one of ye names of Pallas or Minerua
                  
                     Aſſoleo, lêre, to be wont or accuſtomed.
                  
                     Aſsono, are, to ſowne or make a ſowne.
                  
                     Aſſauoce cantare, to ſynge withoute an Inſtrument.
                  
                     Varro. Cato.
                     Aſſuefactio, a bryngyng of one in cuſtome.
                  
                     Aſſueſco, ſcere, to vſe of a cuſtome.
                  
                     Aſſumptio, a takynge.
                  
                     Aſſur, a cytie in Iudea, buylded by kynge Salomon.
                  
                     Aſſus, a, um, toſted or roſted.
                  
                     Aſſyria, a region in Aſia, callyd now Syria, in englyſhe Surrye, hauynge on the eaſte Indie, on the weſt the ryuer of Tigris, on the ſouth Medi or Mede, on the northe the mounte of Caucaſus.
                  
                     Aſta, departe nat, ſtande ſtyll.
                  
                     Aſtachus, a kynde of crabbes of the ſee.
                  
                     Aſtare, to ſtande by, or to be preſent.
                  
                     Aſtare in genua, to knele.
                  
                     Aſtare aduocatus, to aſſyſt or ſpeake for one.
                  
                     Plautus.
                     Aſtaroth, an olde citie ſometyme belonging to Og, kyng of Baſan, in the which dwellyd gyantes, and afterwarde it came to the lotte of the tribe of Manaſſes, and is in the countray of Bethania. There be two caſtelles of that name nyne myles a ſonder, betwene the citie of Adara and Abella.
                  
                     Aſterté, a goddeſſe of the Sirians, to whom Salomon to pleaſe his concubyne, rayſed an Aultar.
                  
                     Aſterias, a kynde of herons, I ſuppoſe that it is an Egrette.
                  
                     Aſthma, matis, a ſyckneſſe, where one maye not fetche his wynde but with moche difficultie, with weaſynge of the breaſt: whiche hapneth by ſtrayteneſſe of the pypes ſtopped with toughe fleume, or of ſomme impoſtume growen in the pypes.
                  
                     Aſtomi, people of Indie, hauynge no mo
                        •
                     
                     thes, whiche lyuen by ayre and ſmelle of ſwete thynges.
                  
                     Aſtrea, ſygnyfieth Iuſtyce.
                  
                     Aſtringere fidem, to promyſe.
                  
                     Aſtringere ſe furti, to yelde or make him ſelf gyltie of felonie.
                  
                     Aſtroites, a ſtone lyke to a 
                        ••
                     ſhes eie.
                  
                     Aſtrologus, an aſtrologie
                        •
                     , he that ſtudieth the ſpeculation of aſtronomie.
                  
                     Aſtronomus, an aſtronomer.Plinius.
                  
                  
                     
                        Aſtruer
                              •
                            digni
                              •
                           ati alterius,
                      to augment an other mans dignitie or honour.
                  
                     Aſtruitur his, is putte for more ouer,Plinius in Epiſtolis. or furthermore.
                  
                     Aſtur, any thyng of Aſturia, a cite in Spain.
                  
                     Aſtur equus, a ſpanyſſhe horſe, callyd a genette. Aſtur co
                           •
                        es, idem.
                  
                  
                     Aſtura, a towne and ryuer in Italy.
                  
                     Aſturiā, a citie in Spayne.
                  
                     Aſueſtinum, lynnen threede, whiche maye nat be burned.
                  
                     Aſymbolus, he that commeth to a bankette, without appoyntement, an vnboden geſte.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶A ANTE T.
                  
                     AT
                     ▪ yet, or at the leaſt way▪
                     Cicero ꝓ Flacco. 
                     Si non propiquitatis, at aetatis ſuae, ſi nō hominis, at humanitatis rationem haberet, All though he had not conſideration of kinred, yet ſhulde he haue had regarde to his age, and though he caryd not for the perſon, yet ſhulde he haue hadde reſpecte vnto good humanitie.
                  
                     Arabulus, a feruent wynde, whyche whan it bloweth in the realme of Naples, peſtylence immediately inſueth.
                  
                     Atalanta, a mayden, whiche was doughter to the kynge of Argiues, whiche kepynge perpetuall virginitie, haunted foreſtes and woodes, and dyd ſlee wylde beaſtes, & was the fyrſte that wounded the greatte bore of Calidonia.
                  
                     Attalus, a kynge in the laſſe Aſia, of meruailous rycheſſe, of whome all magnifyke and ſtately thynges, are callyd Attalica.
                  
                  
                     Attamen, but yet.
                  
                     Atechna, thynges vnkunningly handled.
                  
                     Ategia, a bouthe, or place made vppe with trees and boughes.
                  
                     Ater panis, broune breadde.
                  
                     Atharus, a byrde with foure legges, hauing the longeſt behynde.
                  
                     Athanatos, immortall.
                  
                     Athenae, narum, the citie of Athenes.
                  
                     Athenaeum, a place at Rome, where all ſcyences were radde.
                  
                     Athenodorus, a phyloſopher, whiche lefte with Octauian the Emperoure this leſſon, whā he toke his leue of him: Roble prince, whā thou art attached with wrath, neither ſay nor do any thing, vntyl thou haſt by thy ſelfe pervſed the .xxiiii. greke letters, and remembred the order of places where they ſtand, to thi
                        ••
                     ent that the paſſion of yre, by withdrawyng the mind to an nother thing, mought languiſhe and vaniſhe away.
                  
                     
                     Atheromata, lyttell pouſſhes in the necke, and vnder the armes.
                  
                     Atheos, he that doth not beleue that god is.
                  
                     Atheſis, a ryuer in Italy that paſſeth by the cyties of Verona and Tridentum callyd Trente.
                  
                     Athos, a hylle in Macedonia, of a wonderfulle heyght.
                  
                     Athrax, a citie in Theſſalia.
                  
                     Athracia ars, arte magike.
                  
                     Atlanticae inſulae, the yles callyd nowe fortunatae, where fruite and herbes doo growe without labour.
                  
                     Atlantides, the doughters of Atlas, alſoo certayne ſterres.
                  
                     Atlas, Atlantis, the name of a kynge, whiche fyrſte taughte the courſe of ſterres, and therfore it was fayned of hym, that he ſuſteyned heuen on his ſholders. It is alſo the name of a hylle in Barbaria, highe and ſmall, that it perceth the cloudes.
                  
                     Atlantes, Moores dwelling about that hyl.
                  
                     Atocion, a medicyne, which maketh a woman to be barrayne.
                  
                     Atocius, a certayne ſpyder which is heary.
                  
                     Plautus in 
                           〈…〉
                        
                        ▪
                     
                     At
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , than. Illi ſunt alio ingenio at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         tu, They be of an nother maner of wytte than thou art. Non Appollinis magis verum, at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         hoc reſponſum eſt, Appolloes aunſwere was neuer truer than this is.
                  
                     Plautus in 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                     At
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         adeo, and that more is. Eſurio hercle, at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         adeo nunc haud parum ſirio, I am hungrye, and that more is, I am a thyrſte not a lyttelle.
                  
                     At
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         eccum, but lo where he is.
                  
                     Atractilis, an herbe, hauing a longe ſtemme and rough, with long leaues growyng by the toppe, the reſidue without leaues, the toppe full of prickes, and a yelowe floure, women were wonte to make ſpyndelles of the ſtalkes therof.
                  
                     Atricapilla, a byrde, with blacke fethers on the crowne of his heed.
                  
                     Atrifer, a ruſhe that beareth a blacke ſede.
                  
                     Atriolum, a lyttell ynner court.
                  
                     Atriplex, an herbe callyd orache or arage.
                  
                     Atritas, blackeneſſe.
                  
                     Atrophia, an affecte or diſcra
                        •
                     ye, wherin the body can nat be nouryſhed with any thing but conſumeth with leanneſſe.
                  
                     Atrophus, he that hath that affecte.
                  
                     Atropos, one of the fatall ladies, whyche is fayned to breake the threde of lyfe: it is ſomtyme put for neceſſitte of dethe.
                  
                     Atta, is he that gothe ſo on the ſoles of his fete, that he ſwepeth the grounde, rather than walketh.
                  
                     Attagen, & attagena, a byrd, whiche is foūd in Ionia, and is very delycate, and hathe fethers of ſondry colours, and beynge at large, is alwaye ſyngynge o
                        •
                      chatteringe, whan he is taken, he maketh no noyſe, nor ſemeth to haue any voic
                        •
                     . They ar deceiued that take hym for a woodcocke.
                  
                     Attalica toga, a gowne of tynſette.
                  
                     Attelanae fabulae, were comedies or enterludes, whiche onely were 
                        •
                     ieſtes and mery ſcoffes, or bourdynges.
                  
                     Attelae, a citie nygh to Naples.
                  
                     
                        Attentu
                              •
                           ,
                      he that hereth diligētly, attentiue.
                  
                     Attentus ad rem, carefull to get goodes.
                  
                     Attero, triui, terere, to rubbe againſt a thing.
                  
                     
                        Atterere famam,
                        Saluſt. 
                        Poſt ubi 
                              •
                           orum famam at
                              
                                 
                              
                              que
                            pudorem attriuerat, maiora alia imperabat,
                     
After that he hadde made theym conſume their good name and honeſtie, he ſet them in hande with other greatter attemptatis.
                  
                     Attica, a countray in Grece, wherin ſtoode the famous citie of Athenes, the nourice of all ſcyences.
                  
                     Attice, an aduerbe, ſygnifyenge in the eloquence of ſpeche of Athenes.
                  
                     Atticiſmus, the fourme of that ſpeche.
                  
                     Atticiſſo, ſere, to ſpeake lyke an Athenienſe.
                  
                     Attigo, idem quod attingo.
                  
                  
                     Attilus, a fyſſhe, whyche is in the ryuer of Po, very gret, and with longe reſt waxeth meruaylous fatte, which Franciſcus Philelphus ſuppoſed to be a ſturion, but that is denied by Iouius, which affirmeth that he is greatter than a ſturion, and vnlyke to hym in fourme, taſte, and price.
                  
                     Attingit me ſanguine, he is nigh of my blod.Plinius.
                  
                  
                     Attingere ſenectam, to come to greate age.
                  
                     
                        Attingere partes naturae,
                        Vergili. in Geor.
                      to com to the knowlege of naturall cauſes.
                  
                     Attingere ſtudia, to ſauour of letters.
                  
                     Attingitur, it is nyght.
                  
                     Attondeo, attondêre, to clyppe or ſheare a thynge nygh.
                  
                     Attondere arbores, to ſhrede trees.Plautus.
                  
                  
                     Attondere auro, to rydde one of his money, to take all away from hym.
                  
                     Attributus, ta, tum, attributed.
                  
                     Attributa pecunia, moneye delyuered to be gyuen to an nother manne.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶A ANTE V.
                  
                     AVarus, coueytous of money.
                  
                     Aucupare ſermonem alicuius, to harken or take hede what one ſayth.
                  
                     Audin tu? Hereſt thou not?
                  
                     Audire bene, to haue a good name.
                  
                     Audire male, to haue an yll name.
                  
                     Audiens dicto, redy to doo that he is commaunded, at commaundement, obedyent▪
                  
                  
                     Audienciam facere, to commaunde or make

ſylence, as they doo wihche are cryers in places of iuſtyce.
                  
                     Auello, auulſi, auellere, to plucke awaye by vyolence.
                  
                     Auellere ſe a meretrice, to withdrawe hym, or go away by force from an harlotts.
                  
                     Auenaria, a kynde of graſſehoppes, which appers nat vntyll the corne be rype.
                  
                     Auentinus, an hylle at Rome.
                  
                     Auerni, people in France, callid Auergnes.
                  
                     Auernus, a loke in Campani
                        •
                     , whyche was dedicate vnto Pluto kyng of Hell, where 
                        ••
                     on ſuppoſed, that there was an entrie or paſſage to helle.
                  
                     Auerſus, a, um, ſtraunge, vnacquaynted.
                  
                     Vergilius.
                     Auertere ab aliquo loco, to lette or prohybyte one to enter.
                  
                     Aueruncus, god whiche putteth awaye all euylle.
                  
                     Aufero, abſtuli, auferre, to take away.
                  
                     Terentius
                     Aufer te hinc, gette the henſe.
                  
                     Aufer te domum, gette the home.
                  
                     Plautus.
                     Auferas iurgium, leaue thy chydynge.
                  
                     Auferre litem, to gette by action or proceſſe of the lawe. Maiore mulcta mulcta
                           •
                        , quam li
                           •
                        em auferunt,
                     Plautus in Ruden. He maketh them to ſpende more than they may wynne by their ſuite.
                  
                     Aufer nugas, leaue theſe trifelynges, leaue your mockes.
                  
                     Auferre petitionem, to haue the thynge that he aſketh.Plautus in Cur. 
                     Tuo arbitratu, dum auferam abs te id quod peto, Euen as ye wyll, ſoo that I maye haue the thynge that I aſke or demaunde.
                  
                     Auferre pignora, to take a dyſtreſſe or gage.
                  
                     Plautus in Aſina.
                     Auferre tacita, to make oone to confeſſe a thynge ſecrete. Suſpendas potius me, quam tacita haec auferas, Thou mayſt rather hange me, thanne make me confeſſe that ſecrete.
                  
                     Terentius in Andria.
                     Auferre inultum, to goo quyte without punyſhement. Ergo pretium ob ſtultitiam fero, ſed inultū nun
                           
                              
                           
                           quam
                         auferet, I am well rewarded for my folyſhenes, but yet he ſhall not go quyte away without punyſhement.
                  
                     Cic. Tuſc. queſt. 3. Ennius.
                     Auferri ſibi, to be vexed in mynde, or frome hym ſelfe.
                  
                     
                        Augifico, for augeo.
                     
                  
                  
                     Augere auxilia, to make a newe hoſte, after a diſcomfyte.
                  
                     Auguratus, the dygnitie of theym, whiche were Augures, of whome was a colledge in Rome: as there be nowe of prieſtes in Cathedrall churches.
                  
                     Augurium, dyuination or tellynge before of thinges, whiche ſhall happen, ſpecially by the flyght, or voyces of byrdes.
                  
                     Cicero 
                           •
                         L. Murena
                     Auguror, ari, idem quod Augure.
                  
                  
                     Auguror opiniōe, I ſuppoſe in myn opinyon
                  
                     Auguſta Caeſaria, a cytie in Spayne, vppon the ryuer of Iberus.
                  
                     Auguſta emerita, a cytie in Portugall.
                  
                     Auguſta Vindelicorum, a goodly and beautyfulle citie in Germanye, nowe callydde Awſbourghe.
                  
                     Auguſtalis, ale, the Emperours Palayce or Pauyllyon.
                  
                     Auguſtus, a place conſecrate, full of maieſtie and honour, it is alſo a name of addicion gyuen to emperours.
                  
                     Auiatius, & auiaria, he and ſhe that hath the charge of the kepynge of pultrie or wildfoule. It may alſo be vſed for a pultar, whiche ſelleth pultrie.
                  
                     Auiarium, the place where pultrie is kept. alſo buſſhes ſette for byrdes to haunte and ſytte in.
                  
                     Auide, affectuouſly, couetouſly, ardantly. with great deſyre.
                  
                     Auidis moribus, of an excedynge couaytous appetite.
                  
                     Auiditas, deſyre of a thynge, couetyſe, ardant affection.
                  
                     Auidus cibi, hungrye.Terent.
                  
                  
                     Auilla, a lambe lately yeaned.
                  
                     
                        Auius, uia, uium,
                        Plaut. Vergil. Saluſt.
                      wherby there is no paſſage or waye.
                  
                     Auius, he that gothe out of the way.
                  
                     Aula, of old writers was vſid for olla, a pot.
                  
                     Aulula, a lyttell potte, wherof cometh Aulularia, a comedye of Plautus, wherein is declared the couetous mynd of one, whiche hydde his money in a potte, thynkyng that noo man knewe hit but hym ſelfe, and yet was he deceyued of it.
                  
                     Aulicotia, boyled meate.
                  
                     Aulicus, a courtyar.
                  
                     Aulicus, ca, cum, of the court,Sueton, in Nerone. as aulicus apparatus, courtely apparayle, but moſt proprely the apparayle of pryncis.
                  
                     Aulis, lidis, a lyttelle countraye or ſhyre in Boeotia in Grece. It was alſo a great cytie and hauen, where the princis of Grece aſſemblyd, and conſpired togyther the diſtruction of Troy.
                  
                     Aulon, the name of a Mountayne and citie in Calabria, where growethe excellente good wynes. Alſoo of two other cyties, the oone in Macedonia, the other in Cilicia.
                  
                     
                        Aul
                              •
                           ,
                      ſhaulmes or waytes.
                  
                     Auleticus, he that playeth beſt on a ſha
                        •
                     me or wayte.
                  
                     Auocare animum, to withdrawe the mynde from a thynge.
                  
                     Auocamentum, paſſetyme, recreation, that withdraweth the mynde from heuyneſſe or melancholy.
                  
                     
                     Aurata, a fyſhe of the ſee, which I ſuppoſe to be a gylte heed, for he hath in his foreheed a thinge congelate, which in the water ſhyneth lyke golde, and alſo hath a ſet of t
                        •
                     the lyke checke t
                        •
                     the, wherwith he hathe ben harde of fyſhers in the night to cruſhe cockyls, and ſuche other lytell ſhell fyſhes, wheron he fedeth.
                  
                     Terentius in Andria.
                     Aures arrigere, to lyfte vppe the eares, to here attentyuely.
                  
                     Cicero in Saluſt Cicero ꝓ G
                           ••
                        la
                           •
                        co. Plautus in Tr
                           •
                        nūmo. Plautus in Mi
                           ••
                        . T
                           ••
                        b
                           •
                        nius Cicer
                           •
                        . Cic. V
                           •
                        lū.
                     Aures calent illius criminibus, myne cares glowe or burne to here of his miſcheuous actes. Aures hebetes haber, he is dulle in berynge, or he lyſteth nat to here.
                  
                     Auribus accipere, to haue herde.
                  
                     
                        Auribus cap
                              •
                           re ſpolia,
                      to harken & beare away our ſacrefies, or ſecrete counſayle.
                  
                     Auribus dare, to flatter, to ſpeake that whiche ſhall content a mans eare.
                  
                     Auribus aequiſsimis alicuius uti, to be fauorably harde of one.
                  
                     Apulcius.
                     Auribus prouehi, to be caried by the eares, it is proprely vſed, where we wyl declare, that beinge in iourney with one, we delyte ſo moch in his cōmunication, that we fele no labour or payne by going or riding. So may we ſay, auribus prouehimur, in hering of hym our paynes are relieued, or in heryng him talke, our iorney ſemeth ſhorte, or is abbreuiate.
                  
                     Auricularius, a, um, pertayning to the eares.
                  
                     Auricularis confeſsio, cōfeſſion made ſecretly, as prieſtis do here it.
                  
                     Auricularis▪ re, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Aurigo, a ſicknes callid the yelow iaundiſe.
                  
                     Aurilegus, he that hath ſtollen golde.
                  
                     Auripigmentum.
                  
                  
                     Aurum coronatium, was golde gathered of the people, to make crownes, to ſende to Emperours, after their vyctories.
                  
                     Plaut. in Mercator.
                     Auſcultabitur, he wyll do as ye byd hym.
                  
                     Auſcultare alicui, to obeye one, or be at his commaundement.
                  
                     Auſcultare inter ſeſe, to whyſter oone in an nothers 
                        •
                     are.
                  
                     Auſim, ſis, ſit, is put for audeam, as, at.
                  
                  
                     Auſitis, the contray callid alſo Hus, where Iob dwellyd.
                  
                     Auſonium, Italy. Auſones, were the anciēt kynges of Italy.
                  
                     Auſum, & auſus, a preſumptuous enterpriſe.
                  
                     Plautus in Peria.
                     Auſpicium liquidū, a manifeſt ſigne or token.
                  
                     Auſpicia optima, tokens of good lucke.
                  
                     Plautus in Aui.
                     Auſpicio malo, with ylle lucke, or in an ylle tyme. Nae ego edepol ueni huc auſpicio malo: I camme hither in an ylle time, or, An vnhappy or vnlucky fortune broughte me byther.
                  
                     Auſpico, are, to ſeke for a thing by diuinatiō.
                  
                     Auſpicatus, ta, tum, honourably enterpriſed.Quintilia.
                  
                  
                     Auſpicató, happyly.
                  
                     Auſtrum, the ſpoke of a whele.
                  
                     Aut certe, or at the leaſt. Quo enim vno uincebamur a victa Graetia, id aut illi ereptum eſt,
                     Ci. in Bru. 
                     aut certe nobis communicatum, That oone thyng, wherin we gaue place to Grece, whiche is vanquyſhed by vs, eyther it is taken cleane away from them, or at the leſt we be therin equall vnto them.
                  
                     Autenticus, ca, cum, of auctoritie.
                  
                     Autocthones, people which beganne in the countray that they doo inhabyte, whyche name was gyuen to them of Athenes.
                  
                     Autodidactus, he that lernith without a maſter by his owne ſtudy.
                  
                     Automata. thynges without lyfe, whyche ſeme to moue by them ſelfes: as it may appere in olde horologes, and ymages, whiche by vices do moue.
                  
                     Autopyros, breade of cleane wheate without other mixture, ſauing a lyttell leuen.
                  
                     
                        Author,
                        T
                              •
                           . Liuius, Paulus inrecōſultꝰ. Ci. in Ver. Plautus in Cur. Terentius in Prolog. Andri. Plautus in poenu.
                      the fyrſte Inuenter or maker of a thyng alſo a reporter of newes. alſo he that hath the cuſtody of one within age. alſo he that doth ſell or delyuer a thing on warrantiſe. alſo he whom a man foloweth in doing any thynge.
                  
                     Authoritas, authoritie, credence, puiſſance, opinion, iugement, the inioying of poſſeſſiō.
                  
                     Authoritatem defungi, to deny to haue done any thynge, or to haue bene the cauſe that it was doone.
                  
                     
                        Authoritatem defugere,
                        Terentius Eunucho.
                      to refuſe to do that whiche he is commanded.
                  
                     Authoritatem interponere, to commaunde a thynge to be done.
                  
                     Authoramentum, wages, or hyre.
                  
                     Authoro, rare, to bynde one by couenant to doo ſeruyce.
                  
                     Authoratus, ta, tum, bounden by couenaunt.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶A ANTE X.
                  
                     AXis, an extree of a cart, ſomtyme the hole carte, Sometyme it is ſhyngle,Iuuenal
                           ••
                        . wherewith howſes are couered in the ſtede of tyle.
                  
                     Axilla, the armehole.
                  
                     Axamenta, verſes made by the prieſtes of Mars, called Salii, in quycke tauntynge of all men.
                  
                     Axare, olde writers vſed for nominare, to name or aſke.
                  
                     Axioma, a ſentence ſpoken and proued: as If Plato walketh, Plato moueth, if it be day, the ſon is aboue the erth. It is put by Tulli for that, which ſophiſters do call a propoſition, whiche is a ſentence trewe or fals.
               
            
            
               
               
                  ¶A ANTE Z.
                  
                     AZymus panis, vnleuened breadde.
                  
                     Azanlum, was a welle, the water wherof beinge dronke, cauſed menne to hate the ſauour and taſte of wyne.
                  
                     
                        Azotu
                              •
                           ,
                      a citie in Siria.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶B ANTE A.
                  
                     
                        BAAL in the tongue of Siria, ſignifieth lorde, & is attrybute to Iupiter.
                  
                     Babe, an interiection of wondrynge.
                  
                     Babylon, a great citie in Caldey, and ſignyfyeth confuſion or trāſlation. where was a towre edyfied by Hembroth, whiche was in height fiue myles, and a hū
                     dred thre ſcore and tenne paces, afterward being enlarged by Semiramis, the wyfe of Ninus kyng of Aſſiria, it was ſo great, that it conteyned in compaſſe thre ſcore myles, and the walles were in the height thre hundred fete, and in thyckenes or bredthe thre ſcore and fyftene fete, and hadde a hūdred gates of braſſe, and there ranne through the middell therof the noble and moſte famous riuer Euphrates, whyche is oone of the ryuers, whereof the hedde or ſprynge is in Paradyſe.
                  
                     Babylonia, the countray where the citye of Babylon ſtode.
                  
                     Babylonicus, ca, cum, and Babylonius, a, um, of Babylon.
                  
                     Babylonica, are clothes wouen with ſondry colours.
                  
                     Baccalia, a kynde of bay trees or laurell, but it hath larger leues, and great plentye of beryes. It is alſo called Auguſta.
                  
                  
                     
                        Baccar, car
                              •
                           s, & Baccharis,
                      is an herbe hauynge a lefe in facyon and greatneſſe betwene violet leues and the herbe, whiche is called Moleyn or longwort, the ſtalke ſquare, and ſomwhat rough, whiche is in hayght a foote and a half, hauyng a floure lyke purple, myxte with whyte, the roote blacke, but that ſauouryth lyke vnto Cinamome, ſome do call it Aſdrabacca, ſome our ladies gloues.
                  
                     Bacchari, to do a thynge lyke a madde man or vexed with ſpirites.
                  
                     Bacchatim, lyke a madde man.
                  
                     Baccaricum, a ſwete oyntment, made of the roote of Aſdrabaccha.
                  
                     Bacchius, a, um, of Bacchus.
                  
                     Bacciſera, a tree bearynge bearies.
                  
                     Baccula, a lyttell bearye.
                  
                     Bacillum, a lyttell ſtaffe.
                  
                     Bactra, trotum, a contray in Scithis, beyōd Aſſiria, it is alſo the name of a citie in that countraye.
                  
                     Bactriani, people of that countray.
                  
                     Bactrianum, a coūtray wherin were a thouſands cities.
                  
                     Badizare, to goo.Plautus in Aſina.
                  
                  
                     Bagous, in the Perſian tounge ſignyfieth a geldyng, or a man gelded.
                  
                     Bagrada, a ryuer in Affrike by the citie callyd Vtica, where Att
                        •
                     hus Regulus, and the hoſte of the Romans, ſlewe a ſerpent, whiche was in length one hundred & .xx. fete.
                  
                     Bahal, the ydoll of Cyre.
                  
                     Balanites, a ſtone, whiche is a lyght grene, and hath a vayn in the myddell lyke a flame of fyre.
                  
                     Balanitis, a kynde of rounde Cheſtens or cheſte nuttes.
                  
                     Balauſtium, the floures of wylde pome granades.
                  
                     Baleares, two Iles by Spayne, wherof the one is now called Maiorca, the other Minorca.
                  
                  
                     Balliſtarium, the place where a great brake 
                        •
                     or ſlynge is layde.
                  
                     Balneatorius, a, um, of a bathe.
                  
                     
                        Balneb
                              •
                           um,
                      a lytell bayne or bathe.
                  
                     Balito, tare, to blete often.
                  
                     Balſamum, baulme.
                  
                     Bambia, a kynde of olyue tree.
                  
                     Banauſus, an artificer that worketh at ye fyre.
                  
                     Banchus, called an haddok.
                  
                     Baphia, a dyehouſe.
                  
                     Baptae, men whiche hadde theyr viſages paynted.
                  
                     Baptes, a ſtoone greene, of the colour of a frogge.
                  
                     Baptiſmus, & Baptiſmum, & Baptiſma, matis, Baptym.
                  
                     Barbala, a lytell berde.
                  
                     Barba iouis, an herbe called Sing
                        •
                     eene, and groweth on tyles.
                  
                     Barba ſenis, is an herbe, which groweth amonge ſtones, the leaues wherof be lyke to long heares. It is alſo callyd Barba petrae, it hathe a yelowe floure, and the roote therof is bytter.
                  
                     Barbatulus, he that hath a yonge berde.
                  
                     Barbus, & barbo, a fyſhe callyd a barbyll.
                  
                     Barce, a citye in Libia, alſo an other citye called Ptolomais.
                  
                     Bardeſanes, was an excellent aſtronomer.
                  
                     Bardiacus, a certeyne garment.
                  
                     Baris, barides, vel baridis, a bote in Egypt, wherin they caried ded bodies to burieng.
                  
                     Bariona, ide, quod filius columbae, the Culuers ſonne. It was the ſurname of ſaynte

Peter the apoſtell.
                  
                     Barnacida, a garmēt that childern did wear.
                  
                     Martialis.
                     Barrus, a toothe. Quid tibi vis mulier, nigris digniſsima barris? What woldeſt thou haue woman, that arte worthy blacke tethe?
                  
                     Baſan, a countray beyond the ryuer of Iordane in Iudea, which was diuyded to two of the Trybes: whyche may be interpreted moſte fertile and fatte.
                  
                     Martialis.
                     Baſcanda, a certayn veſſel, whiche came out of Englande, whan it was callyd Britayn.
                  
                     Baſilça, a citie in Germanye.
                  
                     Baſilia, an Ile in the northe occean ſee.
                  
                     Plaut. in capt. Plautus in 
                           •
                        rinūmo. Plautus in Perſa. Plautus in Carcu.
                     Baſilicae edictiones, the kynges ordynaunce or commaundementes.
                  
                     Baſilica facinora, actes or geſtes of kynges.
                  
                     Baſilica nux, a wall nutte.
                  
                     Baſilicè agere, to do a thinge royally.
                  
                     Baſilicus, a certayne chaunce at dyce.
                  
                     Baſilides, a certayne heretike, whiche affirmed to be .CCClxv. heuens.
                  
                     Baſilidiani, the folowers of Baſilides.
                  
                     Baſſaris, tidis, a prieſte of Bacchus.
                  
                     Bat, is a worde that is ſpoken to one, whan we wyl haue hym ſpeke no more, as peace or huyſht.
                  
                     Batauia, a countraye in Germanye, callyd Hollande.
                  
                     Batauus, an Hollander, or man of Hollande.
                  
                     Batiochus, a lyttell potte, out of the whiche wyne is poured at the tablel
                  
                     Batrachion, an herbe, whiche I do ſuppoſe is that whiche is cōmonly called goldknap, or crowefoote. It is alſo callyd of Democritus Chriſanthemon, for it hathe a flowre as yelowe as golde, and the leafe is ſomewhat lyke vnto parcily, but that it is moche greatter.
                  
                     Battologia, idem quod multiloquium, moche talke or ſpeche, clatterynge.
                  
                     Ioſephus.
                     Batus, is a meaſure for lycour amonge the Hebrues, whiche conteyned .lxii. meaſures of Athenes, callyd Sextarios, euery Sextarius contaynynge .xviii. ounces, which amounteth to foure ſcore and .xiii.li. of englyſhe galons.
               
            
            
               
                  B ANTE D, & E.
                  
                     BDelium, is a tree growyng in Arabia & Scithia. alſo a gumme commynge of the ſame tree, lyke to waxe, but clere as gumme, within vnctuous or fatte, verye ſwete of ſauour, whan it is rubbed or burned, and bytter in taſte.
                  
                     
                        Bebry
                              •
                           ia,
                      a coūtray callid the gret Phrigia.
                  
                     Bebrytius, a, um, & bebrix, bebricis, of the countray of great Phrigia.
                  
                     Bebritium, ſeu Bebriacum, a towne in Italye betwene Cremona and Verona.
                  
                     Beelphegor, a gapynge ydoll.
                  
                     Beelſephon, lorde of the northe, an ydol ſet vp in the places of eſpiall.
                  
                     Beelſebub, an ydoll callyd god of flyes.
                  
                     Beemoth, the deuyll, and ſignifieth a beaſt.
                  
                     Belbus, a beaſt callyd alſo Hiena.
                  
                     Belgae, people of Gallia, betwene the riuers of Ryne, Marne, and Seyn, and ſtretchith to the northweſt ſee, in the whiche are now conteyned the countrays of Brabant, Flā
                     ders, Holland, Ghelder, part of Friſeland, Gulyke, Hennow, Pycardy, part of Champayne, the great foreſt of 
                        ••
                     dan, the cities of Acon, Colayn, Triere, Rhein
                        •
                     s.
                  
                     Belial, the deuyll, whiche is interpreted Apoſtata, without yoke.
                  
                     Bellatula, lyttell ſwete harte.Plautus. Plautus in Ruden.
                  
                  
                     Belliatus, ta, tum, beautified.
                  
                     Belle, welle.
                  
                     Belle ſe habet, he dothe or fareth well.
                  
                     
                        Bellerophontes, ſeu Bellerophon,
                        Note here the malyce of hariots.
                      was the ſonne of Glaucus kynge of Ephyra, who beinge a man of moche beautie and prowes was ardātly beloued of Stenobea, the wife of Pretus king of Ephyra, next after Glaucus, and whan ſhe deſyred him to committe adulterie with her, he fearynge the vengeance of Iupiter god of hoſpitalitie, and remembrynge the frendſhyp ſhewed to hym by her huſbande, refuſed her, and dyd put hyr away from him, whiche ſhe diſdayning, and beinge in a woode rage, accuſed hym to her huſbande, that he had rauyſhed her, but he like a ſober man wolde nat than ſlee hym in his owne houſe, but delyueringe to him letters to his wyues father, ſent hym in to Licia, where he than reigned, who perceyuynge therby the mynde of Pretus, encouraged Bellerophon, to diſtroy the two mōſters callid Solymos and Chymera, and ſent him therto that he mought be ſ
                        •
                     ayn vnder the colour of a valiaunt enterpriſe, but he acheuyng it nobly, returned with honor.
                  
                     Bellica, was a pyllour in the temple of Bellona, callyd goddeſſe of battayle, where they vſed, whanne warres were proclaymed, to caſt a Iauelyn.
                  
                     Bellicrepa, a certayne fourme of daunſynge in harneyſe.
                  
                     Bellator equus, a horſe of warre.
                  
                     Bellatrix, tricis, a woman valyant in warres.
                  
                     Belligero, rare, to make warre.
                  
                     Bellona, callyd goddeſſe of battayle.
                  
                     Bellis, ſeu bellium, the white dayſye, callyd of ſome the Margarite, in the northe it is callyd a Banwort. It is alſo a fyſhe with a longe beake lyke a crane, whiche is callyd of ſome a kekehorne.
                  
                     Bellouaci, people of Beauuoſyne in France
                  
                     
                     Cice. Atri.
                     Bellum merum loquitur, he ſpeaketh oonely of warre.
                  
                     Belon, the name of a citie & riuer in Spaine.
                  
                     Beluoſus, a, um, full of monſters of the ſee.
                  
                     
                        Bel
                              •••
                           tus, 
                              •
                           a, tum,
                      paynted or 
                        •
                     erued with great beaſtes.
                  
                     
                        Belluara 
                              •
                           apetia,
                      Tap
                        •
                     ſtrye wroughte with great beaſtes.
                  
                     Belus, the fyrſte kynge of Aſſiria, father of Ninus, and is ſignifieth the ſonne, it is alſo a ryuer in Syria, which hath ſande of the nature of glaſſe, whiche it caſteth vppe, alſo it torneth all other mettall that commeth into it, into glaſſe.
                  
                     Bembina, a towne by the foreſt called Nemaeus. Bembinatus, of that towne or woode.
                  
                     Benacus, a great lake in Lumbardy.
                  
                     Bene accipere aliquem, to entreate one well, or entertayne hym.
                  
                     Bene acceptus, well entertayned.
                  
                     Plautus.
                     Bene agitur, the thynge is wel done.
                  
                     Bene ambulato, god he with the.
                  
                     Bene audire, to be well ſpoken of.
                  
                     Bene conuenire inter cos, they agreed welle to gether.
                  
                     Plinius.
                     Bene cogitare de aliquo, to haue a good opinion of one.
                  
                     Plautus in Pſeud. Plautus in Trinum. Plau
                           •
                        
                     
                     Bene curare aetatem, to lyue pleaſantly.
                  
                     Bene hercle denuncias, thou tellyſt me good tydynges.
                  
                     Benedico, dixi, dicere, to prayſe, to ſay well.
                  
                     Benedicé, an aduerbe, ſignifieng in prayſing or ſaying wel. Cum illiciebas me ad te blande et benedice: whan thou dyddiſte trayne me vnto the with pleſant wordes and praiſynge of me.
                  
                     Benefacio, cere, to do well.
                  
                     Benefactum, it is well done.
                  
                     Benefacta, Benefytes, pleaſures.
                  
                     Beneficiū, a benefite, a pleſure, or good torne
                  
                     Beneficentia, is not onelye lyberalitie in gyuing of money, or poſſeſſions, or other like thynges, but alſo in helpynge a man with counſayle, ſolicitation, or other labour.
                  
                     Plautus in Rude. Plautus in Epidic.
                     Bene ferre gratiam, to do pleaſure to one.
                  
                     Bene habere, to behaue me or hym well.
                  
                     Bene hoc habet, this matter commeth well to paſſe.
                  
                     Bene longus ſermo, a very longe tale.
                  
                     Bene magnus, very great.
                  
                     Bene manè, very tymely.
                  
                     Bene mereri, to do pleaſure to one.
                  
                     Bene multi, very many.
                  
                     Bene nummatum marſupium, a purſe wel ſtored with money.
                  
                     Bene nummatus homo, a well monyed man.
                  
                     Bene ſuccesſit, it came well to paſſe.
                  
                     
                        Bene 
                              •
                           ale,
                      farewell, a dowe.
                  
                     Bene ualere, to be in good helthe.
                  
                     
                        Bene uertāt di
                              •
                           ,
                      god turne it to good: I pray god brynge it well to paſſe.
                  
                     Bene uiuere, to make good chere.
                  
                     Beneuolens, beneuolent, he that loueth well an nother.
                  
                     Benigna terra, a grounde that is fertile.
                  
                     Benigne, an aduerbe, whiche ſignifieth curteyſly, graciouſly, bounteouſly.
                  
                     Benignitas, curteyſie, lyberalitie, gentylnes.
                  
                     Berecyntus, a mountayne and citie in Phrigia, where Cybele, callid the mother of the goddis was chiefely honoured.
                  
                     Berecyntia, callid the mother of goddis.
                  
                     
                        Berſab
                              •
                           ,
                      a citie in Iudea, callyd alſo Puteus iuramenti, the pytte of the othe, where Abraham dwellid, whiche is the conſynes of the lande of beheſt.
                  
                     Berillus, a ſtone whiche is verye clere, and ſomewhat inclynynge to a grene colour. it is not that, whiche we commonly do calle Berall, in drynkynge cuppes, but it is rather that, whiche we do call chriſtall, whiche beinge wrought into ſquares, hathe in them a glymſe of a lyght grene.
                  
                     Beta, an herbe callyd Beetes.
                  
                     Bethania, a towne two myles from Hieruſalem, on the ſide of the mounte Oliuete.
                  
                     Bethel, a citie in Samaria, where the people dwelled whiche were callyd Iebuſ
                        •
                     i.
                  
                     Bethleem, the citie of Dauyd the prophet, where he was borne and dyed, where alſoo our ſauiour Chriſte Ieſu was borne: there alſo dyed Rachel the wyfe of Iacob the patriarche. it was aſſigned to the tribe of Iuda, and was diſtant from Hieruſalem .vi. miles, and was firſte called Euphrata, and ſignifyeth in the hebrewe tongue, the howſe of breadde.
                  
                     
                        Bethſaida, or Betheſda,
                      was a great ponde in Hieruſalem, wherin the priſtis waſhed the ſhepe, whiche ſhuld be ſacrifiſed, and may be interpreted the houſe of cattell. It was alſo the name of a towne, where Peter & Phylyp the apoſtels were borne.
                  
                     Bethſamis, a citie in Galilee, where Chriſte dyd many myracles.
                  
                     Bethſamitae, people of Bethſamis.
                  
                     Bethſura, & Bethſurae, a ſtronge fortreſſe of the Iewes.
                  
                     Baeticatus, he that weareth a black or broune garment.
                  
                     
                        Baeticus, 
                              •
                           a, cum,
                      blacke or browne.
                  
                     Baetica, a prouynce or countray in Spayne, callyd nowe Granado,
                  
                     Baetis, a ryuer in Spayne by Granado.
                  
                     Betonica, an herbe callyd Betayne.
                  
                     Betonica altilis ſiue coronaria, I ſuppoſe hit to be Gyllofers.
                  
                     Betphage, a towne in Iudea, and may be interpreted

the houſe of a mouth, or a iawe.
                  
                     Betula, a tree, called birche.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶B ANTE I.
                  
                     BIaeon, wheate whiche is hard to be beaten out of the huſkes.
                  
                     Bias antis, was one of the .vii. wiſe men of Grece, and was gouernour of the citie called Priene, and was very rigorouſe in iutice agaynſt ill men, and defended his contray longe agaynſte outwarde hoſtilitie: at the laſt the towne being taken, and the people fleinge awaye, and carienge with them ſuche treaſure as they had, he went quietly out of the towne, leuyng all his ſubſtance behynde hym: and whan he was demaunded, why that he onelye caryed nothynge with hym, he aunſwered: I cary al with me that is myne owne, meanynge therby, that his wyſedome and vertue were his propre goodes, al other thynges were the goodes of fortune, & by her appoynted to them that mought catche them, but wyſedome & vertue were conſtante, and mought by no man be taken from hym.
                  
                     Bibiſia, bybbynge.
                  
                     Biblio, blere, to make a ſowne as a pot doth, whan drynke is drawen into it.
                  
                     Bibliographus, a wryter of bokes.
                  
                     Ci in Ve
                           •
                        . act. 3.
                     Bibitur. Mature ueniunt, diſcumbitur, fit ſermo inter eos, et inuitatio vt graeco more biberotur, They come at the tyme appoynted, & there was among them talkynge and quaftynge, that euery man mought drynke after the Greekes facion.
               
            
            
               
                  B ANTE. L.
                  
                     Plautus in Trinūmo.
                     BLandi loquentulus, a pleaſant ſpeaker.
                  
                     Blandé, graciouſely, amorouſely, flateryngely.
                  
                     Blanditer, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Blandicia, flatery, pleaſaunt motion, intyſement by wordes.
                  
                     Blapſigonia, loſſe of generation, proprelye in bees.
                  
                     Blatio, tiui, tire, to ſpeke or talke lyke a fole, or without any purpoſe or reſon, to bable.
                  
                     Blatero, ronis, a babbler, he that talketh to noo pourpoſe.
                  
                     Blattaria, an herbe callyd Moleyn.
                  
                     Blatteus, a, um, purple.
                  
                     Blitteus, ea, eum, vnſauery.
               
            
            
               
                  B ANTE O.
                  
                     BOa, is alſo a ſicknes, wherin the body is full of redde blyſters.
                  
                     Boalia, playes made for the helthe of oxen and kyne.
                  
                     Boaria, an herbe callyd a clote or burre.
                  
                     Boca, uel Bocas, a fyſhe, whiche hathe his backe as it were paynted with ſondrye colours, Iouius ſaythe and affirmeth, that he is taken in all coſtes in greate ſculles, nat withſtandynge I do nat yet fynde his name in englyſhe.
                  
                     Boebis, a lake in Theſſaly.
                  
                     Bogud, a towne in Affrike, alſoo the name of a kynge.
                  
                     Bolus, a throw or caſt at dyſe. alſo a braught with a net in waters. it is alſo a morſell.
                  
                     Bombax, an aduerbe ſpokē of him,Plautus in pſeudolo. that ſetteth nought by that whiche is ſpoken, as one wolde ſay, whanne he is rebuked of a faute, And what than? or tuſhe, I care not for that.
                  
                     Bomolochus, a common ſcoffar, or he that ſuſteyneth all vyllanie for to gette money. It was alſo taken for a boye, that ſtode at the aulters end, to ſtele away the candels.
                  
                     Bona caduca, the goodes of theym that be damned, goodes eſcheted.
                  
                     Bona dea, was ſhe that ſome callyd fatuá, or fauna, of whom Varro writeth, that in her lyfe neuer man did ſee her but her huſbād, nor herde hir named.
                  
                     Bonae aedes, a ſubſtanciall houſe.
                  
                     Bona dicere, to reporte well.
                  
                     Bona fide dicere, to ſay truely and playnly.
                  
                     Bona pars, the more parte.
                  
                     Bona uerba quaeſo, ſay well I pray you.Terentius in Andria.
                  
                  
                     Boni frugi, honeſt, of good condicions.
                  
                     Bonaria, the calmenes of the ſee.
                  
                     Boreae, Iaſper ſtones.
                  
                     Borſyrites, a kynde of olyue, hauynge many boughes, white & ſpotted with ſāguine.
                  
                     Boſra, a citie of Idumea.
                  
                     Botytillus, a lyttell cluſter of grapes.
               
            
            
               
                  B, ANTE R.
                  
                     BRachicatalecton, where oone ſyllable lacketh at the ende of a verſe.
                  
                     Brachicatalecticum carmen, a verſe lackynge one ſyllable or mo.
                  
                     Breuiculus, a lyttell ſhorte man.
                  
                     Breuiter, ſhortly. Breuis, idem.
                  
                  
                     Bryon thalaſsion, or Marinum, a thinge growynge on the rockes, wheron the ſalte water beateth, ſomewhat lyke to moſſe, and is called of the northern men flanke.
                  
                     Bryonia, a 
                        ••
                     lde vine, hauynge redde bearies, & the leaues more rough thā of a vine.
                  
                     Britanica, an herbe lyke greatte ſorelle, but blacker, thycker, and therwith moſye, the roote blacke and litell, and in taſting ſtraineth the tounge.
                  
                     
                     Bromus, one of the names of Bacchus.
                  
                     Bronchoſela, a waxinge kernell.
                  
                     Bronteus, the ſurname of Iupiter.
                  
                     Brupeo, ere, old writers vſed for ſtupeo, ſtupere, to be abaſhed.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶B ANTE V.
                  
                     BVa, the word of yonge children whan they aſke for drynke, with vs they vſe to ſaye Bumme.
                  
                     Bubula, Befe.
                  
                     Bubonocele, where the bowell is braſte by the ſhare of a man toward his priuy mēbres.
                  
                     Bucea, a thynne huſke in a beane within the hulle.
                  
                     Bucerum paecus, an herde of rother beaſtes
                  
                     Bucolicū carmen, a poeme made of herdmē.
                  
                     Bulbine, nes, ſcalions.
                  
                     Bullula, a lyttell water bell or bobill.
                  
                     Buphonum, an herbe, wherof if catell eate, they do dye of a griefe in theyr throte.
                  
                     Buphihalmon, an herbe, called alſo Cotula fetida, and is lyke to camomyll, but it growith more vpright, maywede.
                  
                     
                        Bupre
                              •
                           tis,
                      a fly lyke to a blacke bytel, but he hath lenger legges, whiche if a beaſt doth eate, he ſwelleth, and therwith dyeth.
                  
                     Burbarus, a fyſhe, whiche by the deſcriptiō of Paulus Iouius, ſemeth to be a Carp.
                  
                     Burrum, a depe redde colour.
                  
                     Buſicon, a great figge.
                  
                     Buſtuarij, ſworde players, whiche went before the ded corpſts whan they were borne to be burned.
                  
                     Buteo, onis, a buſ
                        •
                     arde.
                  
                     Buttubata, a trifle of no value.
                  
                     Buxeus, a, um, of boxe.
               
            
            
               
                  C, ANTE A.
                  
                     
                        C BY HIM SELFE, ſygnyfyeth Caius, the propre name of a man, and therfore is ioyned with an other name, as C. lul. Caeſar, Caius Iulius Caeſar. Ci. ſignifieth Claudius.
                  
                  
                     Cabala, a tradicion of the Iewes, lefte amonge them by Moyſes without writyng, but from the father to his ſonne, and ſo cō
                     tinually in their generation, wherein is included the vnderſtandynge as welle of the ſecretes of nature, as the myſticalle ſence, included in the wordes of holy ſcripture.
                  
                     Cabus, a 
                        •••
                     dre of the hebrues, containing two ſextatios and a half .vi. ounces, and .iii. drammes of Athenes meaſure, whyche amounteth to foure pounde, thre ounces, & thre drammes.
                  
                     Cacaturio, to deſyre to go to the ſtole.
                  
                     Cachexia, a ſpyce of a conſumption, which procedeth of an yll diſpoſition of the body, and the body and vyſage is therwith verye leane, and yll coloured.
                  
                     Cacia, vicioſitie, or that whiche we cōmonly do calle, a faute in a thynge.
                  
                     Cacoblepa, a lyttell beaſte in Egypte in the bankes of the ryuer of Nilus, whiche hath ſuche venenoſytie in his eien, that who that beholdeth them, dieth incontinent.
                  
                     Cacoêtlie, a vyce or ſore ingendred in oone frome his infancie, harde to be recouered or caryd.
                  
                     Cacologia, ylle ſpeche.
                  
                     Cacologus, an yll ſpeaker.
                  
                     Cacophaton, is an yll fourme of ſpeakyng, or where the wordes do not ſowne wel and conueniently.
                  
                     Cacoxelus, an yll folower or imitatour.
                  
                     Cacus, a gyaunte, whome Hercules ſlewe in Italye.
                  
                     Cadiſcus, a veſſelle, wherinto are gathered ſcedules, billes, or lottes, where thynges at done by a conſent of many counſaylours, or of the people.
                  
                     Cadmites, a ſtone, whiche hath lyttell blue ſparkes aboute it.
                  
                     Cadmus, the name of a kyng of Phenicia, whiche buylded Thebes: by whome ſome men do ſuppoſe, that dyuers of the Greke letters were founde.
                  
                     Cadit mimus, the courage faylethe, or is 
                        •••
                     ted.
                  
                     Cadere, to be ſlayne.
                  
                     Caducias, the rodde,Plautus in Amphit. whiche Mercurius dyd alway beare in token of peace.
                  
                     
                        Cadoc
                              •
                           ator,
                      ambaſſadour or heraulte at armes, ſent to demaunde peace.
                  
                     Caduca, thynges that wyll ſhortly peryſhe or decaye, olde wryters vſed them for ſignifications of that which ſhulde happen.Ci. in phil.
                  
                  
                     Caduca haereditas, an inheritaunce whiche is fallen in excheate, for 
                        〈◊〉
                      of heyres.
                  
                     Caducus labor, labour loſte.Plinius.
                  
                  
                     Caducae literae, letters whiche wyl be ſhortly put out.
                  
                     Caduci tituli, honours and dignities,Pli. in pan. which endure but a lyttell while.
                  
                     Caduri, they whiche are deceſſed.Vergili. 7.
                  
                  
                     Caducor, ceris, duci, to be ouer throwen.
                  
                     
                        Cadul
                              •
                           ,
                      the dryppyng of flēſhe roſted.
                  
                     
                        Cadu
                              •
                           ,
                      a veſſell con
                        ••
                     ynge the ſame meaſure that Amphora dothe.
                  
                     Cara, an Ile in the ſee called Aegeum. It is alſo called Co
                           •
                        , where fyſhe wormes were

fyrſt founde. the countrey of Hippocrates, the prynce of Phiſitione.
                  
                     Caeus uel Cous, a, um, of that Ile called Caea or Coa.
                  
                  
                     Lueretiꝰ. 2 Plautus in pſeudolo.
                     Caecigeni, they whiche are borne blynde.
                  
                     Caeca die, Eme die caeca hercle oliuum, id uendito oculata die: bye oyle oliue good chepe and ſell it agayne dere. orels, bye oyle for dayes, and ſell it againe for redy money.
                  
                     Caecus morbus, a ſikneſſe that is hid, or may not be diſcerned.
                  
                     Caeci haemorroides, emoraudes or piles, whiche are within the foundement, and do not appere.
                  
                     Caeca ueſtigia, where one may not ſe his way that he rydeth or goeth.
                  
                     Caecum uallum, a trenche, which in tyme of warre is pyght priuily with ſharpe ſtakes, which are hydde with brakes or buſhes.
                  
                     Caecum inteſtinum, is a bowel, which cometh from the ryghte ſyde, at the poynt of the houkle bone, and goeth to the left ſyde in length, and is alſo called Monoculus.
                  
                  
                     Caecitas, blyndneſſe, not onely of the bodyly eyes, but alſo of the mynde.
                  
                     Caedes, murdre.
                  
                     Cic ad Q. 
                           〈◊〉
                         Vergil▪
                     
                     Caedere calcibus, to kycke.
                  
                     Caeditur teſtibus, he is conuict by witneſſe.
                  
                     Caedere, to ſacrifice. Caedunt binas de more bidientes: Accordyng to the cuſtome they ſacrificed two hoggrelles.
                  
                     Caelatus, ta, tum, gra
                        •••
                     .
                  
                     Caeleſus, te, et hoc caeleſte, of heuen or heuēly.
                  
                     Caelibaris haſta, was the ſtaffe of a Iauelyn, which had ben in the body of one of them, whiche were called gladiatores, and was ſlayn: with the which ſtaffe the heade of a mayden newe maried was hempe and ſtriken, ſygnifiyng, that lykewyſe as the ſtaffe was ſtycked faſte in the body of hym that was ſlayne, ſo ſhulde ſhe ſtycke faſt, and be ioyned with hym that maried her.
                  
                     Caeloſtomia, a vyce in ſpeache, where one ſpeketh inwardely, and maketh rather a ſounde than a pronunciatiō of his wordes
                  
                     Plinius.
                     Caelum, the palate, or roufe of the mouth.
                  
                     Caelipoteus, all myghty god.
                  
                     Caeneus, the ſurname of Iupiter.
                  
                     Caepi, I beganne.
                  
                     Caeremoniae, ceremonies.
                  
                     Caeraete, a citie in Thuſcan
                        •
                     .
                  
                     Caeris, a ſore lyke a
                        •
                      hony combe.
                  
                     Caeroferarii, they whiche do beare candels in the churche before the croſſe in proceſſion, or do any lyke ſeruice in the churche
                  
                     Caeroferarium, a candell ſtycke, whervppon tapers are ſette.
                  
                     
                        Caeroma, 
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         
                        Caeromatum,
                      an ointment, wherwith wraſtelers were annoynted, to make them the more delyuer and ſtronge.
                  
                     Caeſim, edgelynge, or with the edge.
                  
                     Caeſitium, a clene napkyn or handkerchiefe.
                  
                     Caeſura, a cutte, a garſe, an inciſyon, alſo intaylyng or caruynge in ſtone or tymber.
                  
                     Caeſuratim, brefely, ſuccinctly.
                  
                     Caetera doctus, lerned in other thynges.Cice. de natura deo
                           ••
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Calamitae, lyttell grene frogges.
                  
                     Calaſaſtri, boyes whyche doo ſynge with a ſhyll voyce.
                  
                     Calatores, ſeruauntes whyche are always callyd for.
                  
                     Calcaria fornix, a lyme kylle.
                  
                     Calcata, a houſe whiche is pargetted.
                  
                     Calcearium, a ſtrowe.
                  
                     Calceatus, tus, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Calceatus, ta, tum, ſhodde.
                  
                     Calceare, to ſhow an horſe or mule.
                  
                     Chalcos, ſeu aereola, the .xxxvi.Sueton. in Reſp. parte of a Dramme.
                  
                     Calculum album adijcere, to approue or allowe a thynge.
                  
                     Calculum ponere, to yelde accompte.Plinius in panegyr.
                  
                  
                     Calculoſus, a, um, grauelly, or ſtony.
                  
                     Caldariae, hote bathes.
                  
                     Caldarium, a cauldron wherin water is her.
                  
                     Calendae, the fyrſt day of euery moneth.
                  
                     Cales, a towne in Fraunce.
                  
                     Calim olde writers vſed for Clam, priuily.
                  
                     Callaria, a cole whitynge, meane betwene a haddocke and a whytinge.
                  
                     Callipolis, a citie in Thracia.
                  
                     Calleo, iui, lêre, to perceyue, to knowe by longe experience.
                  
                     Calliblephara, medicines to make heres to growe in the chekes or browes.
                  
                     Calliblepharon, a medicine for the eies, ſpecially whan the eie lyddes doo cleaue togyther.
                  
                     Calliſcere, to waxe harde, proprelye in the ſkynne and fleſhe.
                  
                     Calliirichum, an herbe called maiden heare.
                  
                     
                        Callum obd
                              •••
                           ere,
                      to harden, to make to indure labours or peynes.
                  
                     Calones, ſhoes of wodde. Alſo ſcullyons and boyes, whiche do folowe an hooſte to cary baggage, wodde, coled, or other like thynges.
                  
                     Calophanta, a mocker.
                  
                     Caluriſicus, ta, cum, that whiche heateth or maketh a thinge hotte.
                  
                     Calotecheus, a good workeman.
                  
                     
                        Calp
                              ••
                           ,
                      a tunne.
                  
                     Caltha, an h
                        •
                     r
                        •
                      callid marigold
                        ••
                      or tuddis
                  
                     Calthala, a garment of the colour of M
                        •
                     
                     rygoldes.
                  
                     
                        Calu
                              ••
                           ia,
                      the hole heed of a 
                        〈◊〉
                      or beaſte. It was alſo a comon place of 
                        〈◊〉
                      ſome men do ſuppoſe, that it was the place where

Adam the fyrſte man was buried.
                  
                     Caluaſter, a man ſomwhat balde.
                  
                     Caluor, ueris, ui, to be dyſappoynted.
                  
                     Calx, calcis, maſculyne gender, the hele.
                  
                     Calx, the feminyne gender, lyme made of ſtones burned. it is taken ſomtyme for the ende of a thynge.
                  
                     Calydon, a citie in Grece.
                  
                     Camarina, a ſtynking herbe, the ayre wherof prouoketh one to vomyte.
                  
                     Cammarus, a fiſhe callid a creuyſe, ſpecially of the freſhe water, a creuyſe deaudoulx.
                  
                     Camerinam mouere, is a prouerbe ſpoken to one, ſignifieng that he hurteth hym ſelf, which proceded of a fenne ſo callid which being dried vp, there hapned a great peſtilēce, wherfore the peple adioyning, aſked of Apollo, if they ſhuld make it drye for euer, who anſwered, Ne moueas camerinā, as he ſhoulde ſaye, ſtyrre no myſchyefe to thy ſelfe.
                  
                     Camuri boues, oxen or kyne, with crooked hornes.
                  
                     Canaan, the ſonne of Cam, the ſon of Noe, of whome commeth Cananeus.
                  
                  
                     Canalitium aurum, golde dygged in pyttes.
                  
                     Ioſephus in antiqui.
                     Canan, the countray callyd Arabye.
                  
                     Cananaea, a part of Siria, now callid Iudea.
                  
                     Cananitis regio, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Canaria, an yle in the ſee callyd Atlanticū, nygh to the fortunate yles.
                  
                     Canarius, a, um, pertaynynge to dogges.
                  
                     Canatim, an Aduerbe, ſygnyfyenge lyke a dogge.
                  
                     Cancellarius, in the old tyme was taken for a ſcrybe or notarye, nowe it is callydde a chauncellour.
                  
                     Cancellatim, lattyſe wyſe.
                  
                     Cicero de lege agraria.
                     Cancelli, lyttell crabbes of the ſee.
                  
                     Canere ſibi, to ſpeake for his owne profite.
                  
                     Canere ſibi & muſis, to ſynge or wryte for his owne pleaſure, and for theym that doo fauour hym, nothing caring for any other.
                  
                     Canta, olde writers vſed for cantata.
                  
                  
                     Cantito, tare, to ſynge often.
                  
                     Plautus in Trinūmo.
                     Cantare, to monyſſhe or exhorte. Haec dies noctes
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         tibi canto ut caueas, This I exhort the daye & nyght, that thou mayſte beware.
                  
                     Cantatio, a ſyngynge.
                  
                     Cantator, a ſynger.
                  
                     Capere rationem, to fynde the meane. Rationem coepi ut & amanti obſequerer, & patrem non offenderem, I founde the mean to pleaſe my louer, and not withſtandyng I dyſpleaſed not my father. alſo to knowe the cauſe why.Terent. in Heautont. 
                     Scio tibi eſſe hoc grauius multo, ac durius cui fit: uerum ego haud minus aegré patior id qui neſcio, nec rationem capio, niſi quod tibi bene ex animo uolo, I knowe wel that to you, whom the thynge toucheth, hit is moche more diſpleaſant and greuous: but yet it greuith me no leſſe, I can not tel why, but onely bycauſe I loue you.
                  
                     Capere rationem oculis, to iudge by ſyghte. Hi loci ſunt at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         
                        
                           •
                        ae regiones,
                     Plautus in Pſeud. 
                     quae mihi ab hero ſunt meo demonſtratae, ut ego oculis rationem capio, Theſe are the places & ſtretes, that my mayſter ſhewed me, as farre as myn eyes can iudge, or as farre as I canne perceyue.
                  
                     Capere uoluptatem, to delyte.
                  
                     Capere uerſoriam, to chaunge a pourpoſe, to tourne ſaylle, to doo contrarye to that he intended.
                  
                     
                        Capere uſuram corporis vxoris alterius,
                        Plautus in Amphitri.
                      To commytte aduoultrie with an nother mannes wyfe.
                  
                     Capidulum, a hoode.
                  
                     Capillatia uela, be clothes of heare.
                  
                     Capito, tonis, a ſee fyſhe, greatter cōmonly than a Myllet is, whiche as I ſuppoſe, we do call a baſe
                  
                     Capitulo, lare, to diuide by chapiters.
                  
                     Capnion, an herbe callyd Fumitorie.Plinius li. 26. it is alſo callyd Capnos.
                  
                     Capo, a fyſhe callyd a Gurnarde.
                  
                     Caprilis, le, of a gote.
                  
                     Caprillus, la, lum, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Caprotina, a ſurname of Iuno.
                  
                     
                        Capſis, for cape ſi vis,
                      take it and thou wylt.
                  
                     Captare impudicitiae, to lye in awayt to take one in the acte of lecherie.
                  
                     
                        Captare 
                              •
                           oenam,
                      to get a ſupper of fre coſt.Martialis.
                  
                  
                     Captare ſermonem, to harken priuyly what menne talke.
                  
                     Captatio, a purchaſe.
                  
                     Carba, a wynde that blowethe frome the Southe.
                  
                     Carbunculatio, is a faut in vynes, whan the cluſters of grapes are nat ſufficiently couered with leaues, by the whyche occaſyon, they be wythered and dried.
                  
                     Carbunculus, is alſo a kynde of erthe, the whiche with the heare of the ſonne, waxeth ſoo hotte, that it burneth the rotes of herbes and trees.
                  
                     Carchedonius, a kynde of Carbuncle ſtones, whiche in the houſe ſeme of purple colour, abrode in the aire they ar fyrie, againſt the ſonne they ſende oute ſparkles, and yf waxe be touched with them, it melteth.
                  
                     Carcinus, a crabbe.
                  
                     Carabus, a fyſſhe callyd a lopſter, lyke to a Creuyſe, but that he is greater, and is red whan he is alyue.
                  
                     Chalchis, a fyſſhe of the ſee, of the kynde of Turbutte.
                  
                     Charax, a Fyſſhe, callydde alſoo Dentix,

with teethe ſtandinge out of his lippes, & is a brode fyſhe, and ſomewhat redde, with a chaungeable colour.
                  
                     Cardomine, an herbe callyd water creſſis.
                  
                     Cardopos, an huche or coffar, wherin bread is layde, In the Northe countraye hit is callyd an arke.
                  
                     Carduus, a thyſtell.
                  
                     Caricus, ca, cum, of the countrey of Caria.
                  
                     Carides, a fyſſhe callydde Pranes, lyke to ſhrympes.
                  
                     Cariem trahere, to waxe rotten, or to be putrified or vinnewed.
                  
                     Cariophillon, a ſpice callyd cloues.
                  
                     Carnus, na, num, fatte.
                  
                     Caros, exceſſe of meate or drynke. alſo an herbe and ſede callyd carways.
                  
                     Carpere iter, to take his iourney.
                  
                     Carpocrates, an heretyke, whiche denyed that god made the worlde.
                  
                     Carpophyllon, a tree, which hath leues like to laurell.
                  
                     Carthallum, a baſkette.
                  
                     Caryopos, the iuyce of a nutte.
                  
                     Carynus, na, num, of a nutte: as oleum carynum, the oyle of nuttes.
                  
                     Caryſtae, & Caryſtos, an Ile in the ſee called Euboicum, wherin is plentie of marbyll of dyuers colours.
                  
                     Caryſtaeus, a, um, of that yle.
                  
                     Caſabundus, da, dum, fallynge often.
                  
                     Caſeale, a ſtable.
                  
                     Caſner, in the Oſke tunge is an olde man.
                  
                     
                        Caſ
                              ••
                           o, tare,
                      to falle often.
                  
                     Caſsinum, an olde market place.
                  
                     Caſsiterus, tynne.
                  
                     Caſsiterides, certayne yles, wherein tynne is dygged.
                  
                     Caſſutha, a wede that windeth about hempe or lynne, callyd Doddar.
                  
                     Catabaſis, the ſonne ſette.
                  
                     Catachreſis, a fygure, wherby the propretie of a worde is abuſed: as, Facies ſimillima lauro, where facies oonely belongeth to a man, and not to a tree, although it doth ſignifye there a ſimilitude or fygure.
                  
                     Cathyſta, a garment cloſe all aboute.
                  
                     Catacryſis, a condemnation.
                  
                     Catagrapha, ymages lokyng diuers ways, and in dyuers fourmes.
                  
                     Catalepſis, occupation or deprehencion.
                  
                     Catalexis, a fynyſhynge of a thynge.
                  
                     Catalyma, refection, alſo an ynne.
                  
                     Catamidio, are, to ſette one vp with a paper on his heed to be mocked or rebuked for ſome offence, as they vſe to doo with men periured, or with forgers of euidences.
                  
                     Catapultarium pilum, a bolte.
                  
                     
                        Cata
                              •
                           ypoſis,
                      a fygure, where one thynge is deſcribed by an nother.
                  
                     Cato, wyſe. Alſo the name of a noble Senatour of Rome.
                  
                     Catoblepas, a beaſte full of poyſon, callyd a Baſylyſke.
                  
                     Catillo, are, to eate lyke a glutton.
                  
                     Catorthoma, the ryght exerciſe of vertue.
                  
                     Catulinus, na, num, of a catte.
                  
                     Caudecae, lytell coffers of wyckers, or a iū
                     ket, wherin eles are taken in ryuers.Plautus in Rude.
                  
                  
                     Caudeus, a, um, of the ſtemme of a tree.
                  
                     Caudex, is a dulle brayned felowe, a dulle hedde.
                  
                     Caudicalis, ale, pertaynynge to the ſtemme of a tree.
                  
                     Caudicariae naues, ſhyppes made of thicke plankes.
                  
                     Cauere alicui, to gyue counſaylle to oone in mattiers of lawe, or concernynge contractes.
                  
                     Cauere, with accuſatiue caſe, ſygnifyeth to byd to beware.
                  
                     Cauere ſibi ab aliquo, to take a quytaunce or other diſcharge for the payment of money or delyueraunce of any thynge. At uero,
                     Ci. in Bru. 
                     inquam, tibi ego Brute non ſoluā, niſi prius a te cauero, amplius eo nomine neminem, cuius petitio ſit, petiturum, Truely (ſayde I) Brutus I wyll not pay the, excepte I haue fyrſt a quyttance of the, that thou ſhalte nat efteſones demaunde it of hym, of whome thou moughteſt aſke it.
                  
                     Cauere capite, to be bounde body for body.Plinius li. 34. plautus in Bacch.
                  
                  
                     Cauere, to prouyde. Quid iſti caueam? B. Vt reuehat domum, Whatte ſhall I prouyde for hym? B. one to brynge hym home.
                  
                     Caueri, to be taken hede of.
                  
                     Caueares hoſtiae, & cauae, were partes of the beaſtes nexte to the tayle, to be ſacryfyſed for the byſhoppes.
                  
                     Cauillatio, a cauillation, a ſubtyl forged tale
                  
                     Cauillor, lari, to ſpeake in mockage.
                  
                     Caulias, the iuyce of colewortes myxt with bran, and being toſſed togider, was brought into the fourme of a paſte.
                  
                     Cauſam accipere, to take the matter in hād. alſo to take an excuſe.
                  
                     Cauſam capere, to take an occaſion.
                  
                     Cauſam dicere, to aunſwere vnto that, whiche is layde to his charge.
                  
                     Cauſſam dicere, to ſaye contrarye, to deny.Plautus in capt. 
                     Hoc ſi ſecus reperies, nullam cauſam dico, quin mihi & parentum, et libertatis apud te deliquio ſiet, If thou doeſt fynde hit other wyſe, I wylle not ſaye contrarye, but that it is at thy pleaſure, that I ſhall loſe both my parentes and lybertie.
                  
                     Cauſſam dicere ex uinculis, to aunſwere in warde, or beinge a priſoner.
                  
                     
                     Terent. in Heauto.
                     Cauſa mea, for my ſake. Syro Ignoſcas uolo, quae mea cauſa fecit, I wyll that ye forgyue Syrus all that he hath done, for my ſake.
                  
                     Liuius.
                     Cauſſas nectere, to fayne matters.
                  
                     Cauſſam orare, to pleade.
                  
                     Cauſſam quaerere, to ſeke an occaſyon.
                  
                     Cice. Atti.
                     Cauſſam ſuſtinere, to beare the blame.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶C ANTE E.
                  
                     Sueton. de claris grā.
                     CEdere creditoribus, is proprely where one not being able to pay his dettes, leaueth all his goodes or landes to his credytours.
                  
                     Plautus in pſeudolo. Plautus in capt. Colu. 12.
                     Cedere ex tranſuerſo, to go ſydelynge lyke a Crabbe.
                  
                     Cedere ad factum, to come to effecte.
                  
                     Cedere pro, to be in the ſtede: of an nother thynge. Nam pro pulmentario cedit ſicuti ficus, For it is in ſteede of the meate, lyke as fygges be.
                  
                     Pli. epi. 50.
                     Cedentes capilli, heares hāgyng down right
                  
                     Cedrelate, tes, a great Cedre tree.
                  
                     Cedrium, certayne kynde of pytche founde in Siris.
                  
                     Cedrinus, na, num, of a cedre tree.
                  
                     Cic. de Se.
                     Cedunt dies, the dayes paſſe awaye.
                  
                     Celatus, ta, tum, hydde.
                  
                     Celebratus, brata, bratum, moche ſpoken of, or haunted.
                  
                     Celebris locus, a place moche haunted and knowen.
                  
                     Accius. Siſenna.
                     
                        Celeranter, for celeriter,
                      haſtily or quyckly.
                  
                     Celeratim. 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Celeres, olde wryters vſed for Equites, horſemenne.
                  
                     Plautus in Merca.
                     Celeris copia. Date di quaeſo cōueniundi mihi eius celerem copiam, God graunt that I may very ſhortly mete with hym.
                  
                     Varro.
                     Cenſere, to be angrye. Ne uobis cenſeam, ſi ad me referretis, Leſt I wolde be angrye, if ye tolde me.
                  
                     Plautus in Stico.
                     Cenſere, to ſpeake or tell. G. Quid grauare? cenſeas. Telle me, what is that, that greuethe the?
                  
                     Plinius. 8.
                     Cenſeri, to be had in eſtymation, or to be ſet by, alſo to be meruayled at.
                  
                     Cenſio, onis, a price, aduyſe, or opinion.
                  
                     Cenſoria nota, the rebuke or checke of the maiſter of maners,
                  
                     Cenſoria animaduerſio, was a punyſhement of them, whiche were of yll maners.
                  
                     Cenſorius, a, um, pertaynyng to them, whiche had ouerſyghte of the maners of the people, whyche were callyd Cenſores.
                  
                  
                     Centaurium, an herbe, wherof there be two kyndes: The great, whyche apotycaries doo call Reuponticum: And the laſſe, whiche is callyd Centorye. Alſoo fel terrae, & Febrifugia.
                  
                  
                     Centenariae coenae, were ſuppers on the whiche by a lawe callid Licinia, was beſtowid but one hundred of the braſyn coyne callyd Aſſes.
                  
                     Centeſimae urſurae, were gaines of the hundred peny value of euery thynge, for euery moneth lone.
                  
                     Centeſimus, ma, mum, the hundred, as Centeſima pars, the hundred parte.
                  
                     Centralis, le, that which is ſette in the very myddes of a thynge.
                  
                     Centurupe, a feld in Sicile, wherof is Centurupinum crocum.
                  
                  
                     Cephalocruſtes, a worme, whyche is in the leaues of a peache tree.
                  
                     Cepa, pae, & cepe indeclinabile, an oynion.
                  
                     Cepas edere, to eate onions, was a prouerbe ſpoken of them, whiche do ſeme to wepe, or doo wepe often.
                  
                     Cephenes, vnprofytable bees, which make no honye, but onely with the multitude of them, do kepe warme the yonge bees.
                  
                     Cera, wexe, alſo wexed tables.
                  
                     Ceramion, the ſame meſure that amphora is
                  
                     Cerea pruna, wheate plummes.
                  
                     Cereus, a, um, ſofte, alſo fatte.Horatius. Actius.
                  
                  
                     Cerinum, a garment of the colour of wax.
                  
                     Cerium, a ſoore lyke an hony combe.
                  
                     Ceritus, madde.
                  
                     Cerinthe, an herbe hauing the taſte of waxe and hony togither.
                  
                     Cerinthus, the meate of bees, whyche is founde in hony combes, ſeperate from the honye, whiche is in taſte bytter and is alſo moyſte.
                  
                     Cernere, to deuyſe togyther,Plautus in Trinūmo. or talke oone with an nother. Verecundari neminem apud menſam decet, nam ibi de diuinis atque humanis cernitur, Noo manne oughte to be abaſſhed at the table, for there men doo deuiſe or talke of matters concernyng as well god as manne.
                  
                     Cernere, to ſyfte or range floure of corne.Pliniꝰ. 1
                           •
                        .
                  
                  
                     Cerno animo, I doo foreſee or conſyder before.
                  
                     Cernulus, he that is buſye to fynde faute in an nother man.Hier. con. Ruffinum.
                  
                  
                     Cernus, nus, nui, a certayne ſhowe.
                  
                     Ceroma, oyle myxt with wex.Cic. in ca. alſo the place where wraſtlers were annoynted.
                  
                     Certatio, debate, ſtryfe, ſtudy, prouocacion.
                  
                     Certo, tare, to ſtryue or contende.
                  
                     Certi, certayne other.Cicero. Saluſt.
                  
                  
                     Certi homines, ſure men and faithfull.
                  
                     Certae opes, ryches that is permanent.
                  
                     Certum habere, to knowe ſurely.
                  
                     Ceua, a lyttelle cowe that gyuethe moche Mylke.Ci. ad Art.
                  
                  
                     
                     Certó, without doubte.
                  
                     Ceruclius, a cabyn in the hygheſte parte of a ſhyppe.
                  
                     Ceſſare, to be ydelle.
                  
                     Ceſtus, a gyrdell, wherwith the houſbande dydde gyrde his wyfe, whiche was ſette with lyttell ſtuddes.
                  
                     Ceu, as it were.
               
            
            
               
                  C ANTE H.
                  
                     
                        CHaere, for ſalue.
                     
                  
                  
                     Chalaſis, the knotte wherwith womens garmentes were knytte about they neckes.
                  
                     Chalaſtricum nitrum, ſaltepeter, whiche is very pure, and lyke to ſalte.
                  
                     Chalcantum, a kynde of ynke lyke to braſſe.
                  
                     Pliniꝰ 
                           •
                         4.
                     Chameleuce, ces, an herbe growynge by riuers, hauynge leaues lyke a poplar, but moche greatter.
                  
                     Chamemirſyne, is a buſſhe or tree, whiche hath ſharpe pryckes in the leaues, & redde bearies clouſtred, I ſuppoſe it to be that, whiche is callyd holy or holme.
                  
                     Chamitterae, & chamitteridae, lyttell ymages, made folowynge a greatter ymage.
                  
                     Chaniſcus, the hyndermoſt part of a ſhyp, by the whiche the anker hangeth.
                  
                     Chanotia, a tarte or marchepayne, or other lyke delycate thynge.
                  
                     Chaonides, wolfes that do ſlee hartes.
                  
                     Charcheſia, a cuppe longe and ſmalle in the myddell, and full of handels.
                  
                     Chariſma, matis, a grace or ſpeciall benefite.
                  
                     Chariſtium, a grene marble.
                  
                     Charmeſinum, a kynde of ſylke, which deliteth the beholders. I thinke it be crimſin.
                  
                     Charopus, amyable, pleaſant, or hauynge a good grace.
                  
                     Chartula, a lyttell leafe of paper.
                  
                     Chelonalopices, I ſuppoſe to be the byrdes whiche we do call Barnakles.
                  
                     Chenotrophia, a houſe or place where waterfoule are kepte.
                  
                     Cheoſpes, a kynge of Egypt, whyche made the great ſteple at Memphis, wheron were ſo many men workynge, that the ſame king ſpent only in parcely, oynyons, and garlike, a thouſande and thre ſcore talentes, whych if it were the greate talent, it amounted of oure moneye, to CCl. thouſande fyue hundred and fyfty poundes.
                  
                     Leuit 11.
                     Chirogylius, an hedgehogge.
                  
                     Chironomus, a daunſer of a moriſke.
                  
                     Choa, a certayn meaſure. alſo veſſel, wherin was put lycour, whiche was offred to idols Choenix, a meſure conteining .xxvii. ounces, which is one Sextarius of Athenes, & a half
                  
                     Chomer, idem quod Chorus.
                  
                  
                     Chorocithariſta, he that leadethe a daunce, and playeth hym ſelfe on an inſtrument.
                  
                     Chors, tis, a place incloſed, wherin cattelle is kepte, a barton callyd in ſome place.
                  
                     Chortales aues, pultrie fedynge abrode in a barton or court of huſbandry.
                  
                     Chorus, ſiue chomer, a meaſure of the Hebrues, whiche contayneth tenne tymes as moch as Batus, or Ephi, and amounteth to as moche as one and fourtye meaſures of Athenes, callyd Medimni, whiche in all maketh two thouſand, nyne hundred .xii. pounde of meaſure, euery pounde being xii. ounces.
                  
                     Chorus, a meaſure of grayn, ſalt, and other lyke thynges, whiche conteyneth as moch as tenne of the meaſures callyd Medimni Attici, where in euerye Medimnus be .lxxii. Sextarii Attici, Rede in Sextarius. ſo that hit contayneth of our galons
                  
                     Chreſton, an herbe callyd alſo cykorie.
                  
                     Chryſoberillus, a chryſtal ſtone, wherin the colour of golde ſhyneth.
                  
                     Chryſopraſſus, a ſtone grene as a leke, hauynge ſpeckes of golde.
                  
                     Chus, ſeu choa, a meaſure contaynyng nine poundes of meaſure, whiche is
                  
                     Chytracus, a tryuet or cradel, wheron pottes are ſette to boyle meate.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶C ANTE I.
                  
                     CIbum ſubducere, to take meate away frome one.
                  
                     Cibum facere, to make redye meate.plautus in Truculen. 
                     Mane aliquid fiet cibi, There ſhall be ſome meate made redy betyme.
                  
                     Cibi repoſiti, meate ſet vp to be kept.Quintilla. Ci. tuſ. q. 1 Varro.
                  
                  
                     Cibarius panis, rāged bred or crybbil bread.
                  
                     Cibarium uinum, ſmalle wyne.
                  
                     Cibatus, tus, tui, vyttayles.
                  
                     Cicatrico, care, to ſtrike one ſo that a marke alway remayneth.
                  
                     Cicatrizo, 
                     idem, alſo to heale a wounde, ſoo that onely a ſeame or ſcarre may appere.
                  
                     Ciceronianus, he that coueyteth to folowe Cicero in eloquence.
                  
                     Cicerbita, an herbe callyd Southiſtell.
                  
                     Cichorea, & cichoreū, an herb callyd cikory
                  
                     Cicum, a thynne ſkynne, whyche is within a Pomegranate.
                  
                     Cicur, euery beaſte or byrde, whyche ones beynge wylde, is made tame.
                  
                     Cicuro, rare, to make tame.
                  
                     Ciere, to trouble or make hym angry.Plautus. 
                     Quid negotii eſt, Piſtoclerum Lydus quod herum tam ciet? What is the mattier that Lydus thus troubleth or angreth his maiſter?
                  
                     
                     Feſtus.
                     Ciere, is ſomtyme to name.
                  
                     Cinabulum, a cradelle.
                  
                     Cinara, an herbe, whiche ſome men do ſuppoſe to be an artochoke.
                  
                     Cinifactum, brought into aſhes, as thynges whiche are bourned.
                  
                     Circania, a byrde, whiche in his flyght fetcheth a compaſſe.
                  
                     Cirſion, an herbe, which we do cal bugloſſe.
                  
                     Circulo, are, to compaſſe aboute, or to make a cerkle or compaſſe aboute a thyng.
                  
                     Circumcidaneus, a, um, cutte rounde about.
                  
                     Circūciſitum muſtum, wine, which after that the grapes are preſſed, is taken out of the ſame grapes, being cut and newe preſſed.
                  
                     Sueton. de claris rhetoribus. Ser. Sul. ad Ciceronē.
                     Circumciſe agere, to make an oration by pecis, without comming to the purpoſe.
                  
                     Circumcirca, all aboute.
                  
                     Circumcurſo, are, to run hither and thither.
                  
                     Circundo, dare, to enuyronne or compaſſe aboute.
                  
                     Paulus de re iudicata Vlp. de iudiclis.
                     Circunduco, duxi, ducere, to lead one about. it is alſo to abolyſſhe or put aſyde an acte. Quod ſi is qui edictum peremptorium impetrauit, abſit die cognitionis, tunc circūducendum erit edictum peremptorium, And yf that he that hath optayned the paremptorie decree, be abſent the daye whan the matter ſhuld be determined, than the peremptorie decree is to be dyſſolued or abolyſhed.
                  
                     Plautus in Pſeud. Plautus ibidem. Plautus in Capt.
                     Circūducere, is ſommetyme to deceyue by cautelles.
                  
                     Circumducere aliquem argento, to get ones money by falſehode.
                  
                     Circumductus, ta, tum, ledde about.
                  
                     Circumductio, deceyte.
                  
                     Circumferre ſe, to go braggynge about the ſtreetes.
                  
                     Vergilius.
                     Circumflecto, tere, to turne hither & thyder.
                  
                     Circumfundo, dere, to caſte water or other lycour aboute.
                  
                     Vergili.
                     Circumfuſus, a, um, gathered about, as people whan they deſyre to ſe a thyng. ſomtime wrapped about lyke an adder or ſerpent.
                  
                     Plin. de uitis illuſtr.
                     Circumlino, to annoynte aboute.
                  
                     Circummiſſus, a, um, ſente aboute.
                  
                     Circummunio, ire, to enuyron ſtrongely, to fortifie with walles or men.
                  
                     Cicero
                     Circumpedes, lackayes awaytynge at their maiſters ſtyrop. alſo fote men of princis.
                  
                     plautus.
                     Circumſpecto, are, to beholde about.
                  
                     Circumſpectatrix, a woman that beholdeth aboute, or watcheth.
                  
                     Circumſto, ſtare, to ſtande aboute.
                  
                     Plautus.
                     Circumtego, texi, tegere, to couer al aboute.
                  
                     Circumuerto, tere, to tourne aboute.
                  
                     Cirri, be thinges lyke heares about oyſters.
                  
                     Cirratus, he that hath his heares brayded.
                  
                     Cis paucos dies, within fewe days.Plautus.
                  
                  
                     Cis vndi
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , in all places aboute.
                  
                     Ciſium, aut ciſsium, a cart with two wheles.
                  
                     
                        Ciſpello, puli, pellere,
                        Plautus in Amphit.
                      to kepe out oone that he come nat into the houſe.
                  
                     Citta, a pye.
                  
                     Ciuiliter, lyke a citeſyn. Alſo courteyſly, or with good maner.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶C ANTE L.
                  
                     CLauola, ſeu clabula, a bough or ſtocke,Varro. wherinto a graffe is ſette.
                  
                     Clā me, clō te, I or thou not knowing.
                  
                     Clam alter alterum, the oone knowyth not of the other.
                  
                     Clam omnes, no man knowynge or witting.Plautus in Pſeud.
                  
                  
                     Clara pugna, a battayle worthy memorie.
                  
                     Claritudo, idē qd claritas, alſo brute, renome.
                  
                     Claſsici, they which in a towne were moſte ryche and ſubſtanciall.
                  
                     Claſsici authores, writers of moſt eſtimatiō.Vergilius.
                  
                  
                     Claſsiarius, a man of warre on the ſee.
                  
                     Claudere, to turne about. Claudite nymphae Dicteae, nymphae nemorum, iam. claudite ſaltus, Tourne aboute ye goddeſſes of Dictea, ladyes of the foreſtes tourne youre daunſe aboute.
                  
                     Clementia aeſtaris, the tēperatnes of ſomer.Plautus in Stich.
                  
                  
                     Clementer uolo, I am well content.
                  
                     Clementer tractare, to entreate gentylly or ſwetely.
                  
                     Cliduchus, he that beareth a mace.
                  
                     Clingo, gere, olde writers vſed for cingere to gyrde.
                  
                     Cliuia, al thīgis hard to be brought to paſſe.Feſtus
                  
                  
                     Cloacare, to defyle or pollute.
               
            
            
               
                  C ANTE O.
                  
                     COaccedo, cedere, to be added to the principall ſomme.
                  
                     Coaduno, nare, to aſſemble.
                  
                     Coccinatus, he that wereth a ſcarlet gowne.
                  
                     Coctona, quynces.
                  
                     Codicarij naues, ſhyppes or barges made of thycke plankes.
                  
                     Codicilli, epiſtels,Suetonius ſometyme it is taken for letter patentes of a prince.
                  
                     Coeli, the part of Siria, that ioineth to Arabie.
                  
                     Coenatus, he that hath ſouped.
                  
                     Coenatiuncula, a lyttell drinkyng houſe.
                  
                     Coenare alienū, to ſup at an other mās coſt.Plautus in perſa.
                  
                  
                     Coenabis hodie magnum malum, thou ſhalte haue thy ſupper ſoone in ſhrewde reſt.
                  
                     Coire in foedera, to make alyance.
                  
                     Coire ſocietatem, to be famyliar.Plautus, Cato.
                  
                  
                     Coepio, piui, pere, to begynne.
                  
                     Coeptus, ta, tum, begunne.
                  
                     Coepta, torum, thinges or matters begunne.
                  
                     Coepto, tare, to begynne.
                  
                     Coepulonus, a banketter or reuellar.
                  
                     
                     Coercere ignes, to ſtynte the fyre, whyche burneth a houſe or other lyke thynge.
                  
                     Plautus in Mili. Plautus.
                     Cogitat curas, he thynketh on his matters.
                  
                     Cogitaté, aduyſedly, Cogitatum, idem.
                  
                  
                     Cogere oues, to putte vp the ſhepe into a ſtable or folde.
                  
                     Cogere in ordinem, to ſette in order.
                  
                     Cohaereo, cohaeſi, haerete, to be ioyned, or to cleaue to a thynge, alſo to come to paſſe. Nuptiae non cohaerent, The mariage come nat to paſſe. alſo to agree togyther.
                  
                     Cohaeres, he that is ioyntelye heyre with an nother.
                  
                     Cohibere, to retayne or kepe to hym ſelfe.
                  
                     Cic. de Se.
                     Cohibere intra limen, kepe you within the doores.
                  
                     Plautus in Milite. Plautus in Mer
                           •
                        ator. Ter. in He.
                     Cohibere filium, to kepe vnder his ſonne.
                  
                     Cohibere ſe, to moderate hym ſelfe.
                  
                     Cohibitus, ta, tum, lette, refrayned.
                  
                     Cohors, is alſo a company of ſeruantes aboute a noble man.
                  
                     
                        Colina, for culina, a kytchen.
                  
                     Collabefactari teſtula, to be banyſhed out of the citie by lottes of ſhelles, as it was vſid in Athenes. Se after Oſtraciſmus.
                  
                  
                     Collacteus, he that ſucketh of the ſame breſt and at the ſame tyme.
                  
                     Collatitius, a, um, that whyche is gathered and brought to gyther.
                  
                     Collaudo, are, to prayſe with other.
                  
                     Collegium, a company of them, which haue equall authoritie. alſo a companye of men whiche be of one myſterie or crafte.
                  
                     
                        Collibet, & collubet, collibuit, collibitum eſt, collibére,
                        Plautus in Amph.
                      to lyke, to pleaſe. Vtcun
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         animo collibitum eſt meo, Euen as it pleaſeth me, or lyketh me.
                  
                     Colligere ueſtem, to tucke vp his garment.
                  
                     Colloco, care, to ſette in a place.
                  
                     Plaut. in A
                           •
                        lul. Plautus in Amph.
                     Collocare ſe in arborem, to klim vp on a tree
                  
                     Colocare aliquem in ſoporem, to ſtryke one in ſuche wyſe that he is amaſed, and lieth as he were on ſlepe, or to ſpeake hit more ſhortly, to laye one aſlepe with a ſtroke.
                  
                     Plautus in Merca.
                     Colloces te in otium, drawe the to eaſe.
                  
                     Collocatus, ta, tum, put or ſet in ſome place.
                  
                     Collocupleto, tare, to enryche.
                  
                     Colloqui aliquem, to ſpeake to one.
                  
                     Colloqui alicui, to deuyſe or talke with one.
                  
                     Colloquor, queris, qui, to talke with one, or to talke togyther.
                  
                     Colluuiaris porcus, an Hogge that walloweth in the myre, and there hath meate giuen hym.
                  
                     Colludo, dere, to play with one, or togither.
                  
                     Colluſor, oris, a playfelowe.
                  
                     Plautus in Capt.
                     Collus, idem quod collum.
                  
                  
                     Collybus, money receyued by exchaunge, or in banke, as menne do whiche goo into ſtraunge countrays, delyuering money of this realme, to receyue as moche of an other coyne, where he commeth.
                  
                     Collybiſtes, & collybiſte, he that deliuereth money by exchaunge, a banker.
                  
                     Collyra, a lofe of breadde, or a bunne.
                  
                     Colere ſe, to apparayle hym ſelfe.
                  
                     Colere officium, to do his duetie or indeuor.Plautus.
                  
                  
                     Colere pietatem, to haue his parentes in reuerence.
                  
                     Colere vitam, to lyue.Plautus in Ruden.
                  
                  
                     Coloratus, ta, tum, coloured.
                  
                     Columbulus, a pygeon.
                  
                     Columnae Herculis, are two mountaynes in the ſee, where menne do entre out of the myddell ſee into the occean, the one is in Europa by Spayne, the other in Affrica.
                  
                     Colunus, na, num, of haſyll.
                  
                     Colutea, the tree callyd Sene, wherof the leaues and coddes are miniſtred in medicines, to pourge melancoly.
                  
                     Comedim, olde writers vſed for comedam.
                  
                  
                     
                        Comeſt, for comedit, he eateth.
                  
                     
                        Comeſſabundus,
                        Q. Curtiꝰ.
                      ouercharged with meate and drynke.
                  
                     Comeſſans, idem quod comeſſor.
                  
                  
                     
                        Comeſſe for comedere,
                      to eate.
                  
                     Commeſſatio, ryottous bankettynge.
                  
                     Comeſſator, a ryottour.
                  
                     Commemini, I remembred.
                  
                     Commeminere, to remember.Plautus in milite.
                  
                  
                     Commentarienſis, was callyd a gayler.
                  
                     Commereri culpam, to do an offence.Pla. in aul.
                  
                  
                     Commigro, grare, to go frome one place to dwelle in an nother.
                  
                     Comminuo, to cutte in ſmalle pieces.
                  
                     Commiſceo, ſcui, ſcere, to myxe togither.
                  
                     Commiſereſco, ſcere, to haue compaſſion.Terentius in Hecyra.
                  
                  
                     Commiſsio, a conferrynge togyther by exerciſe, as two lerned mens wyttes togyther, or other lyke thynge.
                  
                     Commiſſa, confyſcations.
                  
                     Commiſſus, a, um, commytted to the keping of oone.
                  
                     Commiſſum bellum, open warre.
                  
                     Commodare loquelam, to ſpeake.Ti. Liuius. Plautus in Ruden. Plautus in Moſtel.
                  
                  
                     Commodare operam, to helpe.
                  
                     Commodare capillum, to kembe his heed, or decke his buſſhe.
                  
                     Commodatarius, he that hathe borowed any thynge.
                  
                     Commodé, well, or to the purpoſe.
                  
                     Commodè uerba facere, to ſpeake thynges to the purpoſe.
                  
                     Commodè cadere, to happē or ſuccede well or to the purpoſe.
                  
                     
                        Commoditas hominis,
                        Terent. in Adelphis.
                      the facilitie or curteyſie of one, the whiche agreeth to any requeſte.
                  
                     
                     Terent. in Eunucho. Plautus in Aſin. Plautus in Moſtel.
                     Commodum id non eſt, it maye not be eaſily done.
                  
                     Commoda ſtatura homo, a man of good ſtature, nor to great nor to lyttell.
                  
                     Commoda et faceta mulier, a pleaſaunte and mery woman.
                  
                     Commodus capillus, a buſhe well decked or kempte.
                  
                     Idem in Pſeud.
                     Commodus homo, a tractable or reaſonable man.
                  
                     Commodū obſonare, to vſe moderate fare.
                  
                     Commodum diſceſſeras heri, cum Trebatius uenit: Ye were ſcantely departed from me yeſterday, whan Trebatius came to me.
                  
                     Plautus in Pſeud. Terentius in Andria.
                     Commonere aliquem officium ſuum, to aduertiſe one what he ought to do.
                  
                     Commonere aliquem, to remembre one of a thynge.
                  
                     Commonſtro, to ſhewe a thyng that is hyd.
                  
                     Commorior, riri, to dye with one.
                  
                     Plautus in Amphit.
                     Commoror, rari, to abyde with one: alſo to dwell in a place for a tyme: alſo to tary one that is goinge. Male facis, properantem qui me cōmorate, ſol abit: Thou doeſt naught to tary me, ſens I go in haſt, and the ſonne is nowe ſette.
                  
                     Plautus in Amphitri.
                     Commorari, to cauſe one to tary. Ante auſpitium commoratum eſt? an tempeſtas continet, qui non abiſti ad legiones ita vt dudum dixeras? Did the token ſhewed by the birdes, cauſe the to tary? or elles the wether kepe the backe, that thou wenteſt not vnto the army as thou ſaydeſt a whyle a go that thou woldeſte?
                  
                     
                        Commoſſem, for commouiſſem.
                     
                  
                  
                     Donatus.
                     Commotus, ta, tū, meued, troubled, afraid, angrye: alſo quicke.
                  
                     Communes dies, were vnlucky dayes to go about any thynge, ſuche as we do call dyſmoll dayes or croſſe dayes.
                  
                     Communiter, in commune.
                  
                     Commutabilis, le, that whiche may be changed eaſyly.
                  
                     Commutatus, ta, tum, chaunged.
                  
                     Commutatio, an exchaunge, one thynge for a nother.
                  
                     Compareo, rui, rere, to apiere, to be ſeen.
                  
                     Plautus in Amphit. Plautus in Trinūmo. Cicero.
                     Comparebunt quae imperas, You ſhall ſee all thynges done, that ye do commaunde.
                  
                     Comparet ratio argenti, it doth appere how the money is ſpent.
                  
                     Comparare ſe, to dyſpoſe hymſelfe to any thynge.
                  
                     Plautus in Bacch.
                     Comparare, to fynde the meane or deuyſe. Nunc hoc tibi curandū eſt Chryſale. C. Quid uis curem? M. Vt ad ſenem etiam alteram facias viam, compara, fabricare, finge quod luber, Nowe Chryſalus thou muſt take good hede. C. what wylt thou that I ſhulde do? M. Deuyſe yet to goo an nother waye to warke, ymagyne, contryue euen as thou thynkeſt beſte.
                  
                     Compacto rem agere, to conſpire a matter,plautus in capt. or to do a thynge by one accorde.
                  
                     Comparare, to gete or purchace.
                  
                     Comparare conuiuium, to prepare a banket.
                  
                     
                        Comparare malum,
                        Plautus
                      to purchace an yl turne or a myſchiefe.
                  
                     Comparatus, ta, tum, ordeyned or receyued in an vſage. Quam inique comparatum eſt,
                     Terentius in phorm. 
                     hi qui minus habent, ut ſemper aliquid addāt ditioribus? What an yll vſe is this, that they, whiche haue but a lyttell,Ci. de ami. ſhall gyue more to them that be ryche? Quando quidem ita ratio comparata eſt vitae naturae
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         noſtrae, vt alia 
                           ••
                        tas oriatur ex alia, Sens the fourme of our lyfe is ſo ordeyned by nature, that of oone age commeth an nother.
                  
                     Compedio, diui, dire, to gyue or fettar one.Varro.
                  
                  
                     Compelluceo, luxi, lucere, to ſhyne veraye bryghte.
                  
                     Compellucidus, da, dum, very bright.
                  
                     Compendifaceo, facere, to make brief or be ſhorte in ſpeakynge.
                  
                     Comperendinatus, ta, tum, adiorned.
                  
                     Comperendinati rei, they whoſe iudgement is deferred vntyll an nother tyme.
                  
                     
                        Compeſce in illum iniuſte dicere,
                        Plautus in Bacch.
                      leaue to ſay ylle of hym.
                  
                     Competitor, he that ſueth for that which an other man ſueth for.
                  
                     Cōpingere in oculos, to thruſt it in his eies.plautus in Men.
                  
                  
                     Compita, are places where many wayes do mete, or where two ſtretes do croſſe.
                  
                     Complaceo, cui, cere, to pleaſe or lyke well.plautus in amph. Cato. plautus. Terentius
                  
                  
                     Complacitum eſt, it lyketh or contenteth.
                  
                     Complano, are, to make playne.
                  
                     Complures, complura, & compluria, many.
                  
                     Compluſculi, ſcula, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Compluuius lacus, a dyche, whereinto water falleth out of dyuers gutters.
                  
                     Componere lites, to agree menne togither, whiche are at variance.
                  
                     Compos culpae, he that hath don an offence.plautus in Truculen.
                  
                  
                     Compos patriae, he that is come home into his countraye.
                  
                     Compos praeda, he that hathe gotten the praye that he loked for.
                  
                     
                        Compotio, tiui, tire,
                        plautus in Rude.
                      to gette one the thynge that he deſyred.
                  
                     Compoto, taui, tare, to drynke with an nother man.
                  
                     Compotrix, ſhe that drinketh with an other.
                  
                     Compotatio, a bankette.
                  
                     Comprecor, cari, to deſyre or praye.
                  
                     
                        Compraehendo, hendere,
                        Cicero
                      to take holde on a thyng, to comprehende or contayne. Alſo to fauour and defende.
                  
                     
                     Comprimere animā, to hold in a mans breth.
                  
                     Comprimere manus, to holde his handes that he ſtryke not.
                  
                     Plautus in Ca
                           •
                        ina plautus in Truculen. Plautus in Ruden.
                     Comprimere ſe, to ceaſe or refrayne to doo a thynge.
                  
                     Comprime, let be, peaſe.
                  
                     Comprimere aliquē, to beate or torment one
                  
                     Comptum, a certayne offerynge of lycour, whiche was made with meale.
                  
                     Cōcaleo, lui, ere, to be het, to be made warme
                  
                     Concalfacio, feci, facere, to inflame, to be ſtered or prouoked.
                  
                     Concameratio, a warke made lyke to a vault with arches.
                  
                     Concalleo, lui, lere, to be made harde as a mannes handes with moche workynge, or his feete with moche goynge.
                  
                     Concaſtigo, gare, to chaſtiſe with a nother.
                  
                     Plautus
                     Concede hinc, go henſe a lyttell.
                  
                     Concedere fato, to dye.
                  
                     Concelebro, brare, to celebrate with other.
                  
                     plautus in ca
                           •••
                        a.
                     Concelebrare plateā hymenaeo, to make ioye abrode with ſynginge and daunſyng in the honour of mariage.
                  
                     Concento, tare, to agree in one tune.
                  
                     
                        
                           •••
                        tus.
                     Conceptiuae feriae, holy dayes kept at a tyme certayne yerely.
                  
                     Col
                           ••
                        el.
                     Conceptus, ta, tum, conceyued, purpoſed. ſometyme gathered: as, Ne cum a uertice 
                           •
                        o
                           ••
                        ens imbribus conceptus affluxerit, fundamenta conuellat: Leſte whan the ſtreme gathered by the ſhowers of rayne, ſhall runne vnto it, it ſhall pull vp the foundatiō of that whiche is buylded.
                  
                     Conchyta, he that ſeeketh for the ſhell fyſſhes, out of the which commeth purple: we maye take hym for a fyſher of oyſters and muſkelles.
                  
                     Concinnatitius, a, um, compendiouſelye and aptly gathered to gether.
                  
                     Ci. in Ver. act. 4.
                     Conciliare pecuniā, to gather moneye of the people.
                  
                     Concinnitudo, an aptneſſe, a conueniency.
                  
                     Plautus in capt.
                     Concinnare, to make. Vt illi maſtigiae cerebrū excutiam, qui me inſanum verbis concinnat ſuis, I wyll ſurely brayne this knaue, that with his wordes maketh me out of my wit.
                  
                     Plautus in Trinum.
                     Concinnare lutum, to make morter.
                  
                     Concinnare ſe leuem ſuis, to put his frendes to no coſte. Nunquā erit alienis grauis, qui ſuis ſe concinnat leuem: He ſhall neuer be greuouſe to other, whiche wyl not be burdenous vnto his frendes.
                  
                     plautus in Men.
                     Concinnare ſtruices patinarias, to make ſondry bankettynge diſſhes.
                  
                     Ibidem. Plaut. in Sticho. Plautus in Amph.
                     Concinnare veſtem, to amende a garment.
                  
                     Concinnare viam, to make rome that a man maye paſſe.
                  
                     Concinnare vxorem lachrymantem, to make his wyfe to weepe. Lachrymantem ex abitu concinnas tu tuam vxorem, By youre departynge henſe, ye make youre wyfe to weepe.
                  
                     Concinnatus, concinnata, tum, apparailled, trymmed.
                  
                     Concinnè, proprely, honeſtly, trymly.
                  
                     Concire, to moue or ſtere. Diſperij, ſceleſtus,
                     Terent. in Heautont. 
                     quantus turbas, conciui inſciens: I am vndone wretche that I am, what a buſyneſſe haue I made vnwares?
                  
                     Concire lites, to moue debate.
                  
                     Concionem habere, to make an oration or ſermon to the people.
                  
                     Concipere oculis, to ſee or beholde.Plautus in paenulo.
                  
                  
                     Concipere foedus, to make a leage.
                  
                     Concipere metum, to be aferde.
                  
                     Concipere ſcelus, to imagin to do an yl dede
                  
                     Conclamo, mare, to cry to one.Plautus in Milite. 
                     Vbi abijt cō
                        clamo, heus quid agis tu in tegulis? Whan he was gone, I cried vnto hym, Howe ferra, what doeſt thou amonge the tyles? Alſo to make a cry or proclamation.Plautus in Menech. 
                     Vis conclamari auctionem fore quidem? Wylt thou haue it proclaymed that there ſhall be porte ſale.
                  
                     Conclamata vaſa, proclamation made to truſſe, to gather bagge and baggage, as is vſed in the rayſynge of a ſyege, or remouynge of a campe in battayle.
                  
                     Conclamito, tare, to make many cries.Feſtus.
                  
                  
                     Conclauia, many chaumbers or places vnder oone kaye.
                  
                     Conclauium, idem quod conclaue.
                  
                  
                     Concoquere odia, to ſuffre dyſpleaſures or malyce.
                  
                     Concredo, didi, dere, to delyuer or committe a thynge vppon truſte.
                  
                     Concorditer, by aſſent, or agrement.
                  
                     Concreſco, creui, creſcere, to grow togither.
                  
                     Concretus, creta, tum, ioyned or congelyd to gyther, as a thynge that is lyquide, to be made harde.
                  
                     Concubinatus, hooredome, fornication.
                  
                     Conculco, care, to treade vnder the foote.
                  
                     Concuro, rare, to care for a thynge.
                  
                     Concurro, rere, to rounne with an nother,Plautus in Bacch. ſometyme to accorde.
                  
                     Concurſus, ſus, a runnynge of people togyther to one place.
                  
                     Condecoro, rare, to honour a thynge in makynge it more commendable.
                  
                     Condignus, na, num, worthy, and according as it is eſtemed.
                  
                     Condignè, worthyly, honeſtly.
                  
                     Condiſco, ſcere, to lerne.
                  
                     Condiſcipulus, a ſcholefelowe.
                  
                     Conditura, ſaulſe or pyckelle made with ſpyces.
                  
                     Condolet caput, my heed aketh.Plautus.
                  
                  
                     
                     Condono, are, to gyue, to forgyue a det or duety, to pardone.
                  
                     Condormio, ire, to ſlepe with other.
                  
                     Condormiſco, ſcere, to ſlepe a lytell, to nap.
                  
                     Plautus in Aſin.
                     Conduci non poſſum, I can not be made to beleue: no man can make me beleue.
                  
                     Conductus, ta, tum, to be ſette to hyre.
                  
                     Conductor, he that hyreth a thynge.
                  
                     Cōdus, a ſtewarde of houſholde, or he that kepeth the ſtore of houſholde.
                  
                     Conduplico, care, to paye the double of a thynge.
                  
                     Conduplicatio, doublynge.
                  
                     plautus in Rude.
                     Conferre, to deuyſe, to talke togyther.
                  
                     Conferre amorem, to loue.
                  
                     Cōferre animū alio, to ſet his mind els wher
                  
                     Conferre capita, to aſſemble for counſaile, to lay theyr heades to gether.
                  
                     Plautus.
                     Confer gradum, come forthe.
                  
                     Conferre in pauca, to conclude ſhortly.
                  
                     Conferre manus, to aſſayle eche other.
                  
                     Pli. in pan.
                     Conferre tempus in aleam, to ſpend the time in playenge at the dyce.
                  
                     Terent. in Eunucho. Plautus in Bacch.
                     Conferre uerba ad rem, to do as he ſayth.
                  
                     Conferre ſe in pedes, to runne away, to take his legges.
                  
                     Confert, it is profytable.
                  
                     Caeſ▪ in cō.
                     Confertus, ta, tum, full. alſoo in a flocke, or multitude, in a buſhment. Vt nunquam conferti, ſed rari, magnis que interuallis praeliatentur, That they mought fyght, not a multitude togyther, but a fewe at oones, and a greate diſtaunce on ſonder.Ti. Liuius. 
                     Turba conferta iter clauſit, The people gathered in a buſhment,Caeſar. ſtopped the waye. Qua parte hoſtium acies confertiſsima uiſa eſt, erupit, He brake out on that ſyde, where the hoſte of the enmyes ſemed to be moſte thycke of people.
                  
                     Confertim, in a buſhement.
                  
                     Plautus in Mercator. plautus in perſa.
                     Conficere penſum, to ſpynne out her threde, it is tranſlatid into this ſentence, To haue done or broughte to an ende that thynge, whiche he was commanded or appointed.
                  
                     plautus in Men.
                     Conficere prandium, to haue dyned. Pallium ad phrigionem fere confecto prandio, whan dyner was done, or whan he had dyned, he caried hir mantell to the brouderar.
                  
                     Terentius in Andria. Ci pro L. Flacco.
                     Conficere ſolicitudines alicui, to bryng one into heuynes, or to make him ſorowfull.
                  
                     Conficientiſsimus literarum, he that putteth all thynge in writynge.
                  
                     Confidentia, truſt, hope, certayn aſſurance, alſo madde hardyneſſe.
                  
                     Confidentiloquus, he that ſpeaketh boldly, without feare.
                  
                     Plautus.
                     Configo, fixi, figere, to ſtycke or thruſte in to a thynge.
                  
                     Confingo, finxi, fingere, to fayne a thynge to be trewe.
                  
                     Confingere dolum, to fynde a meane to deceyue one.
                  
                     Confirmo, are, to confyrme, or aſſure a thing to be as it is ſpoken.
                  
                     
                        Confirmare ſe,
                        Ci. Tyro.
                      to make hym ſelf ſtronge after his ſickneſſe.
                  
                     Confirmare animum, to take courage.
                  
                     Confirmitas, aſſuridneſſe.
                  
                     Cōflagro, are, to be on a fyre, to be inflamid
                  
                     
                        Conflictatio,
                        Donatus.
                      is where as one thyng beateth agaynſte a nother.
                  
                     Confluuium et confluxus, a metynge to gether of many ſtreames.
                  
                     Confluus, a, ū, that which floweth togeder.
                  
                     Confoeduſti, olde writers called them whiche were ioyned in leage, confederates.
                  
                     Confodio, dere, to dygge.
                  
                     Confore, to be brought to paſſe.Terentius. in And.
                  
                  
                     Conformo, are, to brynge to a facyon or fygure, to make apt or lyke to a thynge.
                  
                     Confringo, fregi, fringere, to breke or bruiſe.
                  
                     Confringere teſſeram, to be out of fauour,Plautus in Ciſtell. or no more welcome to one.
                  
                     Confringere rem, to ſpende awaye all his ſubſtaunce.
                  
                     Confragoſus, a, um, roughe,Ibidem. as a grounde whiche is nat playne, alſo harde to be vnderſtande, rude in language.
                  
                     Confugere ad aliquid, to reſorte for ſuccour or excuſe.
                  
                     Confundere, to trouble all,Liuius. 6. alſo to myxe out of order.
                  
                     Confutatio, a diſprouynge of that whyche is ſpoken.
                  
                     Congelatur, it is froſen or congelyd.
                  
                     Congemino, nare, to double.
                  
                     Congeminatio, a doublynge.
                  
                     Congermino, are, to grow ioyntly togither.
                  
                     Congerro, ronis, a mery companion,Plautus in Moſtel. he that kepeth company only in paſtyme and mery deuyſynge.
                  
                     Congeſtitius, a, um, caſte vp in a heape.
                  
                     Conglacio, aui, are, to be froſen.
                  
                     Conglobatim, in a rounde fourme lyke to a bottome of threde.
                  
                     Conglutino, nare, to ioyne togyther, as it were glewyd.
                  
                     Congraecor, cari, to eate and drynke excedyngly, after the commune worde, to make good chere.
                  
                     Congreſſus, us, is alſo company with other.
                  
                     Congruens, accordynge, lyke.
                  
                     Conijcere in ſaginam, to put to fattynge, to go where he may fyll his bealy.
                  
                     Coniugata, be thoſe wordes, whiche beinge of one kynde, be diriued one of an other, as of Iuſtitia, iuſtus, & iuſtum, wherof an argument may be made in this wyſe, If Iuſtice is to be chiefely honoured and loued

of men, a iuſt man is to be had in eſtimation and reuerence amonge men.
                  
                     Coniugatio, a ioynynge to gether.
                  
                     Coniunctura, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Coniunctus, ta, tum, ioyned.
                  
                     Coniunctim, to gether.
                  
                     Connato, tare, to ſwymme to gether.
                  
                     Connecto, nexui, nectere, to binde together.
                  
                     Conniuentia, a ſufferaunce of a thynge, or a fayninge not to ſe or eſpye.
                  
                     Connatio, a ſwymmynge to gether.
                  
                     Conquasſatio, a bruyſnge together.
                  
                     Conqueror, queri, to complayne,
                  
                     Conquieſco, eui, eſcere, to ceſſe, to leaue of.
                  
                     Conquiro, quiſiui, quirere, to ſeke all about.
                  
                     Conquiſitor, a ſercher, alſo an officer, which is ſent to attache a man for a great offence.
                  
                     Feſ
                           •
                        us.
                     Comegione, old writers vſed for è regione, on the other ſyde, or agaynſt a thyng.
                  
                     Conſcindo, ſcidi, ſcindere, to cut with other.
                  
                     Conſcindere ſibilis, to whyſtell oone oute of a place.
                  
                     Ci. 
                           •
                        d A
                           •
                        .
                     Conſcindere, is alſo to ſcorne or rebuke one pryuylye.
                  
                     Conſcio, ſciui, ſcire, to knowe with other.
                  
                     Conſcium ſacere aliquem, to make one priuie to a matter.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈1 paragraph〉
                        
                     
                     Conciſcere, to drawe to. Diligens paſtor ſta
                        
                           ••
                        ulū cotidie conuerrit, nec patitur ſtercus humorem conſciſcere, A dilygent ſhepherde euery day ſweepeth his ſtable, and letteth nat the dunge drawe moyſture vnto it.
                  
                     
                        Conſ
                              ••
                           ibello, are,
                      to write togyther.
                  
                     
                        Conſc
                              •
                           ibere,
                      is alſo to inrolle or regiſter.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈1 paragraph〉
                        
                     
                     Conſecro, are, to putte in remembraunce by wrytynge.
                  
                     Conſecrare memoriā nominis, to putte his name in perpetuall remembrance.
                  
                     Conſenſus, conſent.
                  
                     Conſepio, piui, ire, to incloſe with an hedge.
                  
                     Cicer. off.
                     Conſeruo, are, to kepe, to preſerue, to gather goodes.
                  
                     Conſeruus, & conſerua, a felowe or companyon in ſeruyce.
                  
                     Conſignifico, care, to ſhewe by tokens.
                  
                     Cicero.
                     Conſigno, nare, to ſeale and cloſe vp, as letters. alſo to ſygnifie or declare, proprelye by letters.
                  
                     Cic. Acad.
                     Conſignatus, ta, tum, ſygnified, teſtified.
                  
                     Conſilium eſt ita facere, I haue purpoſed ſo to doo.
                  
                     Conſimilis, le, in all thynges like.
                  
                     Conſolatio, comfort in aduerſitie,
                  
                     Conſolabilis, he that may be comforted.
                  
                     Conſomnio, are, to dreame.
                  
                     Cic. off. 3.
                     Conſortio, cionis, felowſhyppe.
                  
                     Cōſpergo, ſperſi, ſpergere, to ſcatter or ſperkyll about aboundantly.
                  
                     Conſpectus, tus, a beholdyng or ſyght.
                  
                     Conſpirare, to wynde rounde like an adder.
                  
                     Conſpondio, di, dere, to promyſe mutually.
                  
                     Conſponſi, they whiche haue mutually promyſed one to the other.
                  
                     Conſponſor, ſoris, he that bindeth him ſelfe by promyſe, to hym that hathe made lyke promyſe.
                  
                     Conſpuo, ere, to ſpette on one.
                  
                     Conſputo, to ſpette often on one.
                  
                     Conſtabilio, liui, lire, to make ſure.
                  
                     Conſtituere, to be aduiſed or determined to do a thynge.
                  
                     Conſtituere in diem tertium, to determyne to do a thing thre dayes nexte folowyng.
                  
                     Conſtituere diſceptationē, to make his plee formall, or to foreſee that which ſhall come in contencion.
                  
                     
                        Conſtituere iudiciū,
                        Cicero in parti. ora.
                      after our maner of ſpeakynge is to demourre in lawe, or dwelle in lawe, to remytte a thynge to the better oppinyon of the iudges.
                  
                     
                        Conſtituere maieſtatem,
                        Saluſt.
                      to confyrme or aduaunce the reuerence dewe to the ſupreme authoritie.
                  
                     Conſtituere quaeſtionem, to decree, that vppon ſtrayt examination, execution be done.
                  
                     Conſtituere ſtatum cauſae, is whan the iudge dothe determyne, where hit be a matter in lawe, or a matter in dede, which is in controuerſye.
                  
                     Conſtituere uadimonium, to put in pledges.
                  
                     Conſtet modus, lette there be a meaſure.pli. in epi.
                  
                  
                     Conſtat ratio, there is a reaſonable cauſe.
                  
                     Conſtat hoc mihi tecum, we be both agreed.
                  
                     Conſtrepo, pui, ere, to make a noyſe togider.
                  
                     Conſtringo, ſtrinxi, gere, to bynde faſte, to wringe harde.
                  
                     Conſuetudo, conuerſation.
                  
                     Conſuetus, ta, tum, accuſtomed.
                  
                     
                        Conſumo, ſumpſi, ſumere,
                        Terenti
                              ••
                            in And.
                      ſometyme ſignifyeth to fynyſhe or make vp, or to bryng to a poynt. alſo to ſpende, as Conſumere diē in apparando, to ſpende all the daye in preparynge.
                  
                     Conſumere fidem, to loſe credence.Saluſt. Terentius in Heau. Saluſtius in 
                           •
                        ugurt.
                  
                  
                     Conſumere operam, to employ labour.
                  
                     Conſumere orationem, to telle a longe tale without a concluſyon.
                  
                     Conſurgo, ſurrexi, gere, to aryſe to gyther with other.
                  
                     Contabeſco, ſcere, to waſte away, or relent,Plautus in Mercator. lyke ſalt put in water.
                  
                     
                        Contechnor, nari,
                        Plautus in pſeudolo. Terentius in H
                              •
                           cyra.
                      to inuente ſomme thynge to deceyue.
                  
                     
                        Contego, texi, 
                              •
                           egere,
                      to hyde a faute that it be nat eſpied.
                  
                     Contemptim, dyſdaynefully.
                  
                     Contemptus, ta, tū, contemned, nat eſtemed.
                  
                     Contero, triui, terere, to weare out with occupienge,

alſo to make warre.
                  
                     Plautus in Ciſtell. Plautus in Bacch. Te. in Hec.
                     Conteris tu tua me oratione mulier: Thou makeſt me wery woman with thy talkynge
                  
                     Conterere aetatem, to ſpende his lyfe.
                  
                     Conterere diē, to ſpend the day vnprofitably
                  
                     Conterere operam, to loſe laboure.
                  
                     Conterere queſtum, to ſpende al that he hath goten or wonne.
                  
                     Conteſtatus, ta, tum, proued by wytneſſe.
                  
                     Contexo, ere, to ioyne to gether.
                  
                     Contexere dolos, to fynde crafty meanes.
                  
                     Cōticeſco, cere, to kepe ſylence with other.
                  
                     Continere ſe domi, to abyde at home.
                  
                     Plautus in Amph.
                     Continebat me tempeſtas, The foule weder letted me.
                  
                     Continenti biduo, two dayes continuall.
                  
                     Contignus, a, um, that whiche toucheth or is next to a thynge.
                  
                     Contollam gradum, I wyl go nerre.
                  
                     Plautus in Aulul. Vergil. Geor. Ver. aen. 2.
                     Contorqueo, torſi, torquere, to plucke vppe and drawe with hym.
                  
                     Contorquere telum, to ſhoote an arrowe or darte, and therwith to hit or perce a thing
                  
                     Contortuplico, are, to wrappe or wynde a thynge, that with great payne it maye be vnwounde.
                  
                     Plaut. in perſa.
                     Contortuplicata nomina, names ſoo dyffuſe, that they may vneth be pronounced.
                  
                     Contra, on the other parte.
                  
                     Ci. tuſc. q. Ouidius in Metamor. Pli. in epi. Cicer. off. Ti. Liuius. Cic. Tuſc. queſtio.
                     Contrahere animum, to take thought.
                  
                     Contrahere tempus, to abrege the tyme.
                  
                     Contrahere valitudinem, to gette ſickeneſſe.
                  
                     Contrahere, to make couenant.
                  
                     Contrahere bona, to geate goodes.
                  
                     Contractio animi, ſtonyinge of the minde.
                  
                     Contractus, ta, tum, gotten.
                  
                     Contractus, tus, contracte, bargayne.
                  
                     Cōtraſto, ſtare, to be againſt one, to repugne.
                  
                     Contrunco, care, to myniſhe.
                  
                     Plautus in Sticho Cicero in clodium. Plautus in Stich.
                     Contueor, eri, to defende, to ſee.
                  
                     Contumaciter, diſſobediently.
                  
                     Contundere facta alicuius, to putte a nother mannes actes out of eſtimation or remembraunce.
                  
                     Contuor, eri, to ſee.
                  
                     Plautus in Aſin. Ci. ad At.
                     Conturbo, are, to trouble. alſo to ſpende in waſt. conturbare fortunas, to ſpende al his goodes in waſte.
                  
                     Conuador, dari, to compell oone to fynde ſuertyes.
                  
                     Plin. 11.
                     Conueho, uexi, uehere, to cary or bryng frō many places vnto one place.
                  
                     Cice. Atti.
                     Conuector, toris, a maryner that conueyeth ouer many.
                  
                     Plautus in Amphitri. plautus in Curcu. plautus in Amphit.
                     Conuello, uulſi, uellere, to ſhake, or pull out of his place: alſo to take from one by robery
                  
                     Conuenit, I am content. alſo it is conuenyent or meete.
                  
                     Conueniens, conuenient.
                  
                     Conuentus, ta, tum, accorded.Saluſtius in iugurt. Cice. pro Sexto. Plautus in Ruden. Cato.
                  
                  
                     Conuenta pax, peace, accorded.
                  
                     Conuenticulum, a lyttell aſſembly.
                  
                     Conuerro, rere, to ſwepe to gether into one place▪ alſo to rubbe.
                  
                     Conuerſè, klenly.
                  
                     Conuexus, a, um, imboſed rounde and holowe within.
                  
                     Conuexitas, the imboſynge or roundneſſe of the backeſide of that whiche is holowe.
                  
                     Conuiciū dicere, to ſpeke to a mans rebuke.
                  
                     Conuicium facere, to do a thynge to a mans rebuke.
                  
                     Conuiuam abducere, to brynge one to a dyner or banker.
                  
                     Conuiuiones, companyons at drynkynge or bankettynge.
                  
                     Conuoco, care, to calle to gether, or to aſſemble many to gether.
                  
                     
                        Conuolo, la
                              •
                           e,
                      to fly to gether.
                  
                     Conuoluolus, an herbe called withwynde.
                  
                     Copen, olde wryters vſed for Copioſum, plenteouſe.
                  
                     Cophinus, a baſket.
                  
                     Copio, are, to gather moche to gether.
                  
                     Copiola, ſome plenty.
                  
                     Copia, is alſo ayde.
                  
                     Copiam dare, to gyue power, or lycence,Terent. in Heautont. alſo to gyue occaſion.
                  
                     
                        Copia eſt. Nam apud patrem tua amica tecum ſine metu ut ſit, copia eſt,
                        Ibidem.
                      For thou mayſte nowe brynge to paſſe, that thy wench may be with thy father without any drede.
                  
                     Copia eſt, I may or mought.Terentius in p
                           •
                        o
                           •
                        m. 
                     Ego in eum incidi infelix lo cum, ut neque eius ſit an ittendi, nec retin endi copia: I am vnhapily come to that poynte, that I maye neyther leaue her, nor kepe hir.
                  
                     Copia uix fuit eum adeundi, with great difficultie or peyn mought I come vnto him.
                  
                     
                        Copia cuntandi non eſt tibi,
                        Plautus in Epidic. Plautus in Capt. plautus in Epidico. Plautus i
                              •
                            Milite. pli. in epi.
                      Thou haſte noo leyſure to tarye.
                  
                     Copia eſt tibi magis, thou mayſt more eaſily.
                  
                     Copia nulla eſt tibi in illo, He canne nothyng helpe the.
                  
                     Copiam efficere alicui, to fynde the meanes that one may come in.
                  
                     Copiam facere argenti, to lende one money.
                  
                     Copiam facere, to communicate any thinge with an nother.
                  
                     Copi, for copioſo.
                  
                     Copioſè, abundantly.
                  
                     Coquito, tare, to boyle often.
                  
                     Corbito, tare, to caſte into a baſkette.
                  
                     
                        Cordapſus,
                        Plautus in Caſina.
                      a ſyckenes that is nowe called Illiacus, whiche is a peyne in the guttes.
                  
                     Cordaté, wyſely.
                  
                     
                        Cordilla,
                        plautus in paenulo.
                      the yonge frie of the fyſſhe callyd Tunye.
                  
                     
                     Victruuiꝰ
                     Corgo, olde writers vſed for Profecto.
                  
                  
                     Coria, coriorum, are in buyldynge certayne ſettyng or layeng of thynges in one order, or in height, or in thyckenes.
                  
                     Coriandrum, an herbe and ſeede callydde Colyander.
                  
                     Coriatium, of lether.
                  
                     Corinthiacus, ca, cum, that whiche is of the citie of Corinthus.
                  
                     Corporatura, corpulencie, quantitie of the bodye.
                  
                     Corpore uiciati, they whiche do lacke ſome membre at theyr natiuitie.
                  
                     Corrector, an amender of fautes.
                  
                     Te in Hec. Plautus in 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                     Corripere ſeſe ad aliquē, to go to one haſtily
                  
                     Corripere ſe repente, to go his way ſodeinly
                  
                     Corriuales, they whyche do loue to gyther one womanne.
                  
                     Corroboro, are, to make ſtronge or bygge, to harden.
                  
                     Sali
                           ••
                        ius 
                           〈…〉
                        .
                     Corruda, an herbe callyd wylde Sperage.
                  
                     Corrumpere rem familiarem, to waſte his ſubſtaunce.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈1 paragraph〉
                        
                     
                     Corrumpere igui, to burne vp.
                  
                     Corrumpere oportunitates, to loſe oportunitie or occaſyon.
                  
                     Corruptor, a diſtroyer, a waſter, a corrupter of thynges.
                  
                     Corruo, rui, ruere, to falle downe togyther.
                  
                     Cors, cortis, idem quod chors, a court, whiche ſerueth for pultrie, to fede at large.
                  
                     Corus, a ſouthweſt wynde.
                  
                     Corymbifer, an yuy tree.
                  
                     
                        Coſmitto, for committo.
                     
                  
                  
                     Cotyle, a meaſure contaynynge nyne ounces, as well at Rome, as in Grece.
                  
                     Cotyla hyppoiatrica, that is to ſaye, whiche was vſed in medicines for horſes and cattel contayned .xii. ounces.
                  
                     Cotyla georgica, that is to ſaye, which was vſed in thynges concernynge ſtyllage, conteynyd .xiii. ounces and a halfe. ſometyme it is vſurped for Sextarius.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶C ANTE R.
                  
                     
                        CRacentes, for graciles.
                     
                  
                  
                     Crambe, a kynde of colewortes.
                  
                     Cramben repetitiam, is callyd of Iuuenalie a Declamation to be often herde, with moche tediouſnes to the herers.
                  
                     Crapulam exhalare, to vomyte whanne one is drunke.
                  
                     Crapulam edormiſcere, to ſleape out drunkennes vntyll he be freſhe ageyne.
                  
                     Craſis, a greke worde, ſygnyfieth complection, temperature, or myxture of naturall humours.
                  
                     Craſſamen, thyckeneſſe.
                  
                     Craſſe compedes, weyghty gyues.Plautus in pſeudolo.
                  
                  
                     Craſſo, are, to make fatte.
                  
                     Crater, is alſo the baſon of a water cundite, wherinto the water runneth out of pypes or cockes.
                  
                     Creator, the fyrſte maker of a thinge.
                  
                     Creber, bra, brum, is alſo ſtandyng, or being thycke togyther, as trees.
                  
                     Crebritas, & crebritudo, oftenneſſe, or thiknes in beinge or growyng togither.
                  
                     Credere verba alicui, to telle to oone his counſaylle.
                  
                     Creditur tibi, I truſte the.Plautus in Sticho plautus in Curcu. Plautus. Columel. 6. cap. 25.
                  
                  
                     Creditur male, it is ylle lente.
                  
                     
                        Creduis, uel creduas, for credas.
                  
                  
                     Cremaſteres, the ſynewes, wherby the ſtones of a man or beaſte doo hange.
                  
                     Cremo, are, to bourne.
                  
                     Crepa, of olde wryters is vſed for Capra, a Goote.
                  
                     Crepare, to be brokē, alſo to ſpeke or prech.Vergili. Horatius.
                  
                  
                     Crepidatus, he that weareth ſlyppers.
                  
                     Crepidula, a lyttell ſlyppar.
                  
                     Crepitare dentibus, to craſhe with the teth.Plautus in Ruden. plautus in Amphit.
                  
                  
                     Crepitat mihi uenter, my bealy courleth.
                  
                     Crepuit foris, the doore craked.
                  
                     Criſpus, he that hath a curlyd heare.
                  
                     Criſta, a kreſte, or any thynge growyng on the heade of a foule or beaſte, as a cockes combe, or the fethers on the heade of a byrde, callyd a coppe.
                  
                     Crociatus, ta, tum, coloured lyke ſaffron.
                  
                     Crocito, tare, to croke like a rauen or crow.
                  
                     Crocitus, the noyſe that rauen or crowe maketh, callyd crokynge.
                  
                     Crocitatio, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Crocomagma, matis, the duſte or refuſe of Saffron.
                  
                     Cronia, the feaſtes of Saturne.
                  
                     Cruciabilitas, & cruciatus, turment, affliction.
                  
                     Cruci dare aliquem, to hange one.Plautus in Milite.
                  
                  
                     Crucifigo, fixi, gere, to crucyfie.
                  
                     Crucio, are, to tourment.
                  
                     Cruda poma, fruites that are not rype.
                  
                     Cruſculum, a lyttell or ſmall legge.
                  
                     Cruſtum, is alſo a morcel of bread or meate.Vergili.
                  
                  
                     Crux, ſygnifieth all maner of tourment.
               
            
            
               
                  C ANTE V.
                  
                     CVcurbitula, a lyttell gourde or cuppe, wherwith bloode is drawen out of a man, whan he is ſcarified.
                  
                     Cucuma, a veſſell of braſſe or tynne, facioned lyke a Cucumer, wherwith bathes were fylled and emptied.
                  
                     Cudetur in me faba, all the blaame ſhall be layde to me.
                  
                     Cuiuſmodi, what, what facion, what maner.
                  
                     
                     Plautus in Menech. Oicer. procluen. Cicer. pro Roſcio.
                     Cuiuſmodi homines erunt? What maner of men ſhall they be?
                  
                     Cuiuſmodicun
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         mater ſir? What ſoo euer a mother ſhe be?
                  
                     Cuiuſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        modi. Vereor enim cuiuſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         modi es Roſci, ne ita hunc uidear voluiſſe ſetuare, ut tibi omnino non pepercerim, I feare me that in what ſo euer ſtate thou arte in Roſ. leſt it ſhall be thought, that I wolde ſo excuſe or defende hym, foraſmoche as I haue nat all ſpared the.
                  
                     Saluſti. in catelin.
                     Cuiuſcun
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         modi genus hominum, of all maner of ſortes of men.
                  
                     Culcitrula, a lyttell fether bedde.
                  
                     Feſtus.
                     Culcitula, a lyttell ſtaffe.
                  
                     Culeus, amonge the Romaynes was the greatteſt meaſure, and receyueth twenty of the meaſures callyd Amphora, whyche amounteth to two thouſand, eight hundred, foure pounde of meaſure, euery pound beinge twelue ounces. It was alſo a ſacke of lether, wherinto they, whiche hadde ſlayne their fathers or mothers were ſowen, and with them were alſo put alyue, a Cocke, a Serpent, and an Ape, and throwen al togither in to the riuer of Tyber. And this was the punyſhment of paricides or murderers of their parentes.
                  
                     Plautus in Capt.
                     Culpa carere, nat to offende.
                  
                     Culpam commereri, to committe an offence.
                  
                     Culpam in alterum conferre, to lay the blame to an nother.
                  
                     Culpito, tare, to blame often.
                  
                     Culpo, pare, to blame.
                  
                     Cululus, a lyttell chalyce or cuppe of erth, whiche the byſhops vſed in ſacrifice.
                  
                     plautus in paenulo.
                     Cum, all be it. Nam cum ſedulo munditer nos habemus, uix aegre amarorculos inuenimus, All though we do appoynt vs neuer ſo kleanly, yet vneth fynde we any louers.
                  
                     Cum dicto, forthewith, as ſoone as it was ſpoken.
                  
                     Terentius in Hecyra.
                     Cum maxume, to moche.
                  
                     Cumulatus, ta, tum, augmented.
                  
                     Cumulatè, abundantly.
                  
                     Vergilius.
                     Cunabula, is alſo taken for the begynnyng of thynges.
                  
                     Cunctanter, ſlowely, ſofte and fayre.
                  
                     Cunctatio, & contatio, taryenge.
                  
                     Cunctus, ta, tum, all togther.
                  
                     Cunilago, a kynde of ſauerye.
                  
                     Cupiens, he that deſyreth a thynge.
                  
                     Cupiens tui eſt, he loueth the hartyly.
                  
                     Cupienter, with great deſyre.
                  
                     Cupitus, ta, tum, deſyred.
                  
                     Cupreſſus, a Cypreſſe tree.
                  
                     Cupreſsinus, na, num, of cypres tree.
                  
                     Curiata comitia, were aſſemblyes of people in places of iudgement, for matters in varyaunce.
                  
                     Curio, is alſo a curate,Liuius. or he that hathe the ſpirituall charge in a paryſhe.
                  
                     Curionatus, the offyce of a curate.
                  
                     Curionium, the money that is giuen to a curate for doinge his offyce.
                  
                     Curmundulla, peares very delycate, hauing ſo thynne parynges, that men dydde eate them vnparyd.
                  
                     Curare, to care for a thynge, to take heede,Terent. in Andria. or be dilygent aboute a thyng. Cura ut valeas, Looke to thy helthe. Curaſti probé, Thou haſte done euery thynge well.
                  
                     Curare aedes, to take hede to the houſe,Plautus. Terent. in Heauto. that nothynge be loſte.
                  
                     Curare aliena, to meddell with other mennes buſyneſſe.
                  
                     
                        Curare amicos,
                        Plautus in Sticho Plautus in Trinūmo.
                      to entertayne frendes or acquayntaunce.
                  
                     Curare fidem, to kepe promyſe.
                  
                     Curare munus ſuum, to do his offyce.
                  
                     Curabo illi pecuniam, I wylle prouyde that he ſhall haue money.
                  
                     Curabitur, it ſhall be prouyded.
                  
                     Curatus, ta, tum, done with dilygence.
                  
                     Curatus, in good poynt or ſtate.
                  
                     Curatio, charge. Curatio mea eſt,
                     Plautus in poenu. It is myn offyce or charge.
                  
                     Currens, he that runneth.
                  
                     Currentem incitare, to exhorte or ſette forwarde hym that of his owne courage is well diſpoſed to a thynge.
                  
                     Curſim, with al ſpede, very ſpedyly.
                  
                     Curſura, a courſe.
                  
                     Cuticula, a thynne ſkynne.
                  
                     Cutiones, they whyche in ſellynge make many prices or they come to a poynte.Feſtus.
                  
                  
                     Cuturnium, a veſſell, out of the whiche wine was poured in ſacrifices.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶C, ANTE Y.
                  
                     CYanus, a blewe flowre growynge amonge corne, callyd a bluebottell.
                  
                     Cyathiſſo, are, to ſyppe or to quafte, all out, or halues.
                  
                     Cyathus, the .xii. parte of the meſure callyd Sextarius, whyche was ſuppoſed to be as moche as commonlye a temperate man dyd drynke at one draught. Rede more after in Sextario.
                  
                     Cyborium, a kind of appuls of Alexandria.
                  
                     Cydarum, a bote.
                  
                     Cynodontae, are dogges tethe, whiche doo growe in the latter age.
                  
                     Cyperus Babylonicus, Galyngale.
                  
                     Cypſili, byrdes callyd ſwalowes.
                  
                     Cyrnij, people of the Ile of Cors.
                  
                     Cyſthus, a kynde of yuye.
                  
                     Cytinus, the floure of a gardē pomegranate.
               
            
            
               
               
                  D ANTE A.
                  
                     
                        DAGNADES, were lyttell byrdes, whyche in Egypte men vſed to make faſte to garlandis whan they went to drinkynge.
                  
                     Damaſcoena, prunes.
                  
                     Vlpian. L. aqu
                           •••
                        a. Cic. Epiſt. libr. 17. ad Volūn
                           •
                        um Cic in L. pi
                           •
                        onem.
                     Damnas dare, to pay damages. Damnum facere, to ſuffre damage, to haue loſſe.
                  
                     Damnatus, condemned.
                  
                     Damnatior, more worthy deathe.
                  
                     Daniſta, an vſerer.
                  
                     Daniſticus, ca, cum, pertaynynge to vſery.
                  
                     Plautus in Trucu.
                     Dapſilis lectus, an excellent good bedde.
                  
                     Daphnoides, an herbe callid Lorell or Laury, whiche cuſeth a vehemente purgation.
                  
                     Dapſilia dicta, wordes frankely ſpoken.
                  
                     Daſcia, thyckenes of brethe.
                  
                     Daucus, yelowe carette, wherof the rootes ſodden in brothe are pleaſant and holſom.
               
            
            
               
                  D ANTE E.
                  
                     Plautus 
                           〈…〉
                        
                     
                     DE nocte abijt, he went away at night.
                  
                     
                        De nocte uigila
                              •
                           e,
                      to wake ī the night
                  
                     De die, to day. Ergo ne una orationis pars de die dabitur mihi, Than ſhal nat I be ſuffred to ſpeake one lyttell worde to day.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈1 paragraph〉
                        
                     
                     De die uiuere, euerye daye, or from daye to daye, to lyue.
                  
                     Plautus in per
                           •
                        a. Plautus in Bacch. Plautus in Monech. Cicero. Cicero. Terentius in Hecyra. Plautus in Moſtel. Terent. in Eunucho. Plautus in Capt. Terent. in Heauto. Plautus in Trucu. plautus in Epidico.
                     De meo, of my good, de tuo, of thy good.
                  
                     De mea ſententia, by my counſayle.
                  
                     De illis verbis caue tibi, beware howe thou ſpekeſt ſuche wordes.
                  
                     De imperio decertatur, they fyghte for the empire, or chiefe rule.
                  
                     De manu in manum, from hande to hande.
                  
                     De filia te adij, I comme to ſpeake with you for your doughter.
                  
                     De meo exemplo aedificet, lette hym buylde accordynge to my platte.
                  
                     
                        De iſta
                              •
                            te amo,
                      I loue the for her ſake.
                  
                     De compacto, by agrement.
                  
                     De induſtria, of purpoſe.
                  
                     De integro, efteſoones from the beginning.
                  
                     De improuiſo, at auenture, vnſought for, or vnlooked for.
                  
                     De more, as it hath ben accuſtomed.
                  
                     De nihilo nihil eſt iraſci, It is folye to be angry for nothynge.
                  
                     De praefacili exores, Thou ſhalte lyghtely opteyne.
                  
                     plautus.
                     De proximo ſenex, the olde man that dwelleth hereby.
                  
                     De repenté, ſodaynly. De ſubito, idem.
                  
                  
                     Deam bulatio, a walkynge forth, or abrode, out of the houſe.
                  
                     Debilito, tare, to make feble or weake.
                  
                     Deblatero, terare, to ſpeake foolyſſhely,Fe
                           ••••
                        . Non. Mar. to babble rebukeully.
                  
                     Decaluo, to make very balde.
                  
                     Decaphorus, a lytter borne by tenne men.Ci. ad At. Plinius.
                  
                  
                     Decedere, to gyue place to an other.
                  
                     Decedere itinere, to tourne out of the waye for ſome purpoſe.Plautus Ci. in Ver.
                  
                  
                     Decedere uia, to go out of the way.
                  
                     
                        Decedere de ſuo more,
                        Ti. Liuius.
                      to chaunge his cuſtome.
                  
                     
                        Decedere inſtituto ſuo,
                        Ci. in Ver. Liuius.
                      to do otherwiſe than he was wonte.
                  
                     Decedere officio, to do agaynſte his duetie to do no more his duetie.Terent. in Adelph. Cic. A
                           •
                        t. 1.
                  
                  
                     
                        Decede
                              •
                            nihil de ſumma,
                      there ſhall be nothynge minyſhed.
                  
                     Decedere, to dye.
                  
                     Decedi, to haue place or way gyuen.Cicero de ſenectute. 
                     Haec enim ipſa ſunt honorabilia, quae uidentur leuia at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         communia, ſalutari, appeti, decedi, aſſurgi, deduci, reduci, For thoſe thynges ar honourable, whiche ſeme to be of ſmall effecte and commune, to be awayted on, to be ſued vnto, to haue the way giuen, to be ryſen vnto, to be brought to the court. and brought agayne home.
                  
                     Decem, the number of tenne.
                  
                     Decemuiri, where tenne men be in one authoritie. Suche were at Rome ſoone after that they ceaſſed to haue kynges, and they had authoritie to gather lawes, and alſo to make lawes: At the laſte they conſpired to haue a perpetuall authoritie, and fynallye were therfore depoſed for euer.
                  
                     Decemuiratus, the dignitie or offyce of Decemuiri.
                     Colu. li. 4.
                  
                  
                     Decenus, na, num, a doſen.
                  
                     Decies, tenne tymes.
                  
                     Decennalis, le, of tenne yeres.
                  
                     Decennium, the ſpace of tenne yeres.
                  
                     Decenter, comelye, ſeemely,Terent. in Necyra. or as hit is conuenyent.
                  
                     Decermina, thynges pulled away, in making thynges cleane.
                  
                     Decernere, to purpoſe.Plautus in Moſtel.
                  
                  
                     Decernere quaeſtionem, to ordeyne that an examination be made.
                  
                     Decernere, to fyght in battayle.
                  
                     Decet me haec veſtis, this garmente becommeth me well.Pli. in epi. 105. Terent. in Heautont. Plautus i
                           •
                         Bacch.
                  
                  
                     Decidit ab archetypo, he dyd nat folowe his fyrſte example.
                  
                     Decidere de ſpe, he loſte all his hope.
                  
                     Decidit fructus, he loſte all the profite that ſhulde come of it.
                  
                     Deciduus, a, um, that whiche falleth, as Decidu
                           •
                         folia, leaues that do fall.
                  
                     
                     Decies ſeſtertium, was vſed of the Romains for a thouſande Seſtertia, whych amounteth of our money to ſyxe thouſande, fyue hundred, foure ſcore and ſeuen pounde, & tenne ſhyllynges.
                  
                     Plinius. Varro.
                     Decliuis, ue, that whiche is redy to fall.
                  
                     Decliuis aetate, falle
                        •
                      in age.
                  
                     Decollare, to fayle.
                  
                     Decolorus, a, ū, lackyng colour, or yl colorid
                  
                     Decoloratus, ta, tum, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Decoxit domino ſuo foetura, the increaſe of cattayle came to lyttell aduauntage vnto his mayſter.
                  
                     Decore, honeſtly.
                  
                     Decortico, care, to barke a tree.
                  
                     Decotes, thredebare garmentes, or garmē
                     tes worne to the vttermoſte.
                  
                     Decumbo, bere, to lye downe.
                  
                     Daecures, olde writers vſed for decuriones.
                  
                     Decuriatio, making of knightes or captains
                  
                     Ti. Liuius. de bell. macedonico lib. 10.
                     
                        Decu
                              •
                           rere,
                      to iuſte.
                  
                     Decuſsis, ten hole partes, alſo peces equally cutte, more ouer the diuiſions of tymber ſawen in equall partes.
                  
                     Decuſſatim, in euen porcions cutte.
                  
                     Dedecet, it is not honeſt or conuenient.
                  
                     Dedecoro, rare, to diſhoneſt.
                  
                     Dedecus, dedecoris, dyſhoneſtie.
                  
                     Dedignatio, dyſdayne.
                  
                     Deditus, ta, tum, gyuen, rendred.
                  
                     Dedita opera, for a pourpoſe, by his owne conſente.
                  
                     Deducere riuos, to tourne the ryuer.
                  
                     Deducere vocem, to ſpeake ſmalle.
                  
                     Deducere, to abate of a ſomme.
                  
                     Defaecatus, ta, tum, fyned or cleane from the lyes or dregges, as wyne, whyche is nat troublyd.
                  
                     Defatigo, gare, to make oone weerye, or to fatygate.
                  
                     Defatigatio, weeryneſſe.
                  
                     Deferre aliquem furti, to appeache oone of felonye.
                  
                     Cicero de lege agratia. Priſcianus.
                     Deferunt de me apud uos, They reporte of me falſely vnto you.
                  
                     Defetiſcor, ſci, I am weery.
                  
                     
                        Defeſ
                              •
                           us ſum,
                      
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Defectus, a, ū, that which lacketh any thing.
                  
                     Defectio, rebelliō, departing from one captayn to go to an other. alſo lacke or defaut.
                  
                     Plautus in perſa. Pli. in pan, Cicer. off.
                     Defigere aliquem colaphis, to gyue oone a cuffe on the eare, or to beate one with the handes. Definite, ſhortly, or at few wordis.
                  
                     Definitum eſt, It is concluded.
                  
                     Deflectere ex itinere, to turne out of the way.
                  
                     Deflexit de via conſuetudo, The cuſtome is chaunged or tourned.
                  
                     Defleo, eui, ere, to wayle or lamēt, to be ſory.
                  
                     Plautus in Epidic.
                     Defloccatus, worne for age. ſom tyme paſſed the floure of youthe.
                  
                     Defore, to lacke in tyme to come.
                  
                     
                        Defunctus iam ſum,
                        Terent. in Eunucho.
                      I haue nowe doone my duetie.
                  
                     
                        Defuncta morbis corpora,
                        Liuius.
                      bodies recouered from ſyckenes or diſeaſes.
                  
                     Defunctus fato, eſcaped his deſtenye.Ibidem.
                  
                  
                     Defungi in hac re, to be out of this buſynes,Terent. in phorm. to be diſcharged of this matter.
                  
                     Defungi regis imperio, to doo the kynges commaundement.
                  
                     Defunctus, ta, tum, deed.
                  
                     Defunctorie, remyſſely, lyghtely,Vlpian. withoute ſtudye, or dyligence.
                  
                     Degero, degeſsi, degerere, to cary away.Plautus in Aulular.
                  
                  
                     Degerere laborem alicui, to eaſe one of his labour. Degrūmor, ari, to lay a thing by line.
                  
                     Dehortor, tari, to diſcourage, to exhorte to the contrarye.
                  
                     Deijcere de gradu, to bryng out of a conſtant or temperate mynd, alſo it ſignifieth, to depriue of dignitie.Cic. de off. Ci. ad At. lib. 16. Cicer. pro cecina. Ci. de 
                           ••
                        n.
                  
                  
                     Deijcere, to diſeaſe or putte out a man of his poſſeſſion.
                  
                     Deiectus, & deiectio, a caſtynge out of poſſeſſion, or a diſſe
                        •
                     ſon.
                  
                     Deiungo, xi, gere, to vnioyne.
                  
                     Deiuro, to ſweare depely.
                  
                     Delabor, lapſus ſum, labi, to falle downe of a hygh place. Alſo to be conſumid and come to nought.
                  
                     Delacero, rare, to teare in pieces.
                  
                     Delachrimo, idem quod delachrimor.
                  
                  
                     Delauo, uare, to waſhe myghtily.
                  
                     Delectamentum, paſtyme, ſolace.
                  
                     Delibatio, taſtynge, or the takynge of aſſay. It is alſo ſacrifyce of meate or drynke.
                  
                     Delibatorium, a place apt for ſuche ſacrifice.
                  
                     Delibare, is alſo to hurte.
                  
                     
                        Deliburus periuriis,
                        Columell. Cellius. Saluit.
                      ſtayned or defyled with periurie.
                  
                     Delicatè, wantonly.
                  
                     Delicia, the tymber,Feſtus. whiche maketh the end of a houſe aboue, callyd a Gable.
                  
                     Deliciares regulae, the iſles at the gables end
                  
                     Delici porci, yonge ſuckynge pygges.Varro. 2.
                  
                  
                     Delingo, linxi, lingere, to lycke of.
                  
                     Delirans, dotynge.
                  
                     Deliratio, dotage, foly.Cicero
                  
                  
                     Deliramentum, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Delius, a, um, of the Ile callyd Delus.
                  
                     Delius natator, was one perfytte in ſwymmyng, which became a prouerbe, that whā a thynge was ſpoken or written, harde to be vnderſtande, and requyred a cunnynge expoſitour, than wolde they ſay, Delio natatore eget, It requyreth a cunnynge or ſubtyll expoſitour.
                  
                     Deludificor, cari, to begyle.
                  
                     
                     Delutamentum, clayenge.
                  
                     Terentius in phorm. Plautus in Menech.
                     Demenſum, a certayne portion of meat and drynke allowed by the moneth to the ſeruantes. It is alſo a meaſure contaynynge foure Romayne buſſhelles.
                  
                     Demeter, the name of Ceres.
                  
                     Demigro, grate, to goo from one houſe, to dwelle in an nother.
                  
                     Vergilius. Georg. 2.
                     Deminuo, nuere, to mynyſhe, or make laſſe.
                  
                     
                        Demi
                              ••
                           ere,
                      to dygge.
                  
                     Demiſsi homines, men fallen from rycheſſe to pouertie.Cice. pro Murena.
                  
                  
                     Demere ſoleas alicui, to pull of ones ſhoes.
                  
                     Demere vngues, to pare ones nayles.
                  
                     Plautus in Auius.
                     Demogorgon, was an enchaunter, whiche was ſuppoſed to be of ſuche excellencye, that he had authoritie ouer all yll ſpirites, whiche made men aferde.
                  
                     
                        Demoli
                              ••
                            culpam,
                      to dyſcharge hym of the faute or blame.
                  
                     Plautus in Bacch.
                     Demolio, idem quod demolior.
                  
                  
                     Demoueo, uere, to remoue!
                  
                     Demuto, tare, to change his maner or facion
                  
                     Denarius, in weight is the ſeuenth parte of an ounce:To
                           •
                         
                        
                           〈…〉
                        
                      In coyne hir was as moche in poyſe and valuation, as our olde ſterlynge grote, of the whiche there wente ſeuen to the ounce.
                  
                     Denaſcor, denaſci, to ceaſſe to be, to dye.
                  
                     Denominatio, the namynge of a thyng.
                  
                     Dens, is alſo euery thynge, wherwith an other thynge may be holden faſte.
                  
                     Dentatus, he that hath great tethe, ſtronge to the, or many tethe.
                  
                     Dentifrangibilum, a thynge wherwith tethe are broken.
                  
                     Denumero, rare, to paye money.
                  
                     Denunciatio, menaſſynge.
                  
                     Caeſar. Cicer pro Placco.
                     Denunciatio teſtimonij, an iniūction to apere
                  
                     Deoro, rare, among our lawyers, is to perpleade, or to conclude in pleadynge.
                  
                     Deorſum uerſum, downe ryght.
                  
                     Terent. in Adelphis.
                     Depaciſcor, ſci, to make couenant, to agree vpon certayne couenantes.
                  
                     Depaupero, rare, to impoueryſſhe, or make poore. Depectus, kempte.
                  
                     Dependere operā, to take pein about a thing
                  
                     Depingo, xi, gere, to paynt a thynge to the quycke, alſo to reporte.
                  
                     Deprecatio, whan we confeſſe that we haue offended.
                  
                     Deprecator, he that ſueth or intreatethe for another man, that he ſhuld nat be puniſhed.
                  
                     Depreſſus, a, um, lowe.
                  
                     plautus in paenulo. Terentius
                     Depropero, rare, to make moche haſte.
                  
                     Depugnatus, ta, tum, well fought.
                  
                     Deputare rationes, to reken, or make accōpt
                  
                     Derado, ſi, dere, to ſhaue of, or barke of.
                  
                     Deriduculum, a ſkorne or mocke.
                  
                     
                        Deripere aliquem capillo,
                        Plautus in Menech.
                      to pull one downe by the heare of the heed.
                  
                     Derogito, to make inſtant deſyre,Plautus in Aſina. to praye hartylye.
                  
                     Des, a poyſe of eyght ounces.
                  
                     Deſcendere in ſeſe, to humble hym ſelfe.Perſius
                  
                  
                     Deſcenſus, ſus, a goynge downe.
                  
                     Deſcenſio, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Deſeco, care, to cutte.
                  
                     Deſedeo, dere, to ſytte downe.
                  
                     Deſertor, he that leaueth his countrey, and gothe to his ennemyes.
                  
                     Deſeruire ſtudijs, to apply lernyng or ſtudy.Plinius in Epiſtolis. Plautus. Terentius
                  
                  
                     Deſideo, ſedi, deſidere, to ſytte ſtylle, to abyde in a place.
                  
                     Deſido, ſedi, ſidere, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Deſignare, to chefe a thynge, and appoynte it for ſome purpoſe.
                  
                     Deſiſtere litibus, to leaue ſuite.Terent. in phormi.
                  
                  
                     Deſpectio, a lokynge downewarde.
                  
                     Deſpicor, cari, to deſpiſe or diſprayſe.
                  
                     Deſpicatus, tus, diſprayſe.plautus in Milite.
                  
                  
                     Deſpoliare digitos, to pulle the rynges of from ones fyngers.
                  
                     
                        Deſpondere prouinciam,
                        Cicero de prouinc. coniu.
                      to gyue charge or rule of a countrey.
                  
                     Deſponſo, are, to affiance a woman.
                  
                     Deſtinare, is alſo to ſende.Iuuenalis.
                  
                  
                     De ſubito, ſodaynely.
                  
                     Deſudaſco, ſcere, to labour vntyll he ſweat.
                  
                     Deſuefactus, out of cuſtome, or vſe.
                  
                     Deſydero, rare, to deſyre.
                  
                     Deſyderati, men deed, proprely in battayle.
                  
                     Deſyderium, deſyre, alſo ſpeciall loue.Cicero
                  
                  
                     Deſyderatio, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Detrecto, tare, to refuſe to do a thynge, or nat to doo it.
                  
                     Detrudere, to ſette forthe one by force.
                  
                     Detrudere regno, to putte oone oute of his royaulme.
                  
                     Deturbare aliquem aedibus, to thruſte oone out of the houſe.
                  
                     Deuerbium, the laſte ende of a worde.
                  
                     Deuerſus, tourned downewarde.
                  
                     Deuoro, rare, to deuoure.
                  
                     
                        Deuorare dicta,
                        Plautus in Aſina.
                      to take good heede vnto wordes. Deuorare libros, to reade bokes with ardent deſyre.
                  
                     
                        Deuorare moleſtiam paucorum dierū,
                        Ci. in phili.
                      to indure peyne or diſpleaſure for a lytel while.
                  
                     
                        Deuorare nomen alicuius,
                        Plautus in Trin
                              •
                           mo. Ci. in Bru.
                      to forgete a mans name. Deuorare orationem, to here a taale without takynge any hede of it.
                  
                     Deunx, deuncis, xi. tymes the meaſure callid Cyathus, whiche was as moch as a temperate man vſed to drynke at .xi. draughtes.
                  
                     Dextans .x. tymes the meſure callid Ciathus
                  
                     Dextera uel dextra, the ryght hande. ſometyme on the right ſyde.
                  
                     
                     Dextram dexirae cōmittete, to promyſe faith and trouthe in hande.
                  
                     Laur. Val.
                     Dextimus, olde writers vſed for dexter.
                  
                     Dextero, rare, to leade in the ryght hande.
               
            
            
               
                  D ANTE I.
                  
                     
                        DIabath
                              ••
                           ,
                      ſhowes that the grekes vſid
                  
                     Diaulus, a meaſure of grounde contaynyng two furlong, euery furlong beinge of .Cxxv. fete.
                  
                     Diacodion, a ſyrope made of the heedes of popye and water.
                  
                     Dibaplia, purple twyſe dyed.
                  
                     Terentius in phorm. Plautus in Auiui. Terentius in phormi. Ci. in Ver.
                     Dicam impingere, to bryng an action againſt one, or to laye agaynſt ones charge.
                  
                     Dicam ſcribere alicui, to enter an action agaynſte one.
                  
                     Dichas, a meaſure of two palmes, or .viii. fyngers.
                  
                     Dicare operam ſuam, to offre his ſeruyce.
                  
                     Dicere nummos, to promyſe money.
                  
                     Saluſti. in hiſto.
                     Dicere ex animo, to ſpeke as a man thinketh
                  
                     Dicere ex tempore, to make an oration without ſtudy. alſo to ſpeake vnaduyſedly.
                  
                     Dicere, is alſo to call a thynge by a name.
                  
                     Plautus in curgul. Ibidem.
                     
                        Dicaſsis, for dicas.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Dice, for dic.
                     
                  
                  
                     Dictamen, a thyng writen by an other mans inſtruction.
                  
                     Dictare rationem, to yelde accompte.
                  
                     Plautus in Amph.
                     Dictatum, a mynute gyuen by one ſo an nother, to write a letter by.
                  
                     Dictito, to tell a thynge ofte.
                  
                     Didragma, a coyne, whiche was of the value of .viii. of the money callyd Seſterciil, whiche of oure moneye is two olde ſterlynge grotes.
                  
                     Didymus, is in latyne Geminus, in engliſhe, one man double as moche as an other.
                  
                     Diffarreatio, a certayne ſacrifyce, whyche was betwene a man and his wife.
                  
                     Differitas, olde wryters vſed for Differentia, dyfference.
                  
                     Differre, ſitim, to endure thyrſte.
                  
                     pli. in epi.
                     Differre vadimonium, to gyue to one a longer day of apparaunce.
                  
                     Differre famam alicui, to ſprede ones name abroode.
                  
                     Differri, to be ſoo vexed in mynde, that a man wotteth nat what to doo.
                  
                     Plautus in Ciſtell.
                     Difficultas, difficultie.
                  
                     Difficulter, with great peyne or labour.
                  
                     
                        Difficul, for difficile
                     .
                  
                     Difflo, are, to blowe downe.
                  
                     Plautus in Mill. Iou
                           ••
                        s.
                     Digeſtio, dygeſtion, dyſtribution.
                  
                     Digiti, ar muſkyls, or a like kind of ſhel fiſhe
                  
                     Digitum tollere, to fauour a matter.
                  
                     Digitus, is alſo a meſure, being of the bredth of foure cornes of wheate layde togyther.
                  
                     Digitulus, a lyttoll fynger.
                  
                     Digladiatio, a fyght, a ſtryfe, a debate.
                  
                     Dignatio, greate eſtimation, ſometyme fauour, or familyaritie with noble men.
                  
                     Digreſſus, a departynge.
                  
                     Diligenter, dilygently, aduyſedly.
                  
                     Dilucidé, euydently.
                  
                     Dimiſſoriae literae, letters myſſiue.
                  
                     Dimixos, a lampe with two lyghtes.
                  
                     Dinumero, rare, to paye money.
                  
                     Diobolaris, a common and vyle harlot.
                  
                     Diomedes, a noble captayne of the Grekes at the ſyege of Troye.
                  
                     Dipſaeus, a wylde taſyll.
                  
                     Dirimere litem, to make an ende of a matter in varyaunce or ſuite.Cicero
                  
                  
                     Ditimere actionem, to delaye
                        •
                      matter.
                  
                     Dirimere ſocietarem, to breake felowſhyp.
                  
                     Diripere oppidum, to ſacke a towne.Plinius.
                  
                  
                     Dituo, rui, ruere, to breke down to the groūd
                  
                     Dirutus, ta, tum, broken down to the ground dyſtroyed.
                  
                     Diſcalceo, ceare, to pull of ones ſhoes.
                  
                     Diſcalceatus, vnſhodde.
                  
                     Diſcedere in diuerſa, to be of ſondry opiniōs
                  
                     Diſcernere armis, to fyght in battayle.
                  
                     Diſcupio, to deſyre very moche.
                  
                     Diſcurſus, runnynge hyther and thyther.plautus in paenulo.
                  
                  
                     Diſcutere, to diſſolue humours gathered into an impoſtume.
                  
                     Diſcuſſoria medicamēta, medicins which do diſſolue or breke thinges congelid or tough.
                  
                     Disiunctio, a ſeparation.
                  
                     Disiunctus, ta, tum, ſeparate.
                  
                     Diſpar, vnlyke, vnmete.
                  
                     Diſparo, rare, to ſeuer.
                  
                     Diſparatum, is that whych is ſeparate from any thynge by layenge to his contrary.
                  
                     Diſpartior, tiri, to diuyde, or be dyuided.
                  
                     Diſpeream, I praye god that I dye: it is a worde vſed in the ſteede of an othe, in the affirmance or denyenge of a matter.
                  
                     Diſperij, I am vndone.
                  
                     Diſpliceo, cêre, to diſpleaſe.plautus in ciſtell.
                  
                  
                     Diſplicina, ſhe that hath diſpleaſed.
                  
                     Diſpolio, idem quod deſpolio.
                  
                  
                     Diſpoliabulum, a deſpoyle,plautus in Bacch. a place where all myſchiefe or robbery is done.
                  
                     Diſpudet, I am aſhamed, or he is aſſhamed of that, whiche is done.
                  
                     Diſſoluere, to pay that whiche is owed.Terent. in phorm. Plautus in Mercator.
                  
                  
                     Diſſoluere aliquem, to deſpatche one from a longe taryenge.
                  
                     Diſſuadere, to turne one frō doing of a thing
                  
                     Diſſuo, ere, to vndoo a thynge.
                  
                     
                        Diſt
                              •
                           det,
                      I am wery of a thynge.
                  
                     Diſtinctio, diſtinction, ſeparation.
                  
                     Diſtincté, diſtinctly in order, as it may welle be vnderſtande and perceyued.
                  
                     
                     Terent. in Eunucho.
                     Diſtorqueo, ſi, quere, to ſorte awrie. Ah illud uide, os ut ſibi cariufex diſtorſit, O, loke how the hangeman ſetteth his mouthe awaye.
                  
                     Plin. de uiris illuſtr. Plautus in Trucu.
                     Diſtractus, ta, tum, pullyd on ſunder.
                  
                     Diſtractio, a pullynge away or a ſunder.
                  
                     Diſtricte, ſtraytely.
                  
                     Diſtrunco, care, to cutte in two pieces.
                  
                     Plautus in 
                           •
                        acch.
                     Diuidia, buſynes, trouble, variance.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶D, ANTE O.
                  
                     Plautus in capt Idē in Aul. In amphit.
                     DAre in ruborem, to make aſhamed.
                  
                     Dare inſidias, to deceyue one.
                  
                     Dare iusiurandum, to take an othe.
                  
                     Do lego, I gyue by teſtament or laſte wyll.
                  
                     Dare malum alicui, to do one a ſhrewd turne
                  
                     Dare manus, to yelde hym ſelf vanquiſhed.
                  
                     Dare mancipio, to delyuer on warrantiſe. Suo periculo is emat, qui eam mercabitur, mancipio ne
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         promitret,
                     Plautus in p
                           •••
                        a. 
                     ne
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         quis
                           
                              
                           
                           quam
                         dabit, He that wyll haue her, let hym bye her at his owne peryll: for no man ſhall promyſe or delyuer her on warrantiſe.
                  
                     Dare mutnum, to lende.
                  
                     Dare vitio, to diſprayſe.
                  
                     Plautus 
                           〈◊〉
                         in 
                           〈◊〉
                         in 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                     Danunt idem quod dant, they gyue.
                  
                     Datu meo, of my gyfte.
                  
                     Datarius, a, um, that whiche is to gyue.
                  
                     Datatim ludere, to toſſe frome one to an nother, as men playe at tenys.
                  
                     Doctor, he that teacheth other.
                  
                     Doccus, a tymber piece.
                  
                     Dodrans, is alſo .ix. of the meaſures, callyd Cyath
                        •
                     , alſo .ix. inches in length or bredth.
                  
                     Dogmariſtes, he that folowethe an nother mans doctrine.
                  
                     Dolenter, ſorowfully.
                  
                     Dolium, a veſſel for wyne, ſom call it a tūne, and conteyneth .xxx. of the olde meaſures callyd Amphoras.
                  
                     Doloro, aui, are, to cauſe one to haue ſorow or peyne.
                  
                     Domi, at home.
                  
                     Domo, from home.
                  
                     Domum, to the howſe, or home, ſometyme at home.
                  
                     Cicero de diuinatiōe Tibullus.
                     Domuitio, a departynge home.
                  
                     Do mitus, ta, tum, made tame, ſubdewed, or vanquyſſhed.
                  
                     Domator, idem quod domitor.
                  
                  
                     Dominus, is alſo an owner.
                  
                     Domina, the lady or maiſtreſſe.
                  
                     Dominatus, tus, domynation, or authorytie ouer other, mayſterſhyp.
                  
                     Domus, is ſometyme a temple or churche. alſo a familye or kynrede, alſoo a mannes countrey, alſo a neſte of byrdes.
                  
                     Donaticae coronae, garlandes that in the olde tyme were worne in playes.
                  
                     
                        Dormire in vttamuis aurem,
                        Terent. in Heauto.
                      is a prouerbe whiche ſygnifyeth to be without any maner of care. It may be engliſhed, To ſlepe ſoundly on bothe ſydes.
                  
                     Dormiſco, ſcere, to begynne to ſlepe.Plautus in curcu. in Trinum.
                  
                  
                     Dormitator, a ſleaper.
                  
                     Dormitorium, that whiche pertayne the to ſleape.
                  
                     Dorophorus, he that caryeth a preſent.Vergilius. Seruius.
                  
                  
                     Dorſum in mari, a heape of ſande gathered in the ſee, which watermen do cal a ſhelpe.
                  
                     Dorſus, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Dotes animi, the gyftes of grace.
                  
                     Dotes corporis, the gyftes of nature.
                  
                     Doxa, in greke, ſygnifyeth opinion, ſommetyme glorye.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶D ANTE R.
                  
                     DRachma, the coyne, which is in value v.d.ob. halfe farthyng. ſomwhat leſſe, after fyfty of them to fyue crownes of the ſonne.
                  
                     Dracaena, the female dragon.
                  
                     Draguntea, an herbe callid dragons.
                  
                     Dragma auri, a coyne whiche in value was as moche as one ounce & a halfe of ſiluer.
               
            
            
               
                  D ANTE V.
                  
                     DVbenus, old writers vſed for dominꝰ.
                  
                     Dubitatim, doubtfully.Vergilius.
                  
                  
                     Ducere animo, to thynke.
                  
                     Ducere bellum, to make warre.
                  
                     Ducere ſpiritum, to drawe breath, to lyne.Ci. ad qui.
                  
                  
                     Ducere vultum, to lowre.
                  
                     Ducere, is alſo to ſuppoſe.Ci. de ami. 
                     Hanc eſſe in te ſapientiam exiſtimant, ut omnia tua in te poſita eſſe ducas, Men thynke that wyſedom to be in you, that ye thinke all that whiche is your owne, to be in youre ſelfe and not in Fortune.
                  
                     Ducere honori, to repute it honourable.Saluſtius in iugurt. Ibidem.
                  
                  
                     Ducere minoris, to ſette leſſe by it.
                  
                     Ducere officij, he ſuppoſid it to be his dutie.
                  
                     Ducere probro, to dyſprayſe.
                  
                     Ducere mortuum, to be deed. Meos ne ego ante oculos illam patiar, alios. amplexarier? mortuum hercle me duco ſatius, Shal I ſuffer hym to imbrace her before myn eyes? by god I had rather be reade.
                  
                     Ductare, to take to wyſe, alſo to eſteme.Plautus in Aſin. Plaut. in perſ
                           •
                        . Terent. in Adelphis.
                  
                  
                     Ductare reſtim, to leade the daunce.
                  
                     Ducatus, the gouernance or condute of mē
                  
                  
                     Ductus, ta, tum, ledde.
                  
                     Ductus, tus, tui, a coundyte, whereby water dothe rounne.
                  
                     Ductor, toris, a guyde.
                  
                     
                        Du
                              •
                           llator,
                      a warryour.Plautus in Capt.
                  
                  
                     
                     Duellica ars, the feate or ſcience of armes.
                  
                     Duicenſus, he that is ſette with an other to pay money for a taxe of ſubſidie.
                  
                     Duidens, a ſhepe of two tethe.
                  
                     Dulceo, cere, to be ſwete.
                  
                     Dulcidulus, a, um, a lyttell ſwete.
                  
                     Dulceſco, ſcere, to be made ſwete.
                  
                     Plautus in Mercator.
                     Dum, as longe as. Vſque ne valuiſti? C. perpetuo recte dum puidem illic fui: Dyddeſte thou well all that while? C. ye alway well, as longe as I was there.
                  
                     Dumoſus, a▪ um, full of brembles.
                  
                     Duodeuiginti, eyghtene.
                  
                     Duodecim, twelue.
                  
                     Duodecimus, a, um, the twelf.
                  
                     Duonum, olde wryters vſed for bonum.
                  
                  
                     Dupliciter, two wayes.
                  
                     Duricoria, thynges which haue harde ſkins
                  
                     Duricors, dis, harde harted.
                  
                     Duratus, ta, tum, hardned.
                  
                     Duro ingenio, dull wytted.
                  
                     Duré, cruelly.
                  
                     Duriter, with moche payne.
                  
                     Duricles, rudeneſſe, rygour.
               
            
            
               
                  D, ANTE Y.
                  
                     ¶Dynaſtea, a rule or gouernaunce.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     
                        EFOR THE MORE parte ſignifieth of.
                  
                     Ere náta, conſyderynge the matter.
                  
                     Ere nata mellꝰ fieri haud potuit, quam factum eſt: Cōſideringe the matter, or as the matter chaunced, it coulde not haue bene better done than it was.
                  
                     Eregione, on the other parte, on the other ſyde agaynſte.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶E ANTE B.
                  
                     EBeati, they whiche from great proſperitie are fallen into myſery.
                  
                     Ebeo, are, to bringe out of proſperitie.
                  
                     Ebibo, bibere, to drynke all out.
                  
                     Eboracum, a citie in England, called Yorke.
                  
                     Eblandior, iri, to gette a thynge by flatery: alſo to lyke.Ci. ad Att. Id
                           •
                        
                        ̄ planc. Columell.
                  
                  
                     Eblanditus, ta, tum, goten by flatery.
                  
                     Ebriolus, la, lum, a lyttel drunke, or a lyttle perſone drunke.
                  
                     Laberius. pla. in aul.
                     Ebriulo, are, to make drunke.
                  
                     Ebriatus, drunke.
                  
                     Ebullo, are, to boble out, or braſte out.
                  
                     Ebulus, an herbe called walworte, which is lyke to yonge elder tree.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶E ANTE C.
                  
                     ECaſtor, an othe of the paynymes.Plautus in mercator.
                  
                  
                     Ecce me, lo here I am.
                  
                     Eccere, ſome vſed it for an othe, as it were, by Ceres: ſome onelye for Ecce, lo nowe, or ſe nowe.
                  
                     
                        Eccillum, for ecce illum,
                      ſee hym.Plautus. Terentius
                  
                  
                     
                        Ecciſtam, for ecce iſtam,
                      ſe her.
                  
                     Echnephias, a ſtorme, where a cloude is broken and falleth.
                  
                     Echi, lyttel narowe valeys or daies betwene two hylles.Columel.
                  
                  
                     Econtra, contrary wyſe.Ci. in phil.
                  
                  
                     Ecorapeli, they which abhorre the common facion or olde vſages.
                  
                     Ectypum, that whiche is made accordynge to a paterne.
               
            
            
               
                  E, ANTE D.
                  
                     EDem, ſignifieth pleaſure, dilectation.
                  
                     Edētatꝰ, he that hath his teth takē out.
                  
                     
                        Edicto, tare,
                        Plautus in Epidic.
                      to declare or pronounce often tymes.
                  
                     Edictio, idem quod edictum.
                  
                  
                     Edor, ederis, edi, to be eaten.
                  
                     Edo, edis, edidi, edere, to execute or doo a thynge, or to cauſe a thynge to be done.
                  
                     Edere annos, to tell what age a man is o
                        •
                     .
                  
                     Edere cedes, to make great ſlaughter.
                  
                     Edere clamorem, to cry out.
                  
                     Edere exemplum, to ſhewe an exaumple.
                  
                     Edere foetus, to brynge forth fruite.
                  
                     Edere iudicium, to reherce the iugement.Cicero
                  
                  
                     Edere librum, to publyſhe a boke.
                  
                     Edere ludos, & ſpectacula, to cauſe playes and pageantes to be ſhewed to the people
                  
                     Edere nomen, to tell his name to be written or regeſtrid.
                  
                     Edere oracula, to gyue anſweres, as the diuell dyd in the ydolles of paynymes.
                  
                     Edere praelium, & bellum, to make warre.
                  
                     Edere rationem, to yelde accompte.
                  
                     Edere riſus, to lawghe.
                  
                     Edere ſcelus, to commyt a myſcheuouſe act.
                  
                     Edere ſcriptum, to ſhewe by wrytynge.
                  
                     Edere ſpiritum, to dye.
                  
                     Edere ſtragem, to make a greate ſlawghter of men.
                  
                     
                        Edititius iudex,
                        Cicer. pr
                              •
                            planco.
                      a iudge whom the one parte hath choſen.
                  
                     Edoceo, cui, cêre, to inſtructe or informe one of a thynge.
                  
                     
                        Edo
                              •
                           miſco, ſcere,
                      to ſlepe ſoundely.
                  
                     Edormiſcere crapulam, to ſlepe vntyll he be ſober agayne.
                  
                     Educere, ſometyme ſygnifyeth educate.Plautus. Te. in Ad.
                  
                  
                     Eduro, rare, to make very harde.
               
            
            
               
               
                  E ANTE F.
                  
                     EFfaſcino, nare, to bewytche any thing, as wytches doo, whyche diſfygure chyldren, and diſtroye grayne and other thynges with ſorcery.
                  
                     Effata, were certayne prayers, whiche the diuinours vſed to make at the end of their diuination or telling the ſucceſſe of thingis
                  
                     Effectum dare, to brynge to paſſe.
                  
                     Terent. in Adelphis. Cicer. her tenſio.
                     Efferre ſeſe, to prayſe hym ſelfe.
                  
                     Effere manum, to lyfte vp his hande.
                  
                     Effere aliquem laudibus, to extolle oone with prayſes.
                  
                     Efferre, to deuulgate, or to telle abrode.
                  
                     Efferre, to aduaunce or promote.
                  
                     Effero, rare, to make woode as a beaſte.
                  
                     Efferueo, êre, to boyle moche.
                  
                     Efferueſco, ſcere, to begyn to boyle or ſethe.
                  
                     Cicero de oratore. Plautus in Caſina.
                     Efferueſcentia uerba, hotte angry wordes.
                  
                     
                        Effexis, for effeceris
                     .
                  
                     Efficere argentum alicui, to gette money for a man by ſome meane or deuyſe.
                  
                     Efficientia, idem quod effectus.
                  
                  
                     Effigio, are, to counterfayte ones ymage in payntynge or keruynge.
                  
                     Effilo, lare, to ſowe.
                  
                     Effilatum, that whiche is ſowed or ſtitched on a garment, as a garde or purfle.
                  
                     Plautus in 
                           〈◊〉
                        . Plaut. in 
                           〈◊〉
                        . Plautus in 
                           〈◊〉
                         Ci. de 
                           〈◊〉
                        . Terent. in Eunucho. Cice. 
                           •••
                        e.
                     Effio, fieri, to be doone.
                  
                     Effligo, flixi, fligere, to tourment.
                  
                     Efflare, animam, to dye.
                  
                     Efflauit animam ſpes, I haue noo maner of hope or truſte.
                  
                     Effiuet, it ſhall oute, I wylle nat keepe it, all men ſhall knowe it.
                  
                     Effluxit, it is quyte gone.
                  
                     Effoetus, ta, tum, hatched, as a byrde that is come out of the egge.
                  
                     Effoetum corpus, a weake body.
                  
                     Effreno, nare, to vnbrydell.
                  
                     Effringo, effregi, gere, to breake to pieces.
                  
                     Effractus fame, made feble for lack of meate
                  
                     Effugit memoria, to be forgotten.
                  
                     Plautus in Bacch. Terent. in Andria. Pli. in epi. & in pane.
                     Effugere nuptias, not to be maried.
                  
                     Effuſé, effuſius, effuſiſsime, abundantly, more vehemently, excedyngly.
               
            
            
               
                  E ANTE G.
                  
                     EGens eſt conſilij, he lacketh counſayle
                  
                     Egeria, was an ydol, to whom women with chyld dyd offer, ſuppoſyng that therby they ſhulde trauayle eaſily.
                  
                     Egerit aquam fons, the fountayne pouſheth out water.
                  
                     Egeſtio, onis, diſtribution abrode, it is alſo the puttynge forthe of ordure or dunge.
                  
                     Ego, I.
                  
                     Egomet, I my ſelfe.Terent. in Eunucho.
                  
                  
                     Ego ne, who I.
               
            
            
               
                  E ANTE H, & I.
                  
                     EHem, is a worde ſpoken, whan a man is moued with ſome thynge, which is newly hapned.
                  
                     Eheu, alaſſe.
                  
                     
                        Eho 
                              〈◊〉
                           ,
                      howe ſerra, whan one calleth a man to hym, forgettynge his name.
                  
                     Eiectus, ta, tum, caſte oute.
                  
                     Eiecto, tare, to throwe oute.
                  
                     Eiulatio, a brayenge out with lamentation.
                  
                     Eiurare, to renounce,
                  
                     Eiuratio, renouncynge.
               
            
            
               
                  E ANTE L.
                  
                     ELangueo, êre, to be ſycke.
                  
                     Elangueſco, ſcere, to waxe feble.
                  
                     
                        Elauare ſe bonis,
                        Plautus in Aſina.
                      to be cleane waſſhed frome all his goodes, to ſpende all, and leaue nothynge.
                  
                     Elapſus, a, um, eſcaped.
                  
                     Elapſa eſt ſpes, hope is loſte.
                  
                     Elleborus albus, an herbe callid Lyngwort, the roote wherof is callyd neſyng pouder.
                  
                     Elleborus niger, an herbe callid beares fote
                  
                     Elix, licis, a furrow made for water to paſſe.Colu. li. 2.
                  
                  
                     Ellobia, thynges whyche were hanged at the cares of women.
                  
                     
                        Ellum, for ecce illum,
                      ſee where he is.Donatus.
                  
                  
                     Elops, a fyſhe callyd alſo Accipenſer.
                  
                     Eluceo, cere, to ſhyne.Vergilius.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  E ANTE M.
                  
                     EMaciatus, ta, tum, made leane.
                  
                     Emancipatus, ta, tum, alyened.
                  
                     Emancipati, are alſo they, whyche are out of theyr fathers rule, or they,Feſtus. Cic. in catelinā. whyche are made ſubiectes to an nother.
                  
                     Embata, a ſhyppe callyd a barque.
                  
                     Embolium, the argument or fyrſt entree into a playe or interlude.
                  
                     Emboliſmus, the adding of a day in the yere
                  
                     Emeritum ſtipendium, the laſte wages that a man taketh in warres.
                  
                     Emeriti ſenes, olde men excuſed frome labour by age.
                  
                     Emico, care, to ſkyne forthe.
                  
                     Emicare, to daunce or leape.
                  
                     Emigro, grate, to goo frome oone place,Plautus in Aulular. Vergilius. to dwell in an nother.
                  
                     Emmanuel, is interpreted, God is with vs.
                  
                     Emoueo, uere, to put away.
                  
                     Empyrium coelum, the heuen, which is next aboue all the ſeuen ſpheeres, and ſignifieth the fyry heuen.
                  
                     
                        Emu
                              •
                           io, tire,
                      to humme or make anye other ſowne lyke a man that is dumme.
               
            
            
               
               
                  ¶E ANTE N.
                  
                     ENarro, rare, to telle a thyng at length.
                  
                     Enato, tare, to ſwymme out.
                  
                     Encauſtes, he that fourmeth or facyoneth a thynge with fyre.
                  
                     Encauſtice, makyng of images with the fire.
                  
                     Enimuero, forſothe.
                  
                     Enixa, a woman late delyuered of chylde.
                  
                     Sueton. in othone.
                     Enoteſco, ſcere, to come to knowledge.
                  
                     Enterocela, a diſeaſe whan the bowelles be fallen into a mans codde.
                  
                     Enucleaté, clerely.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶E, ANTE O.
                  
                     Sueton. de claris grā.
                     EO ſetius, neuer the leſſe.
                  
                     Eo loci, in that ſtate.
                  
                     Eo inficias, I denye.
                  
                     Eo obniam, I goo to mete with one.
               
            
            
               
                  E, ANTE P.
                  
                     EPacta, thynges added to.
                  
                     Epheſus, a citie in Grece.
                  
                     Ephialtes, is that diſeaſe, which is callyd the mare in ſlepynge.
                  
                     Ephimeron, the great wylde Lylly.
                  
                     Ephod, a ſtole, whiche a prieſte weareth about his necke, whan he is at maſſe.
                  
                     Epicoenum, of bothe kyndes.
                  
                     Epicia, callyd aequum & bonum, equytie, which is iuſtyce without rigour of the law.
                  
                     Epimytheon, the declaration of a fable.
                  
                     Epiphora, a ſyckenes of the eyes, callid the droppynge of the eies.
                  
                     Epiroticus, ca, cum, of the countray callyd Epirus.
                  
                     Eporhedicae, good breakers of horſes.
                  
                     Epulae, larum, a banket made to many ꝑſons
                  
                     Epha, ſeu Ephi, a meſure of the Hebrues or Iewes, contayning .lxxii. times the meaſure callyd Sextarius Atticus. Rede more after in Sextarius.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  E, ANTE Q.
                  
                     EQuiceruus, a beaſte in the oryente, hauynge hornes, and a longe mane to the ſhulders, and a bearde vnder his chyn, and fete rounde lyke a hors, and is as great as an harte.
                  
                     Equiſetum, an herbe callyd horſetayle.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶E ANTE R.
                  
                     ERadico, care, to pluck vp by the rotis.
                  
                     Eradicare aures alterius, to pulle oone harde by the eares.Plautus in Epidico.
                  
                  
                     Eraſus, a, um, raſed or ſcraped out.
                  
                     Erogatio, diſtribution of thynges to other men, a lyberall gyuynge.
                  
                     Erogito, tare, to deſyre hartily.
                  
                     Eros, loue.
                  
                     Erotema, tis, a demaunde.
                  
                     Erotematicus, he that often demaundeth.
                  
                     Errare de verbis alicuius, to myſvnderſtande the wordes that one ſpeaketh.
                  
                     Erratio, a goinge out of the way.Terent. in Adelph.
                  
                  
                     Erratum, an errour.
                  
                     Erumpo, rupi, erumpere, to braſte out, ſome tyme to leape forthe.
                  
                     
                        Erumpet in neruum iſtae
                              •
                            fortitudo,
                        Terent. in phorm. Donatus. Eraſmus in Adag.
                      is a prouerbe, whiche is dyuerſely expounde, for it may ſignifie, This courage of thyne maye brynge the to a halter, or to 
                        •
                     y
                        •
                     te by the heles. or it may ſygnify, This great ſtrength or courage of thine wyl come vnto nothing. whyche prouerbe is taken of archers, whiche oftentymes whan they put forth moſte ſtrength: they breake the ſtrynge of their bowe, and the arowe falleth downe at their fete, wherby the ſhotte is loſte, and cometh to nothynge.
                  
                     Eruptio, is whan an hoſt iſſueth haſtily out of a campe or fortreſſe, and falleth on their ennemies.
                  
                     Eruum, the grene peaſon.
                  
                     Eryngion, an herbe lyke a thyſtel, the rote whereof beinge condite or conſerued in hony with cynamome and cloues, comforteth nature, and ſtyrreth courage, and is of ſome men callyd Yringus.
               
            
            
               
                  E ANTE S.
                  
                     ESalon, is a byrde, which breaketh crowes egges, and her byrdes be diſtroyd by the wolfe, and lykewyſe ſhe kylleth the wolfes whelpis, if ſhe may com by them
                  
                     Eſau, the ſon of Iſaac, & brother of Iacob.
                  
                     Eſſedarius, a charyot man.
                  
                     Eſtrix, a woman rauenour or deuourer.
                  
                     Eſurio, onis, an hungrye felowe.Plautus in perſa. Varro.
                  
                  
                     Eſurigo, ginis, hunger.
               
            
            
               
                  ¶E, ANTE T.
                  
                     ETenim, for, alſo, ſemblably, ſurely.
                  
                     Etiamnae, is it ſo? is that ynough?Plaut. in Aſin. Terent. in Eunucho. Plautus in Amphi
                           •
                        . Cicero de amicitia.
                  
                  
                     Etiamnum, vntyll than, vntyll that time.
                  
                     Etiamnunc, vntyll nowe.
                  
                     Etiamſi, although. Etſi, idem.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  E ANTE V.
                  
                     EVangelia, liorum, pluraliter, were ſacrifices and ſolemne prayers made after good tydynges.
                  
                     
                        Euanno, are,
                        Ci. de fini. Cic. ibidē.
                      to van corne or other like thing
                  
                     Euceria, oportunitie.
                  
                     Eudoxia, good renoume or good fame.
                  
                     Euenit ex ſententia, it camme to paſſe as I,

thou, or he wolde haue it.
                  
                     Euenit praeter ſententiam, aut praeter ſpem, It happened otherwyſe, than I, thou, or he thought, or truſted.
                  
                     Euerriculum, a fyſhynge nette callid a drag.
                  
                     Euerſus, a, um, deſtroyed.
                  
                     Euerſio, deſtruction.
                  
                     Plautus in Menech.
                     Euhoe, a noyſe, whyche they doo make that are in great heuynes and waylyng.
                  
                     Euidenter, clerely.
                  
                     Euiteſco, ſcere, to become grene.
                  
                     Euolo, lare, to flee away. alſo to eſcape, It ſign
                        •
                     fieth ſometyme to take away by ſtelth.Plautus in Cuteli. Terent. in Eunucho.
                  
                  
                     Euoluo, uere, to tourne hyther and thither.
                  
                     Euoluere ſe turba, to wynde hym ſelfe oute of trouble.
                  
                     Euomo, mui, mere, to vomyte, to caſte out.
                  
                     Euomere itam, to wreake anger.
                  
                     Euomere uirus, to ſpytte out his poyſon.
                  
                     Eupatorium, an herbe callyd agrimonye.
                  
                     Euphraſia, an herbe callyd eybright.
                  
                     Eutrapelia, gentylneſſe, good maners.
                  
                     Eutrapelus, gentyll and pleaſant.
                  
                     Euxinus Pontus, a parte of the ſee, whiche diuideth Europa from Aſia.
               
            
            
               
                  E ANTE X.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈1 paragraph〉
                        
                     
                     EXaduerſum, euen agaynſt it, on the other ſyde.
                  
                     Ex aequo & bono facere, to doo iuſtely or indifferently.
                  
                     Ex animo, of good wyll, of a good courage
                  
                     Cic. 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                     Ex dignitate noſtra, accordyng to our 
                        •
                     ſtate or dygnitie.
                  
                     Exacuo, cuere, to make very ſharpe, to ſtere.
                  
                     Exaequo, quare, to make egall.
                  
                     Ti. Liuius. Plautus in Trucu.
                     Exaeuio, uire, to waxe gentyll or mylde,
                  
                     Exagogae, they whyche carie anye thynge out of the houſe.
                  
                     Exagoga, rente, reuenues.
                  
                     Plin.
                     Exalburno, nare, to take out the farte iuyce that is in ſome wodde.
                  
                     Exaluminati, orient perles.
                  
                     Examen, is alſo examination or triall.
                  
                     Examina inſantium, a companye or ſorte of chylderne.
                  
                     Plautus in Truculen. Cic. Tuſc. Cicero de amicitia.
                     Examo, mare, to loue well.
                  
                     Exanclo, is alſo to vanquyſhe.
                  
                     Exardeo, ſi, dêre, to be vehemently inflamid.
                  
                     Exardeſco, ſcere, to waxe hotte, or to be vehement.
                  
                     Plautus in Mili. Plautus in Capt.
                     Exarco, rêre, to be drye.
                  
                     Exaugeo, gêre, to increaſe moche.
                  
                     Exauſpicaui ex vinculis, I haue had yll lucke ſens I came out of priſon.
                  
                     Excalceo, ceaui, are, to pull of hoſen or ſhoes
                  
                     Excalfacio, cere, to make very hotte.
                  
                     Terent. in Andria.
                     Exceſsit ex ephebis, he paſſed boyes age.
                  
                     Excedere puetis, 
                     idem.
                     Cice. pro Archia. Plinius in Epiſtolis.
                  
                  
                     Excedere officium, to do more than duetie.
                  
                     Excellens, excellent, ſurmountynge.
                  
                     Excelſitas animi, the valyantnes or heighte of courage.
                  
                     Excidere formula, to loſe his action.Sueton. in Claud.
                  
                  
                     Excidit numero ciuium, he is not of the nū
                     ber of citelyns.
                  
                     Excidit animo, it is out of my mynde.
                  
                     Excido, cidi, cidere, to diſtroy. alſo to cut out of a quarrye of ſtone.
                  
                     Excipere, to take vnwares or ſodaynly.
                  
                     Excipere furem, to receyue a felone,Plinius in Aulul. as an acceſſarye.
                  
                     Excogito, tare, to fynd or inuent by thinking.
                  
                     Excogitatio, inuention.
                  
                     Excoquo, quere, to boyle a thynge vntylle it be drye.
                  
                     Excrucio, are, to tourment.plautus in ciſtell.
                  
                  
                     Excruciabilis, le, worthy to be tourmented.
                  
                     Excubo, bare, to kepe watche.
                  
                     Exculco, care, to treade out, or wryng out.
                  
                     Exculpo, pſi, pere, to graue or intayle ymages, alſo to get any thing by bering of one.
                  
                     Exculpere oculum, to thruſte out ones cie.Terentius in phormi. Varro. Plautus in Pſeud. Plautus in Caſina Plautus in Moſtel.
                  
                  
                     Excurio, are, to put out of company.
                  
                     Excuro, rare, to dreſſe a thynge curiouſly.
                  
                     Excuratus uictus, meate curiouſly dreſſed.
                  
                     Excuratus homo, a galyarde felowe.
                  
                     Excurro, rere, to runne out of a place.
                  
                     Excurſus, ſus, where one paſſeth his boūdes
                  
                     Excurſor, a currour.
                  
                     Excuſabilis, le, that whiche may be excuſed.
                  
                     Excuſatius, more excuſed.Plinius.
                  
                  
                     Excutere aliquē, to robbe one, to ſhake oone out of his clothes.
                  
                     Excutiunt cerebrum tua dicta, thy wordes do trouble my brayne.
                  
                     Excutere iugum, to ſhake of the yoke.
                  
                     Excutere lachrymas alicui, to make the teares come out of ones eyes.
                  
                     Excutere uomitum, to make one to ſpue.
                  
                     Excuſsi grandluae, beaten with hayle ſtones.pli. in epi. Ci. in phil.
                  
                  
                     Excutere, is alſo to cheſe. Inuentutem ex tota Aſia excuſsimus, 
                     
                        •
                     e haue choſen oute all the yonge men that are in Aſia.
                  
                     Exector, idem quod execto.
                  
                  
                     Exegeticon, idem quod expoſitiuū, uel enarratiuum, by the whyche oone expoundeth or declareth a thynge.
                  
                     Exit in fabulam, it is made a tale.
                  
                     Exequi mortem, to dye.Plautus in pſeudolo. plautus in Trinum. plautus in Milite.
                  
                  
                     Exequi ſermonem, to ſpeake.
                  
                     Exercere aetatem, to lyue.
                  
                     Exercere Bacchanal, to be drunke.
                  
                     Exercitatus, exercyſed.
                  
                     Exerere uincula, to ſtryke of his gyues, or to take out of priſon.
                  
                     Exfodio, dere, to dygge out.
                  
                     
                     Exgurgito, tare, to take or caſte out of the chanell or ſtreame.
                  
                     Exhaeredatus, diſinherited.
                  
                     Exhaereſimus dies, the daye whiche maketh the leape yere.
                  
                     Exhaurire labores, to ſpende labour.
                  
                     Exhebenum, a ſtone wherwith gold ſmyths. do polyſhe golde
                  
                     Exhibere rationes, to make accompt▪
                  
                  
                     Exhibere ſpectaculum, to make commune playes or triumph.
                  
                     Exhillaro, rare, to comforte or reioyce.
                  
                     Plautus. Pli. in epi. plautus in Mercator. plin. de viris illuſt. Ci. in Ver. Cic. in oratore.
                     Exigere aetatem, to lyue.
                  
                     Exigere tempus, to paſſe forth the tyme.
                  
                     Exigi matrimonio, to be deuorced.
                  
                     Exigere ſupplicium ab aliquo, to puniſh one.
                  
                     Exigere nomina, to compell menne to paye their dettes.
                  
                     Exacta aetate, at the laſt ende of age.
                  
                     Exacto menſe, the moneth paſſed.
                  
                     Exiguus, a, um, lyttell.
                  
                     Exilica cauſa, a matter agaynſt them, whych were in exile.
                  
                     Exigué, an Aduerbe, whiche ſignifieth verye lyttell.
                  
                     Columel.
                     Exilis, le, ſclender, ſmalle.
                  
                     Eximiè, excellently.
                  
                     Eximius, a, um, excellent.
                  
                     Ci. in Ver. Cicero de oratore.
                     Eximere ex reis, to acquite one of an offence
                  
                     Eximere ex aerarils, where one hath his Qui etus eſt in the eſcheker, or other like place, to diſcharge one vpon his account.
                  
                     Tit. Li. 8.
                     Eximere noxae, to releaſe one of a treſpaſſe commytted.
                  
                     Eximere actionē, to barre one of his action.
                  
                     V
                           •
                        p
                           •
                        a. titulo Ex quibus cauſia. Plautus in milite.
                     Exinde, idem quod exin, afterwarde, from thenſeforthe.
                  
                     Exloquor, qui, to ſpeake as it is, to ſpeke all.
                  
                     Exobſecro, crare, to make great deſyre.
                  
                     Exoculatus, whoſe eyes be put out.
                  
                     Exoculo, lare, to put out ones eies.
                  
                     Plautus in Ruden.
                     Exoculaſſo, ſere, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Exodia, were alſo wanton toyes myxte with verſes in a comedy or interlude.
                  
                     Exonero, rare, to diſcharge or vnburdeyn.
                  
                     Exopto, tare, to deſyre feruently, or wyſſhe.
                  
                     Plautus in Epidico. Ci. in ph
                           •
                        . Plautus in 
                           •
                        acch.
                     Exotheo, bui, bere, to ſucke vp.
                  
                     Exorbo, bare, to make oone that he canne nat ſee.
                  
                     Exorare ueniam, to aſke pardon.
                  
                     Exorabilis, he that is eaſye to be intreated in a matter.
                  
                     pli. in epi. Plautus in cafin. Donatius. Terent. in Adelphis.
                     Expalleo, lui, lere, to be pale.
                  
                     Expallio, aui, are, to rob one of his garmētis.
                  
                     Expectatus, ta, tum, deſyred.
                  
                     Expectati parentes, were yll parentes, and worthye to be hated, as who ſaythe, their death were dayly to be deſyred.
                  
                     Donatus.
                     Expeciario, deſyre of thynges certayn and loked for.
                  
                     
                        Expedire ſe cur
                              •
                           ,
                      to diſcharge hym of care.Terentius in phorm.
                  
                  
                     Expedire rationes, to diſpatche matters.
                  
                     Expedi, telle on quyckely.Terentius in Eunuch. 
                           •
                        dē in pho. pli. in epi. Plautus in Truculen.
                  
                  
                     Expedire rem, to declare the matter plainly.
                  
                     Expeditum erat, it was expedient.
                  
                     Expedibo, for expediam.
                  
                     Expeditus, diſpatched.
                  
                     Expendere ſcelus, to be punyſhed iuſtly for his offence.
                  
                     
                        Expendere,
                        Vergillus. aeneld. 2.
                      is alſo to examyn and to cōſider
                  
                     Expenſum, uel expenſam, hath alſo an other propre ſignification.Caeliꝰ Ci. 
                     Mentio facta eſt de legione ea, quā expanſam tulit C. Caeſari Pom peius. Mencion was made of the legyon, whiche Pompeye reckened to be atte the charge of Ceſar. Creditores ſuae negligentiae expenſum ferre debent,
                     Secuola. quae in fraudē. L. pupilius. Cicero The creditours ought to beare the loſſe, whiche is hapned by their neglygence.
                  
                     Experge te, awake.
                  
                     Expergere facias, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Expergitus, wakened by an nother.Feſtus. Plautus in Amphitri. plautus in paenulo.
                  
                  
                     Expetunt multa iniqua, many vnhappy thinges chaunceth.
                  
                     Expetit tuam aetatem illud facere, thyne age requyreth to do it.
                  
                     Expetere, is alſo to pourchace.Plautus in Ruden. 
                     Mirum quin tuum ius meo periculo expetam, It is meruayle but that I ſhall pourchaſe thy ryghte with my great danger. It is alſo to redoūde or tourne. Nam deum non par uidetur facere,
                     Plautus in Amphit. 
                     delictum ſuū, ſuam
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         culpam expetere in mortalem ut ſinat▪
                      It is nat ſyttynge for god to doo, that his offence and faute, ſhoulde redounde to a mortall perſon.
                  
                     Expetendus, da, dum, worthy to be deſyred.Plaut. in perſa. Plautus in Trinſimo. Aſconius. Ci. in Ver. Cicero in piſonem.
                  
                  
                     Expeteſſo, ſere, to demaunde.
                  
                     Expetiſſo, ſere, to deſyre vehemently.
                  
                     Expilator, a robber, which leaueth nothing behynde hym.
                  
                     Expiare ſcelera. Tua ſcelera dis immortales in noſtros milites expiauerunt, God hathe punyſſhed oure menne of armes for thyne offences.
                  
                     Expiamentum, ſatisfaction.
                  
                     Explanto tare, to pull vp that whiche is ſet.Columell. Sueton. in Tito. Te. in Hec.
                  
                  
                     Explendeſco, ſcere, to appere clerely.
                  
                     Exple animum curis, put all care oute of thy mynde.
                  
                     
                        Explicare,
                        Plautus in Epidic. Cicero in piſonem. pli. in epi. Cic. de ſenectute. Idem de amicitia. Plinius in Epiſtolis.
                      is alſo to telle or ſhewe a thynge playnely.
                  
                     Explica aeſtum meum, put me out of this fantaſy or doubte.
                  
                     Exploratū eſt mihi, I know ſurely, I am ſure
                  
                     Exploratum habeo, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Exporto, tare, to beare or carie out.
                  
                     Expreſſe dicere, to ſpeake properly and to the poynte.
                  
                     
                     Exprobratio, a reproche.
                  
                     Terent. in Andri. Terent. in Eunucho. Plautus in milite.
                     Exprompta memoria, a redy wytte.
                  
                     Expuere miſeriam ex animo, to put myſerye clene out from the mynde, to forget miſery.
                  
                     Expurgo, are, to make all cleane.
                  
                     Expurgare ſe, to declare hym ſelfe innocent of that whiche is layde vnto hym.
                  
                     Expurgationem habere, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Columell. planc. Cic. Plautus in curcu.
                     Expurare, is alſo to cut cleane awaye: alſo to coniecte.
                  
                     Exputreſco, ſcere, to rotte.
                  
                     Exquiſitus, ta, tum, exquyſyte, moche ſerched for.
                  
                     Exquiſito opus eſt, it muſt be loked for.
                  
                     Exquiſité et exquiſitim, exquiſitely, with moche ſtudy and diligence.
                  
                     Plautus in Bacch. pli. in pan. Plautus in Bacch.
                     Extendere, is alſo to continue, to prolonge.
                  
                     Extentare uires, to thruſt out ſtrength in doinge a thynge.
                  
                     Extergeo, terſi, tergere, to wype cleane.
                  
                     Extergo, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Exterus, tera, terum, that whyche is not of this countrey or place.
                  
                     Extimeo, mere, to haue great feare.
                  
                     Extirpo pare, to plucke vp by the rootes.
                  
                     Extollere, is alſo to lyfte vp.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈1 paragraph〉
                        
                     
                     Extollere liberos, to brynge vp chyldren: alſo to prolonge: alſo to magnify.
                  
                     Extortus, conſtrayned by tourmentes.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈…〉
                         Cl
                           •••
                        . 
                           〈◊〉
                         T
                           •
                        . Li
                           •
                        ius. Plautus 
                           •
                        ur
                           •
                        cō, ad ex 
                           •
                        iben. plautus in paenulo.
                     Extra precium, aboue any pryce.
                  
                     Extra, excepte.
                  
                     Extra iocum, in erneſte.
                  
                     Extraneꝰ haeres, he that is not the very heire
                  
                     Extraho, traxi, trahere, to drawe out.
                  
                     Extrahere diem, to put of a matter from day to day.
                  
                     Extrahere certamen, to deferre battayle.
                  
                     Extrahere iudicium, to deferre iugement.
                  
                     
                        Exuer
                              •
                           ae,
                      the ſwepynges of a houſe.
                  
                     Exuerto, tere, to preuente.
                  
                     Ex uinculis cauſam dicere, to plede in warde.
                  
                     Exungo, xi, gere, to anoynte.
                  
                     Plautus
                     Exungulo, are, to cut of ones nayles.
                  
                     Exuere, is alſo to depryue.
                  
                     Vergilius.
                     Exue mentem, put away that mynde.
                  
                     Exurgo, gere, to aryſe vp.
               
            
            
               
                  F ANTE A.
                  
                     
                        FACETE, meryly.
                  
                     plautus in Milite. Plautus in capt.
                     Facere aucupiū auribus, to herken as a ſpye.
                  
                     Facere carnificinā, to execute the offyce of an hangeman, in hanging, behedynge, or quarterynge of men.
                  
                     Cic. Cato.
                     Facere caſtra, to ſet a campe.
                  
                     Facere certiorem, to aſcertayne, or aduertiſe one by letters or meſſager.
                  
                     Facere compendiū, to make ſhort, to abrege.Plautus.
                  
                  
                     
                        Facere compot
                              •
                           ,
                      to gyue to one, that thing, whiche he deſyreth.
                  
                     Facere coniecturam, to coniecte or deeme.
                  
                     Facere contumeliam, to do diſpleaſure.Plautus in Aſina. Terent. in phorm.
                  
                  
                     Facere copiam argenti, to lende money.
                  
                     Facere copiam alicuius, to let hym take his pleaſure of one.
                  
                     Facere delitias, to ſpeake for pleaſure,Plautus in paenulo. Cicero in philip. or in mockage.
                  
                     Fac eſſe, admyt that it be ſoo, or put the caſe it be ſoo.
                  
                     Facere fidem, to make one to beleue.
                  
                     Facere frugem, to drynge gaynes.Plautus in paenulo. Cicer. pro cluen. Plautus in curcul. Terentius in Eunuch. Plautus in Amphitri.
                  
                  
                     Facere funus, to miniſter funeralles.
                  
                     Facere gradum, to walke or go a iournay.
                  
                     Facere gratiam; to gyue thanke.
                  
                     Facere gratum, to do pleaſure to one. or to wynne a mans fauour.
                  
                     Facere grauidam, to geate with chylde.
                  
                     Facere iacturam, to haue a great loſſe.
                  
                     Facere inditium, to tell or to gyue warnynge of a thynge that he knoweth.
                  
                     
                        Facere ingenium ſuum,
                        Plautus in Mercator.
                      to do accordynge to his wyt or nature.
                  
                     
                        Facere inſidias,
                        plautus in paenulo. Terentius in phorm.
                      to lye in a wayte to do harme to oone.
                  
                     Facere ludos, to mocke or ſkorne.
                  
                     Facere magni, to eſteme moche.
                  
                     Facere nequiter, to do ſhrewdely.
                  
                     Facere ocium, to gyue to one leyſure.Plaut. in Mili.
                  
                  
                     Facere palam, to tell a thynge abrode.
                  
                     Facere periculum, to proue, to aſſaye.
                  
                     Facere pluris, to ſet more by.
                  
                     Facere propitium, to make hym thyne or his good lorde or mayſter.
                  
                     Facere quaeſtum, to gayne.
                  
                     Facere reducem, to brynge one agayne.Plautus in capt. Terent. in Adelphis.
                  
                  
                     Facere rē, to get profite or gayne by a thing.
                  
                     Facere reum, to accuſe or ſue one in a criminall cauſe.
                  
                     Facere riſum, to laughe.
                  
                     Facere ſcelus, to do a myſcheuous deede.Quintilia.
                  
                  
                     Facere ſementem, to ſowe grayne.Cicero de oratore. plin. de viris illuſtr. Plautus in Amphit. Non. Mar. Plautus in Bacch. Terent. in And. Plautus in Epidico. Ci. in Top plautus in Trucu.
                  
                  
                     Facere ſtipēdia, to be in wages in the warres
                  
                     Facere ſuperbum, to ſle one.
                  
                     Facere technam, to playe a craftye pageant.
                  
                     Facere tranſacta omnia, to brynge all thynges to a poynte.
                  
                     Facere turbas, to make buſyneſſe.
                  
                     Facere uadimonium, to lay in gage or ſuerte.
                  
                     Facere uerba aut uerbum, to ſpeake.
                  
                     Facere uindemiā, to gather grapes to make wyne.
                  
                     Facere uitium, to fall in decaye.
                  
                     Facere uolupratem, to ſatisfye myn thyn or his pleaſure or appetite. alſo to delyte with

pleaſure.
                  
                     Fagineus, et Faginus, a, um, of beche.
                  
                     Vergili. 9.
                     Falurica, were waypons, which were throwen out of toures.
                  
                     Falcè, falſely.
                  
                     Plautus in Bacch.
                     Falcimonia, deceyptes.
                  
                     Falſus, a, um, falſe.
                  
                     Famam diſsipare, to ſowe a brute or noyſe in the people.
                  
                     Famigero, to dinulgate or publiſhe a thyng.
                  
                     Varro.
                     Farrago, ginis, dyuers grayne & pulſe corne myngled for prouander, called in Cambryge ſhyre, bolymonge. it is ſometyme vſed for a myxture of any other thynge.
                  
                     Iuuenalis.
                     Fatuus, a, um, vnſauery, without any maner of taſte.
                  
                     Fauoniana, peares whiche are redde.
               
            
            
               
                  F, ANTE E.
                  
                     FElicones, men whiche are neceſſary for no thynge.
                  
                     plautus in capt.
                     Feriae eſuriales, faſtynge dayes.
                  
                     Ferinus, ferina, ferinū, pertaynyng to wylde beaſtes.
                  
                     Ferre conditionem, to proffer, to put to the choyſe, to offer a condition.
                  
                     Plautus in mercat.
                     Ferre gradum, to go forthe.
                  
                     Ferre grauiter, to take a thinge greuouſely.
                  
                     Fer manum, gyue me thy hande.
                  
                     Plautus in Truculen. Terent. in Heauto.
                     Fer me, ſupporte me, helpe me.
                  
                     Ferre moleſtè, to take a thyng diſpleſantly.
                  
                     Ferre oſculum, to kyſſe.
                  
                     Ferre ſententiam, to ſhewe his opinion.
                  
                     Ferre ſuppetias, to ſuccour.
                  
                     Feſtra, a lyttell wycket.
               
            
            
               
                  F, ANTE I.
                  
                     FIctus, ta, tum, made to the ſimilitude of a thynge.
                  
                     Ci. in phil. Cicero de ienectute. Terent. in And. Te. in Hec.
                     Fidem deſerere, to breake promyſe.
                  
                     Finge animo, ſuppoſe or put the caſe.
                  
                     Fit, it happeneth.
                  
                     Firmare fidem, to perfourme promyſe. alſo to accorde to a thynge.
                  
                     Firmé, ſtedfaſtly.
                  
                     Firmiter, 
                     idem.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  F ANTE L.
                  
                     FLagrare inopia, to be in great pouertie.
                  
                     Flamatick, a tree burned with lightning
                  
                     
                        Flam
                              •
                           arius,
                      a dyer of yelowes.
                  
                     Flameum, a veyle or typpette of yelowe, whyche women dydde weare, whan they were newe maryed.
                  
                     Flammigena, commen of fyre.
                  
                     Feſtus.
                     Flegmen, is where with moche goynge the bloudde iſſueth out of the toes.
                  
                     Flexipes, pedis, he that hathe crooked fete.
                  
                     Fluſtrum, the fulle tyde in the ſee, or other water, whyche ebbeth and flowyth.
               
            
            
               
                  F ANTE O.
                  
                     FOenuſculum, a bottell of hey.
                  
                     Forago, a ſkayne of yerne.
                  
                     Forma ſtata, a meane beaultie or ſtature.
                  
                     Fors, Fortune.
                  
                     Fors fuat, god ſende the good fortune,Terent. in Hecyra. Donatus, god ſpeede the well.
                  
                     Fors fortuna, good chaunc
                        •
                     .
                  
                     Forſitan, & forſan, peraduenture.
                  
                     Fors, is ſometyme vſed for Forſitan, peraduenture.
                  
                     Forte fortuna, by good aduenture.
                  
                     Forteſco, ſcere, to waxe or be ſtronge.Neu
                           •
                        us.
                  
                  
                     
                        Fortit
                              •
                           r,
                      puyſſantly, valyantly.
                  
                     Fortunae, goodes, good fortune, aduancemente.
                  
                     Forenſia, Iudges robes,Sueton. in Auguſto. or the habytes the whyche are worne in the places of Iudgemente.
                  
                     Fouere in pectore, to thynke pryuyly.Plautus in Bacch.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  F ANTE R.
                  
                     FRacecre, to be reſolued, putryfyed, or rotten.
                  
                     Fraces, lyes of oyle.
                  
                     Fraenos inijcere alicui, to lette oone of his pleaſure, to brydell hym that wolde nat be rulyd.
                  
                     Fractae res, thynges ſpent or loſte.
                  
                     Fracti bello, werye of warres.
                  
                     Fractus, ta, tum, broken.
                  
                     Fragilis, le, frayle, broukle.
                  
                     Fragilitas, frayiltie or brouklenes.
                  
                     Fratricida, he that hath ſlayne his brother.
                  
                     Fratrueles, brothers chylderne, couſyne germaynes.
                  
                     Frequentiſsimae aedes, a houſe moche hanted with people.
                  
                     Frequens adeſt, he commeth often.
                  
                     Frontem explicare, to loke meryly.Terentius Plinius.
                  
                  
                     Frontem exporgere, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Frontem contrahere, to loke ſowerly.
                  
                     Fronte exporrecta, with a merye countenaunce.
                  
                     Frugaliter, temperately, ſoberly,Plautus in Epidico. Cato. Terent. in Heautont. Plautus in Bacch. Plautus in Amph withoute exceſſe or ryotte.
                  
                     
                        Fruiſcor, ſci, for fruor.
                     
                  
                  
                     Frui ingenio ſuo, to doo as he wyll.
                  
                     Fruſtra es, Thou arte deceyued or abuſed.
                  
                     Fruſtra habere aliquem, to abuſe or deceyue oone.
                  
                     
                     Columel.
                     Fruſtrari expenſas, to looſe his coſtes and charges.
                  
                     Fruſtratio, abuſynge or deceyuynge of one
               
            
            
               
                  F, ANTE V.
                  
                     FVat, for fit.
                  
                     Plautus in Amphitri. Cicero.
                     Fugere, is alſo to exchue.
                  
                     Fugit te ratio, thou vnderſtandeſte not the matter.
                  
                     Fugit me, I haue forgoten it.
                  
                     Fugiens uinum, wyne that hath loſte his verdure.
                  
                     Fugientes litere, blynde letters.
                  
                     Fugitiuus, a, um, fugitiue, not abydynge.
                  
                     Fugitiuarius, a, um, that gladly and quickely runneth awaye.
                  
                     Plautus in Trinūmo. Plautus in Trinum.
                     Fulcimentum, a botreulx, or that wherwith a thynge is ſuſtayned.
                  
                     Fulguritaſſunt, ſtryken with lyghtnynge.
                  
                     Fulguritum, ſtriken or blaſted with lyghtenynge.
                  
                     plautus. Martialis.
                     Fullonica, fullars crafte.
                  
                     Fumos uēdere, is the practiſe of them, whiche beinge nygh about a prynce, or in his fauour,
                        
                           〈1 paragraph〉
                        
                      do beare men in hande, that they ſpeake for them to the prynce, where they ſpeake neuer a worde: and cauſe menne therby to lyue in fooles paradyſe.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈1 paragraph〉
                        
                     
                     Funditus me perdidiſti, thou haſt vtterly vndone me.
                  
                     Funditus perii, I am vtterly vndone.
                  
                     Fundere exercitum, to dyſcomfite an armye.
                  
                     Fundus, is ſomtyme taken for a foundation. alſo for the chiefe authour of a thynge.
                  
                     Fungi officio ſuo, to do his deuour.
                  
                     Funginus, a, um, of a mouſheron.
                  
                     Plautus in Aſina.
                     Funus facere, to cauſe one to dye.
                  
                     Futio, tis, tere, to poure out, or runne out.
                  
                     Futis, a veſſel, wherwith water was poured in to a lauer, to brynge water in to a parlour or ſoupynge chamber.
               
            
            
               
                  G, ANTE A.
                  
                     
                        GABA, a towne in Galile
                  
                     Gabalum, a towne in Fraunce, nyghe to Narbona, where there was made very good cheſe.
                  
                     Gabaon, a Cytie in the holy lande nyghe to Rama, where Salomon doing ſacrifice, ſpake with god.
                  
                     Gabaonitae, men of that towne.
                  
                     Gabba, a citie in Siria.
                  
                     Gabriel, ſignifyeth the puiſſaunce or myght of god.
                  
                     Galatia, a countrey in the laſſe Aſia.
                  
                     Galgulus, a byrde, whom if one do beholde that hath the yelowe iaundiſe, furthwith the man becommeth hole, and the byrde hath the ſyckeneſſe.
                  
                     Galiléa, is a countray,Plinius whiche marcheth on Siria, Arabia, and Egypt.
                  
                     Gallaria, a lampurne.Pau. Iouiꝰ
                  
                  
                     Gallus, a, um, of Fraunce.
                  
                     Gangaridae, people betwene Aſſiria & Inde.Columell.
                  
                  
                     Gangilium, a ſickeneſſe in the hed of a beaſt, wherwith the hed becometh ful of water.
                  
                     Ganzae, geeſe.
                  
                     Garūna, a ryuer in Fraunce, called Gyrond.
                  
                     Gaſtrimergia, gloteny.
               
            
            
               
                  G, ANTE E.
                  
                     GEbuſeus, the ſon of Canaan, of whom the olde inhabitauntes of Hieruſalem were called Gebuſei.
                  
                     Gedeon, the name of a iudge in Iſraell.
                  
                     Gedroſia, a countray in Aſia.
                  
                     Gemellariae, an inſtrumente, by the whiche oyle runneth out of the preſſe.
                  
                     Gemmoſus, ſa, um, that whiche is all of preciouſe ſtones.
                  
                     
                        Gemit cymba,
                        Vergilius.
                      the bote cracketh beynge ouercharged.
                  
                     Generoſitas, an aptnes to ingendre,Colum. 3. to bring forthe, ſomtyme it ſignifyeth nobilitie.
                  
                     Genezareth, a great mere or ponde in the lande of promiſſion, and it is alſoo called Mare Tiberiadis.
                  
                  
                     Genocha, a beaſte laſſe than a foxe, in color a darke yelowe, full of blacke ſpottes: I ſuppoſe it to be a blacke Ienet, the furre wherof is in Englande eſtemed aboue all other furres.
                  
                     Genſelia, whiche is compacte of many families or kynredes.
                  
                     Geodeſia, is a ſcience of thinges concerning ſenſible greatneſſe and fygure.
                  
                     Gergonia, a towne in Guyen, ſtandynge on an hyghe hyll.
                  
                     Gerere bellum, to make warre.Pli. in p
                           ••
                        .
                  
                  
                     Gerere honores, to be in honour or autorite.
                  
                     Gerere morem, to obeye.Terent. in Adelph. Cicero de amicitia. Plautus in paenulo. Plautus in Amphit.
                  
                  
                     Gerere negotium, to do his buſyneſſe.
                  
                     Gerere praeturam, to be in the authirotye of a iudge.
                  
                     Gerere pudorem, to be ſhamefaſte.
                  
                     Gerere rempublicam, to myniſtre the publyke weale.
                  
                     Gerontocomion, an hoſpitall, wherin olde men are kept, an almeſehouſe.
                  
                     Geſta, thynges whiche haue benne doone, actes.
                  
                     Gethae, people, whiche ſome ſuppoſe to be

thoſe, whiche are in Norway and Gothia▪ ſome ſay that they be more in the northeſte in Scithia parteynynge to Europa.
               
            
            
               
                  G, ANTE I.
                  
                     GIbboſus, idem quod Gibber.
                  
                  
                     Githago, cokyll growynge amonge corne whiche is rype,
                  
                     Giruli, fyſſhes whiche I ſuppoſe to be menowes.
               
            
            
               
                  G ANTE L.
                  
                     GLomus, mi, et glomus glomeris, a botome of threde.
                  
                     Glucidatum, ſwete and delectable.
               
            
            
               
                  G ANTE N.
                  
                     GNafalium, an herbe, which is alſo called Chamezelon, whoſe leaues are ſo white & ſoft, that it ſemeth to be floxe
                  
                     Gnafos, a 
                        ••
                     fyll, whiche towkars do vſe in rowynge of clothes.
                  
                     Liuius.
                     
                        Gnarauit, et Gnarauiſſe, for Narrauit et Narrauiſſe
                     .
                  
                     
                        Gnariter, for gnare,
                      wyttſly.
                  
                     Gnauus, quicke, actiue, apt to euery thing.
                  
                     Gnauiter, dyligently, luſtily, valiantly.
                  
                     
                        Gnitur, et G
                              ••
                           urs,
                      old wryters vſed for Gignitur, et Nixus,
                  
                  
                     
                        Gnoro, for Noro.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Gnoſco, for Noſco.
                     
                  
                  
                     Gnoſsos, a citie in Greta or Candy.
                  
                     Gnoſius, a, um, of that citie.
               
            
            
               
                  G ANTE O.
                  
                     
                        GOmo
                              •
                           ,
                      is a meaſure of the hebrues, and in the 
                        〈◊〉
                      part of Ephi, wherfore it conteyneth .vii times the meaſure called 
                        •
                     e
                        •
                     tarium in ounces, an halfe ounce .ii. ſcruples, on halfe 
                        〈◊〉
                     , halfe one ſilique, and the tenthe part of Siliqua
                  
                     Gobio, idem quod Gobius a goge
                        ••
                     .
                  
                     Gorgonius, a, um, parteyning to Gorg
                        •
                     nes
                  
                     Gorthia, a countray beyond Norway, wherof the people 
                        〈…〉
                     , whyche deſtroyed the 
                        〈◊〉
                      of Rome, with the more parte of Europe.
               
            
            
               
                  G ANTE R.
                  
                     GRadus, a griece wherby a man goeth vpwarde. Alſo a degree.
                  
                     Liuius.
                     
                        Grad
                              •
                           
                        
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      to cauſe 
                        〈◊〉
                      ſteppe backe.
                  
                     Ci. Tuſ. 2. Ci. de off. 1
                     
                        Grad
                              •
                           
                        
                      
                     
                        〈…〉
                      of eſtimation or authoritie.
                  
                     
                        Gr
                              •
                           d
                              •
                            
                           
                              〈◊〉
                           ,
                      to 
                        〈◊〉
                      p
                        ••
                     te from a conſtaunte purpoſe.
                  
                     Gradus, honour.Ci. in philipp. 1.
                  
                  
                     
                        Graec
                              •••
                           lix,
                      red wyllowe.
                  
                     Graeciſco, are, to folowe the grekes.
                  
                     Graecia, the countray called greece.
                  
                     Graecus, a greke.
                  
                     Grandiuſculus, a, um, a lyttell greatter.
                  
                     Gratiam habere, to thanke.
                  
                     
                        Gratiam i
                              •
                           ire,
                      to get thanke.
                  
                     Gramma, idem quod ſcriptulum, uel ſcrupulū, a ſcruple, the .xxiiii. parte of an ounce.
                  
                     Gratiam referre, to require one with a good tourne o
                        •
                      an yll.
                  
                     Gratia tui, for thy ſake.
                  
                     Gratus, a thankefull man.
                  
                     
                        Grati
                              ••
                           do,
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     , kyndeneſſe.
                  
                     
                        Gra
                              ••
                           , kyndely.
                     
                  
                  
                     Grauaſtellus, an auncient father.Plautus. Vergilius.
                  
                  
                     Grauis nuntius, heuy tydynges.
                  
                     
                        Grauep
                              •
                            
                           
                              •••
                           m,
                      an hyghe pryce.
                  
                     
                        Graue din
                              ••
                           u
                              •
                           , a, um,
                      heuy or vnluſty, diſpoſed to do no thynge.
                  
                     Grauicors, cordis, he that hath a gret hart.
                  
                     Grauiloquus, he that ſpeaketh grauely and ſeriouſely.
                  
                     
                        Gremi
                              ••
                           ,
                      is the ſpace betwene the twoo thighes, ſpecially of a woman.
                  
                     Granta, herbe roberte.
               
            
            
               
                  G, ANTE V.
                  
                     GVeſſelli, beaſtes lyke to myſe, which haue their dunge as ſwete as muſke
                  
                     Guberno, nare, to gouorne.
                  
                     Gubernaror, a mayſter of a ſhyp.Plinius in Epiſtolis. Ci. in phil. alſo a gouernour of a countray.
                  
                     Gubernacula nauis, the Inſtrumentes, wherby the ſhyp is ruled.
               
            
            
               
                  H, ANTE A.
                  
                     
                        
                           HAb
                              ••
                            eum arcte,
                        Plautus in Mercator.
                      he kepeth hym ſhort or from lybertie.
                  
                     
                        Habere 
                              •
                           ontionem,
                      to preache, to declare a thynge to the people.
                  
                     
                        Habere rationē
                         
                        
                           〈…〉
                        , to 
                        〈◊〉
                      the erthe.
                  
                     Habitus, ta, tum, 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     .
                  
                     
                        Habi
                              •
                           
                        
                      
                     
                        〈…〉
                      father of manye 
                        〈…〉
                     
                  
                  
                     Hadria, beinge the maſculyne gendre, is taken for 
                        〈…〉
                     , or the fe
                        •
                     ther▪ beynge the 
                        〈◊〉
                      gen
                        •
                     re, it is a towne 
                        〈…〉
                     .
                  
                     
                        Hadria
                              •••
                           ,
                      a no
                        •
                      
                     
                        ••
                     per
                        •
                     ure, whiche in al 
                        〈…〉
                      ex
                        ••
                     l
                        •
                     utly l
                        •••
                     ed.
                  
                     Hadriaticum mare, the ſee, which is betwen the northe parte of Italy and Illiria, or A
                        •••
                     ony.
                  
                     
                     Terent. in Eunucho. Idē in Ad.
                     Hac, henſe. ſomtyme by this place.
                  
                     Hac non ſuccesſit, it c
                        •
                     me not well to paſſe this way.
                  
                     Haebudes, are Iles beyonde Scotlānde two dayes ſaylynge, wherof be fyue.
                  
                     Herba, an herbe.
                  
                     Herbaceus, a, um, that is of herbes.
                  
                     Herbarius, he that knoweth herbes, & their vertues.
                  
                     Herbarius, a, um, of herbes.
                  
                     Herbeſco, ſcere, to be an herbe.
                  
                     Herbidus, et Herboſus, a, um, hauynge many herbes.
                  
                     Hagiographa, holy ſcripture.
                  
                     Hagiographus, a wryter of holy ſcripture.
                  
                     Hallux, the greatte toe, whyche lyeth ouer the nexte toe.
                  
                     Halyetus, a foulcon.
                  
                     Hanus barbarus, a lyttell pot with a greate bely, wherin wyne and water were wonte to be brought to the table.Terent. in Eunucho. Vergili. Vergilius. C
                           •
                        cer pro M Cal
                           •
                        o.
                  
                  
                     Haud innito, wyllyngly.
                  
                     Haud nihil, ſome thynge.
                  
                     Hauſit coelum, he ſawe heuen.
                  
                     Hauſit corda pauor, feare made theyr courages fayne.
                  
                     Au
                           •
                        uſtinꝰ.
                     Haurire dolorē, to endure heuines or ſorow
                  
                     Hauritorium, any thynge wherby water is drawen out of a welle.
               
            
            
               
                  H ANTE E.
                  
                     HEana, a foundation.
                  
                     Hebeteſco ſeu hebetaſco, ſcere, belongeth proprely to the eyes, to be dulle in ſyght.
                  
                     Hebraei, Iewes.
                  
                     Hecatontarchus, the Capytayne of a hundred menne.
                  
                     Hecta, vel heta, a try
                        ••
                     e.
                  
                     Hemina, is a meaſure, whiche is halfe aſmoche as Sextarius, that is to ſay, conteyneth x. ounces, and is alſo callyd Dextane, in the pounde of meaſure.
                  
                     Hedui, people in Fraunce, nowe callydde Burgonyons.Vid. Caeſa.
                  
                  
                     Helciarius, he that draweth a 
                        •
                     o
                        ••
                      agaynſte the ſtreame.
                  
                     Helicon, a mountayne in Boeotia.
                  
                  
                     Heliopolis, a citie in Egypte.
                  
                     Helleborum edere, is a prouerbe ſpoken to men, whyche are very melancholye, or be wylde brayned.
                  
                     Heluella, ſmalle herbes or wortes.
                  
                     Helxine, an herbe called pelitory.
                  
                     Hemionitis, ſiue hemonion, an herbe whyche we commonly call hartes tung
                        •
                     .
                  
                     Hemicadia, veſſelles callyd a tierce, halfe a hoggesheed.
                  
                     Heo, an interiection, Howe.
                  
                     Heptaphillon, an herbe called tormentill.
                  
                     Hercle, a worde vſed to ornate a ſentence by affyrmation.
                  
                     
                        Here, for heri,
                      yeſterday.
                  
                     Herinatius, an hedgehogge.
                  
                     Hermathena, was two ymages to gether of Mercury and Mynerua.
                  
                     Heros, herois, an halfe god, or he whiche for the loue of vertue ſuſteyneth great labours and peryl.
                  
                     Hera, the lady, the mayſtree, the dame.
                  
                     Herilis, le, perteinyng to the lord or maſter.
                  
                     Hexaplum, vel hexapla, an example.
                  
                     Hexaſticum, ſyxe verſes together.
                  
                     Hexapeda, a meaſure called a fathom.
               
            
            
               
                  H, ANTE I.
                  
                     HIbiſous, wylde melowes.Terent. in A
                           •
                        d.
                  
                  
                     Hic, Tu ſi hic ſis, aliter ſentias, if thou were I, or as I am, thou woldeſte thynke other wiſe.
                  
                     Hieratica, fyne paper.
                  
                     Hin, a meaſure of the Hebrues, which conteyneth .xii. tymes the meaſure callyd Sextarius, rede more in Sextarius.
                  
                     Hinnus, hinna, & hinnulus, hinnula, a mule engendred betwene an aſſe and a mare.Terent. in Adelph. Idē in Eun.
                  
                  
                     Hinc, an aduerbe ſygnyfienge from thenſe.
                  
                     Hinc illinc venit, He commeth I knowe not frome whens.
                  
                     Hinc loci mei, from my countray, or towne that I cam fro.Idē in and.
                  
                  
                     Hinc, for that cauſe. Hinc illae lachrimae, For that cauſe were the teares, or that was the matter wherfore he wepte.
                  
                     Hiant flores, the floures doo ſpreade.Vergili. 6.
                  
                  
                     Hiare, to wonder or meruayle.
                  
                     Hippagogius, an inſtrumente, wherewith ſtones are polyſhed.
                  
                     Hipparchus, captayne of the horſemen.
                  
                     Hippei, cometes or blaſyng ſterres, hauing manes lyke horſes.
                  
                     Hippiades, images of womē on horsback, as the womē of Amazon were alway paynted.
                  
                     
                        Hippia
                              •
                           ,
                      was a philoſopher in Grecia, whiche 
                        〈◊〉
                      hym ſelfe to knowe al ſciences and artes: for in eloquence he was excellent, meru
                        •
                     ylouſe in poetry, alſo in muſyke, and made the inſtrumentes, whereon he played, and al the 
                        〈…〉
                      that he did weare, and the rynge 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        •
                     yn
                        ••
                     r, which was wonderfully well gra
                        •
                     en, and wrought his gyrdell with nedell w
                        ••
                     ke incomparably, and a philoſophy 
                        〈…〉
                      with a
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
                  
                     Hippobotos, a feder of horſes.
                  
                     
                        Hippolap
                              •••••
                           ,
                      an herbe, whiche ſome doo ſuppoſe to be pacience.
                  
                     Hypericon, an herbe callid ſaint Iohns 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
                  
                     Hydropiper, ſemeth to be the herbe whiche the potecaries do cōmonly cal Eupatory.
                  
                     Hiſtria,
                  
               
            
            
               
               
                  H ANTE O.
                  
                     HOdiernus, na, um, of this day.
                  
                     Homonymon, where manye thynges haue one name, but dyuers in effect: As a man, which is alyue, or paynted, deuided by this addicion, a very man, a paynted man.
                  
                     Cicero.
                     Honorificētisſime, in a very honorable forme or maner, very honorably.
                  
                     Honorem prefari, is where one ſhal ſpeke of any thynge, that is not honeſt, than to ſay, Sauynge your reuerence.
                  
                     Hora, is ſomtime takē for a day: alſo for time
                  
                     Hordeaceus, a, um, of barly.
                  
                     Plinius.
                     Hordearij, they whiche do lyue with eating barley.
                  
                     Horiola, a lyttell fyſhers bote.
                  
                     Horno, an aduerbe ſygnifienge this yere.
                  
                     Horrent agri, the fyldes are vnpleaſaunt and vnfrutefull.
                  
                     Horti penſiles, gardeynes made on the toppes of houſes, or vpon pylars.
                  
                     Hortenfis, ſe, perteynynge to a gardeyne, or of a gardayne.
                  
                     Hoſpitium, a houſe alwaye redy to receyue frendes. Sometyme a lodgynge▪ alſo an hoſpytall. ſomtyme frendeſhyppe ſhewed in hoſpitalitye.
               
            
            
               
                  H, ANTE Y.
                  
                     HYades, the ſeuen ſterres.
                  
                     Hydragogus, he that bryngeth water to a place by furrowes or trenches.
                  
                     Hydrargyrū, a certayne thynge, wherwith ſyluer is gilt in the ſtede of quicke ſyluer.
                  
                     Hypenium ouum, an egge whiche hath neyther whyte nor yelke.
                  
                     Hypotheca, a pledge. alſo a doctryne.
                  
                     Hypotheſis, an argument, matter, or cauſe, whervpō one ſhuld argue, diſpute, or ſpeke.
                  
                     Hycca, a greate fyſſhe, whiche Hermolaus Barbarus taketh for a Sturgeon.
               
            
            
               
                  I, ANTE A.
                  
                     
                        IA, was the yonger ſonne of Atlas, and ſounethe as moche as a royſe.
                  
                     Pli. in epi. Cicero de 
                           •
                        micitia.
                     Iacet grauiter, he lyethe ſycke.
                  
                     Iacens animus, a deſperate mynde.
                  
                     Quintil. 9. Cicer. pro Roſcio, Cicero.
                     Iacet oratio, the oration is without any grace or ſpirite.
                  
                     
                        Iacent preti
                              •
                           ,
                      they are of a lowe pryce.
                  
                     Iacent, they are without vertue, courage, or eſtimation.
                  
                     Iacêre, to extende out or be of length.
                  
                     Iacio, ieci, iacere, to caſte or throwe.
                  
                     Iacere fundamentū, to ſet or lay a foundation.
                  
                     Iacob, a patriarch, ſonne of Iſaac.
                  
                     Iam, is alſo incontinent or forthwith.
                  
                     Iam ne imus? ſhall we not go nowe?Terent. in Eunucho.
                  
                  
                     Iatros, a phiſition.
               
            
            
               
                  I, ANTE B.
                  
                     ¶Ibidem, there, or in the ſame place.
               
            
            
               
                  I, ANTE D.
                  
                     ID curat ſcilicet, he careth moch therfore,Ter. in An. whiche is ſpoken as who ſayth, he careth nothynge for it.
                  
                     
                        Id locorum, for Id.
                        plau. in ca. & in paenu. Ci. de orator. & pro Milone.
                     
                  
                  
                     Id temporis, at that tyme, or ſuche a tyme. Id temporis eſt: The tyme is ſuche.
                  
                     Idaſpes, a ryuer runnynge by Parthia and Inde: and at the laſte falleth into the gret ryuer called Indus: in this ryuer is found moche golde and precious ſtones.
                  
                     Idem, alſo ſignifyeth lyke or ſembable.Plautus in Epidico. Ter. in an.
                  
                  
                     Idipſum, the ſame thynge, or one thynge.
                  
                     Idomeneus, the ſonne of Deucaliō and king of Crete.
               
            
            
               
                  I, ANTE E.
                  
                     ¶Ieſſen, a towne, where Ioſeph met his father Iacob, and brought hym into Egypt.
               
            
            
               
                  I, ANTE G.
                  
                     IGnarius lapis, a fyre ſtone, or flynte, out of the whiche fyre is beaten.Affranius.
                  
                  
                     Ignauia, is alſo lacke of courage.
                  
                     Ignauit, he made him a foole.
                  
                     Ignauiter, with a fals harte, or cowardly.
               
            
            
               
                  I, ANTE L.
                  
                     
                        ILlabor, beris, labi,
                        Vergili.
                      to throw hym ſelfe into a thynge. Medie
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         minans illabitur urbi: And thretnynge theym, he threwe hym ſelfe into the citie.
                  
                     Illaboratus, ta, tum, that whiche is made or done without labour.
                  
                     Illac, on that ſyde.
                  
                     Illiuſmodi, of that ſorte.
                  
                     Illepidus, without dilectation or grace.
                  
                     Illiberalis, vngentyll, withoute kyndeneſſe or courteſy.
                  
                     
                        Illibera
                              •
                           e facinus,
                      an vncurteyſe pageaunt.Te. in Ad.
                  
                  
                     Illinc, from that place.
                  
                     Illiteratus, vnlerned.
                  
                     Illo, to the place.plautus in capt.
                  
                  
                     Illotis manibus rem aggredi, to go aboute a great thynge without reuerence, or diſhoneſtely

to treate a thynge of greate eſtymation.
                  
                     Gellius. Macrobi,
                     Illotis pedibus, fere 
                     idem, alſo without ſhame
                  
                     Illuc, in that place or there.
                  
                     Illutibilis, that whiche can not be waſſhed awaye.
               
            
            
               
                  I, ANTE M.
                  
                     IMaginoſus, ſa, um, full of images.
                  
                     Immemor, forgetfull, he that dothe not remembre.
                  
                     Immemorabilis, le, vnworthy remembrance,
                  
                     Plautus in Capt. Suetonius Plautus in A
                           ••
                        na.
                     Immenſus, a, um, of ſuche greateneſſe, that it can not be meaſured.
                  
                     Immerens, he that hath not deſerued.
                  
                     Immerito meo, without my deſerte.
                  
                     Immeritó, an aduerbe, without deſeruinge.
                  
                     Immergo, merſi, gere, to drowne, or to plōge a thynge in the water.
                  
                     Cicer. pro 
                           〈…〉
                         in 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                     Immerſit ſe in alicuius conſuetudinem, He brought hym ſelfe into deepe acquaintance with one.
                  
                     Immerſit ſe in ganeum, he is goten into a tauerne: or he hath thraſte hym ſelfe in to a tauerne or ale houſe.
                  
                     Immigro, to go to dwell in a place.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈1 paragraph〉
                        
                     
                     Immigraui in ingenium meū, I came to mine owne rule, or to be ruled by min owne wit.
                  
                     
                        Imm
                              ••
                           ere,
                      ſignifyeth alſo, to be nygh. Mors propter incertos caſus quotidie imminet, Dethe, by vncertayne chaunces, is euery daye nyghe.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈…〉
                         Ver. Act. 4▪
                     
                     Imminent in fortunas noſtras, they be at hand and redy to robbe vs of our goodes.
                  
                     Imminet exitio alterius, he is redy to ſle one.
                  
                     Imminens, that whiche is at hande.
                  
                     Imminens ingenium, a runnynge wytte.
                  
                     Imminuere caput alteri, to breke ones hed.
                  
                     Plautus in Mo
                           ••
                        el.
                     Imminuere pudicitiam virginis, to defloure a mayden.
                  
                     Imminuere maieſtatem, to commyt treaſon.
                  
                     Immiſceo, ſcui, ſcere, to mengle to gether.
                  
                     Immiſericot diter, without pitie.
                  
                     Terent. in Adelphis. Plinius
                     Immitis, te, cruell, without pitie.
                  
                     Immitia poma, apples whyche are not yet rype.
                  
                     Immobilis, le, vnmoueable.
                  
                     Plautus in poenu.
                     Immodeſtus, ta, tum, without temperaunce.
                  
                     Immodeſté, out of meaſure: alſo to moche.
                  
                     Immodicus, ca, cum, great or moche.
                  
                     Martialis.
                     Immodici, many.
                  
                     Immodicé, to moche.
                  
                     Immola, a citie in Italy, whiche was ſometyme called Forum Cornelii.
                  
                     Immortalitas, a perpetuall lyfe.
                  
                     Immortalis, le, vnmortall, that lyueth euer.
                  
                     Immoror, rari, to abyde or contynue in a thynge.
                  
                     Immuſtulus, a lyttell byrde, I ſuppoſe it be a wrenne.
                  
                     
                        Immuto, tare,
                        Plautus is Epidico. Ibidem.
                      to chaunge one thynge for a nother.
                  
                     Immutabilis, le, vnchaungeable.
                  
                     Impanero, crare, to inuade, or go into a place
                  
                     Impar, not equall, not ſufficient.
                  
                     Imparens, diſobedient.
                  
                     Imparatus, vnredy, vnpuruayed.Feſtus. Plautus in Amphitri.
                  
                  
                     Impatibilis, le, that whiche can not ſuffre or ſuſteyne.
                  
                     Impauidus, he that feareth not.
                  
                     Impendent mala, myſchiefe is nyghe.Cic. plane.
                  
                  
                     Imperium exequi, to do that is commanded.
                  
                     Imperare cupiditatibus, to rule deſyres or appetytes.
                  
                     Impertio, tiui, tire, et Impertior, tiris, perti, to partycipate with one, to giue parte of that whiche he hath.
                  
                     Impertire ſalute, to ſalute.
                  
                     Impertitur, parte is gyuen.Terent. in Eunucho. Feſtus.
                  
                  
                     Impeſco, ſcere, to putte a beaſte in to a good paſture to feede.
                  
                     Impigrè, diligently, without ſlouthe.
                  
                     Impio, are to defile, to ſtayne him ſelfe with a diſhoneſt or foule dede, ſpecially agaynſt god or his parentes.
                  
                     Implere, ſomtyme ſignifyeth to accompliſhe or put in execution.Sueton. plinius. Columell. Non. Mar. plautus in Epidic.
                  
                  
                     Impluo, ere, to rayne in.
                  
                     Implutus, wet in the rayne.
                  
                     Impluiatus, ta, tum, coloured as it were wet in the rayne.
                  
                     Imponere legem, to ſet a lawe on a thynge,
                  
                     Imponere alicui, to deceyue one.
                  
                     Importuoſus, a, um, without porte or hauen.
                  
                     Improbus aliae, rei, good for non other thing.plautus in Milite. Ibidem. Moſte.
                  
                  
                     Improba merx, ill marchaundiſe.
                  
                     Improbi poſtes, rotten poſtes, or decayed, or feble.
                  
                     Improbè, an aduerbe ſignifyenge ſi, nowghtyly, vnhappely.
                  
                     Improlis, vel Improlus, he whiche is not yet a cytezen.
                  
                     Improuidus, he that prouydethe not for the tyme commynge.
                  
                     Improuidus, da, dum, that whiche commeth ſodaynely and vnloked for.
                  
                     Improuiſus, a, um, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Improuiſé, vnthought on, or vnloked for.
                  
                     Imprudens harum rerum, not knowynge of thoſe matters.
                  
                     Imprudentia, lacke of foreſyght, that it was not thought on.
                  
                     Imprudenter, vnwyſely, vnaduyſedly.
                  
                     
                        Imputare,
                        Vlp. Caius
                      is alſo to reken one thynge with a nother, or to accompte one ſomme with a nother.
               
            
            
               
               
                  I, ANTE N.
                  
                     Ci. in Ver. Cicero de amicitia. Terent. in Andri. Plautus in perſa. Quintilia, Plautus in A ſin.
                     IN annum, for a yere.
                  
                     In bonis, amonge good men.
                  
                     In coenam, for ſupper.
                  
                     In conſpectum aſpice, loke before the.
                  
                     In diem uiuere, to lyue without carynge for to morowe.
                  
                     In numerato habere, redy, or at hande.
                  
                     In partem, for thy parte. Age ſis, tu in partem nunc iam hunc delude, at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         amplexare hanc: Goo to nowe for thy parte, deceyue hym hardely, and take her vnto the.
                  
                     Cicero.
                     In pedem, for euery foote. Is ſe ternis nummis in pedem tecum tranſegiſſe dicebat: He ſayde, that he bargayned with the for thre pence a fote, or for euery fote.
                  
                     Cicer. pro lege Ma.
                     In poteſtatem eſſe, vnder the rule, or at the pleaſure of one.
                  
                     In praeſentia, at this preſent tyme.
                  
                     In primis, aboue all other thynges.
                  
                     In procliui, that maye be lyghtely or eaſyly done.
                  
                     In promptu eſt, it is eaſy to knowe, it is apparaunte.
                  
                     Plautus in pſeud. Feſtus.
                     Inanis accedit, he commeth withoute bryngynge any thynge with hym.
                  
                     Inciens, a woman nygh her tyme to trauaile of chylde.
                  
                     Inclareo, uel inclareſco, ere, to be knowen of all men.
                  
                     Inconſultè, without counſaile, or vnaduiſedly
                  
                     Incontinens, he that is not chaſte, or kepeth hym not to one woman.
                  
                     Incoquo, xi, coquere, to ſeethe or boyle in a thynge.
                  
                     Incoctus, ta, tum, vnboyled or rawe.
                  
                     Feſtus.
                     Incoctae mulieres, women whiche do trymme theyr heares to moche.
                  
                     Incoctile, a braſyn or copper veſſell, tynned within.
                  
                     
                        In conſilio ad
                              •
                           ſſe,
                      to be of counſayle in a mater in lawe.Cic. act. 4. in Verrem 
                     Me quoque Petilius, vt ſibi conſilio adeſſem, rogauit: Petilius alſoo deſyred me, that I wolde be of counſayle.
                  
                     Plautus in ciſtell.
                     Incordio, aui, are, to put into a mans harte, to perſwade hym.
                  
                     Incubo, bonis, they that ſet al theyr ſtudy on treaſure.
                  
                     Plautus in Aulular. Ibidem.
                     Incumbere, to be inclyned to ſome thynge.
                  
                     Incumbere gladium, to thruſt hym ſelfe on a ſworde.
                  
                     Indecens, vnſyttynge, vnconuenient.
                  
                     Indecoris, re, idem quod Indecor.
                  
                  
                     Indecoré, an aduerbe, ſygnifyeng vnhoneſtly, vnconueniently.
                  
                     Indico, dixi, dicere, to denounce properlye warre.
                  
                     Indicere conſilium, to call or commaunde a counſayle.
                  
                     Indicere iuſtitium, to commaunde a vacation or as we do ſay, to kepe no terme.
                  
                     Indicere pecuniam populo, to ſette a taxe or ſubſydie on the people.
                  
                     
                        Induere poſtes pice,
                        plautus in moſtel.
                      to laye on pytche on the poſtes.
                  
                     Induere perſonam alterius, to ſpeake in the name or ſtede of a nother man.Quintilia.
                  
                  
                     Induere perſonam iudicis, to repreſente a iudge.
                  
                     Induſtriè, wyttyly.
                  
                     Inire rationem, to fynde the meane.
                  
                     Inire, to leape, as a horſe lepeth a mare.
                  
                     Ineunte aetate, in youthe.
                  
                     Ineunte uere, at the begynnyng of the ſpring of the yere.
                  
                     Inexhauſtus, a, um, neuer ceaſynge.
                  
                     Inferre crimen alicui, to laye to ones charge.
                  
                     Inferre ſermonem, to talke.
                  
                     Infectus, infected, ſtayned, dyed.
                  
                     Infectum reddere, to vndoo that whiche is doone.
                  
                     Infecta pace, without any peace made.
                  
                     Infector, a dyar of colours.
                  
                     Infit, he ſayde, he beganne.
                  
                     Inflecto, tere, to bowe or plye.
                  
                     Influo, xi, ere, to runne into a thynge, as water or other lycour dothe.
                  
                     Infuco, care, to coloure a thynge, intending deceipte.
                  
                     
                        Infuſcare uinum merum,
                        Plautus in ciſtell.
                      to alaye wyne with water.
                  
                     Ingeniculus, a fygure amonge the ſterres. called nowe Hercules.
                  
                     Ingenua facta, noble actes.
                  
                     Ingens animus, a great courage.Plautus in milite. Plautus in Aſina.
                  
                  
                     Ingerere dicta in aliquem, to chyde with one, to ſay ill of one.
                  
                     Ingerere malum, to do diſpleaſure.
                  
                     Ingerere pugnos, to ſtrike with the fyſte.
                  
                     Ingratijs, maulgre one.Plautus in Amphit. & in curcu. Terentius in Eunuch.
                  
                  
                     Ingratus, ta, tum, vnthankfull, dyſpleaſaunt, conſtrayned, or agaynſte a mannes wyl alſo vnkynde, and not remembrynge frendſhyppe, or beneuolence.
                  
                     Inguinium, a citie in Liguria, aunciente and ryche.
                  
                     Inhabilis, le, vnapt.Plinius in Epiſtolis, Plautus in Sticho Ci. in phil.
                  
                  
                     Inhabito, tare, to dwell in a place.
                  
                     Inhibere imperium, to haue charge or rule.
                  
                     Inhibere ſupplicia alicui, to execute turmentes on one, or to put one to dethe.
                  
                     Inhibere nauem, to caſte ancre, or to ſtaye a ſhyppe, which is vnder ſayle, that ſhe ſaile not a full courſe.Terent. in Eunucho.
                  
                  
                     Inhoneſtus, ta, tum, diſhoneſte.
                  
                     Inhoneſte, diſhoneſtly.
                  
                     Inhonoratus, ta, tum, lackynge honour.
                  
                     
                     Inhoſpes, he that wyl lodge no man.
                  
                     Inhoſpita tecta, houſes where no man maye lodge.
                  
                     Inhoſpitalis, le, vnapte for lodgynge,
                  
                     Cicer. pro Roſcio.
                     
                        Inh
                              •
                           mo, are,
                      to put into the grounde.
                  
                     Inijcere manus in aliquem, to apprehende or attache one.
                  
                     Terentius in phormi.
                     Inijcere ſcrupulum alicui, to put one in a fantaſye.
                  
                     Sucton.
                     Inijcere ſtudium alicui, to cauſe one to ſtudy.
                  
                     Iniquo animo ferre, to be myſcontented or ſo rowfull.
                  
                     Iniqué, myſcheuouſely, or vniuſtly.
                  
                     Plautus in Trucu
                           •
                        en. Cicero de ſenectute.
                     Iniuria tua, throughe thy defaulte.
                  
                     Iniuſſu imperatoris, without the emperours commaundement.
                  
                     Iniuſta, ta, tum, vniuſte, alſo excedynge iuſte meaſure.
                  
                     Iniuſté, vniuſtely.
                  
                     Innaſcor, ſci, to be ingendred in one.
                  
                     Innatus, ta, tum, ingendred.
                  
                     Innocens, vnharmefull, innocent.
                  
                     Innocentia, integritie, true intente.
                  
                     Pli in epi. 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                     Inoſſenſus, vnhurte.
                  
                     Inofficioſum teſtamentum, where the father by teſtament gyueth away from his ſonne his landes or goodes without cauſe.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈1 paragraph〉
                        
                     
                     Inops ab amicis, dyſpouruayed of frendes.
                  
                     Inops amicorum, 
                     idem.
                  
                  
                     Inopia, pouertie, lacke of thynges neceſſary
                  
                     
                        Inopi
                              •
                           atus,
                      vnthought on or vnloked for.
                  
                     
                        
                           〈1 paragraph〉
                        
                     
                     In quantum, in as moche, or for as moche.
                  
                     Inquam, I ſayde.
                  
                     
                        In
                              •
                           anitas,
                      madneſſe.
                  
                     Inſaciabilis, le, vnſaciable.
                  
                     
                        Inſ
                              •
                           endo, dere,
                      to go vp, or to clyme.
                  
                     Terent. in H
                           •••
                        to. Cicer pro P. Sylla. Tit. Li. 4.
                     Inſciens, vnwyttinge. alſo not thynkynge on that he doeth.
                  
                     Inſcientia, ignoraunce.
                  
                     Inſtaurare bellum, to make warre eftſones.
                  
                     Inſuitor, may alſo be called a factour whiche byeth and 
                        •
                     elleth for a nother man.
                  
                     Inſtitoria actio, an action brought by the maſter agaynſte his factour, or by the factour agaynſte his maſter.
                  
                     plautus in Epidic. Terent. in phorm. Cicero in philip.
                     Inſtiruere aſtutiam, to finde a craft to deceiue oone.
                  
                     In integrum reſtiuiere, to reſtore a thynge to as good poynte as it was in.
                  
                     Integrum eſt, hit is at his pleaſure or in his power.
                  
                     Integré, truely, and diligently.
                  
                     Cicero de oratore.
                     In integro eſſe. Sed quoniam haec iam neque in integro eſſe poſſunt: But for as moche as there is no remedy, or that theſe thynges maye not be holpen, or maye not be in as good poynte as they were.
                  
                     Cic. de Senectute.
                     Intemperans, he that doth euery thyng with out order or meaſure.
                  
                     
                        Intendere f
                              •
                           rmulam,
                      to brynge an action agaynſte one.Sueton
                           ••
                        s in Vitell. Sueton. in Ty
                           •••
                         in Cic. ad Q. fratrem. Terent. in Eunucho.
                  
                  
                     
                        Inter coenam, for In coena
                     .
                  
                     Inter nos amamus, we loue togyther oone an nother.
                  
                     
                        Inter 
                              •
                           ias,
                      by the waye rydynge or goinge.
                  
                     Interceſſor, he that letteth a matter, that it may nat goo forwarde.
                  
                     Interpellatio, a lette in a man
                        •
                      buſyneſſe.
                  
                     Interpellator, he that letteth oone that he may nat ſpeake or doo a thynge.
                  
                     Intrarius amicus, a ſpeciall frende.plautus.
                  
                  
                     Intybum, ſeu Intybus, is the generalle name to all kyndes of Lichorye or Succhorye. as commune Succhorie, Scariole, Endiue, and Dendelyon.
               
            
            
               
                  I, ANTE S.
                  
                     Iſchiros, idem quod fortis, ſtronge.
                  
                     Iſatis, Ode, wherewith clothes are dyed blewe.
               
            
            
               
                  I, ANTE T.
                  
                     ITa me deus amer, Soo god loue me,Plautus. Terentius or helpe me.
                  
                     Ita ut fit, as it happeneth. Dum rus eo,
                     Terent. in Eunucho. 
                     coep
                           •
                        egomet mecum inter uias, ita ut fit, ubi quid in animo eſt moleſtiae, aliam rem ex alia cogitare, Whanne I wente downe into the countraye, by the waye rydynge, as it happeneth oftentimes, whan any diſpleaſure commeth to my mynde, I bethought me of one thynge and other.
                  
                     Ita ut erat, as it was in dede.
                  
                     Ita ne? but is it ſo? or is it as thou ſayſte? Alſo it ſygnyfieth a note of dyſdayne.Terent. in Andria. 
                     Ita ne contennor abs re? Settyſt thou ſoo lyttelle by me?
                  
                     Ita
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , wherfore than.
                  
                     Ita
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        , and ſoo.
                  
                     Item, euen as, alſo, in lyke maner.
                  
                     Iter facere, to goo a iourney.
               
            
            
               
                  I, ANTE V.
                  
                     IVcundè, merilye, gladdely, pleaſauntly, dylertably.
                  
                     Iucunditas, dilectation, pleaſure.
                  
                     
                        Iudi
                              •
                           io perfundere,
                        Cicer. pro Sex. Roſe.
                      to bryng one to the point to be condempned.
                  
                     Iurare in uerba alterius, to doo fealtie, or to be ſworne a ſubiecte.
                  
                     
                        Iurare in lege alterius,
                        plin. de viris illuſtr.
                      to ſweare to kepe the lawes or ordinances of an nother.
                  
                     Ius bonum dicis, thy requeſt is reaſonable.Plautus in Stico. Plautus in Epidico.
                  
                  
                     Ius dicis, thou ſpeakeſt reaſon.
                  
                     Iure, with good cauſe.
                  
                     
                        Iure ue
                              •
                           iuiu
                              •
                           ia,
                      by right or wronge.
                  
                     
                     Terent. in Andri. Plautus in Capti. Ter. in Ad.
                     Iuſta ſeruitus, ſeruyce without rygour.
                  
                     Iuſti honores, honours due.
                  
                     Iuuat mihi, It dothe me good, it is a pleaſure to me.
               
            
            
               
                  L ANTE A.
                  
                     
                        LABIO, is a fyſhe, whiche I ſuppoſe to be that that is callyd God, with the great lyppes. it was alſoo the Surname of a Romayne.
                  
                     Labrum, a lyppe. alſo the brymme of a ryuer alſo a waſſhynge baſyn.
                  
                     Laccia, a fyſhe callyd a cheuyn.
                  
                     Plautus in Sticho Plautus in Aſin. Priſcianus Feſtus.
                     Lacerare diem, to loſe the day, to ſpende the tyme aboute nought.
                  
                     Lachrimula, a lyttell 
                        •
                     eare.
                  
                     Lacio, lacui, & lexi, lacere, to brynge into a ſnare, or to wynde one in to deceyue him.
                  
                     Lamia, is alſoo an herbe callyd a blynde or deade nettyll.
                  
                     Lagopus, an herbe, whyche I ſuppoſe to be Auyns.
                  
                     Latheris, an herbe callyd Spurge.
               
            
            
               
                  L. ANTE E.
                  
                     LEchia, a fyſſhe, whiche ſome haue taken to be Tunye, for the ſymylitude of them.
                  
                     Legere, to ch
                        •
                     ſe.
                  
                     Lege agere, to ſewe in the lawe, alſo to doo execution.
                  
                     Lent paluſtyis, duckes meate, whyche is in ſtandynge waters.
                  
                     Leo, a ſhelle fyſhe callyd a lopſtar.
                  
                     Lepidè, pleaſantly, pratyly.
                  
                     Lepiſta, a lyttell potte or vyole.
                  
                     
                        Lep
                              •
                           a,
                      is the ſmalleſte poyſe that maye be, wherof there ar .lxxxiiii. in one ſcruple, in a dramme. .CClii.
                  
                     Leucophlegmantia, a ſpyce of the dropſye, where the face and membres are whyte, and ſwollen great.
                  
                     Leuare aliquem onere, to diſcharge oone of his burdeyne.
                  
                     Leuare laborem, to mynyſhe his labour.
                  
                     Leuare morbum, to put out of payne.
                  
                     Leuia nina, ſmalle wynes.
                  
                     Leuita, a deacon.
                  
                     Leuiter, lyghtly.
               
            
            
               
                  L▪ ANTE I.
                  
                     LIa, oone of the wyues of Iacob the patriarche.
                  
                     Libella, the diminuti
                        ••
                      of Libra, it was alſo a ſmalle coyne, and of them were two ſortes, one was worthe the ſenthe part of Seſtertius, the other the tenthe parte of Denarius.
                  
                     Libelhones, caryers of letters.
                  
                     Libere, frankly, liberally, without conſtraint
                  
                     Libere uiuere, to lyue at pleaſure.
                  
                     Liberalis forma, a good fauour.
                  
                     Liberale ingenium, a free courage.
                  
                     Libertus, a bondman manumiſed.
                  
                     Libra, a pounde weight, wherof were dyuers, one was the Romayne pounde, whiche contayned .xii. ounces, or foure ſcore & xvi. drammes, an nother was belonging to exchaungers or bankers, and was but of viii. ounces, an other was callid Mina, wherof rede more in Mina.
                  
                  
                     Lichen, an herbe called Lyuerwort.
                  
                     Limaria, the fyſhe callid Tuny, whan it doth nat excede one foote in length.
                  
                     Lingulaca, a fyſhe callyd a ſole.
                  
                     Litem conteſtari, I ſuppoſe dothe ſygnifie as moche as that whiche our lawyers doo ſaye, to enterpleade whan oone, whiche is nat partie to the action, cometh in, or is callyd in to pleade with the other, to thintent to ſaue his title or intereſt, whiche is ſuppoſed that he hath with them.
               
            
            
               
                  L ANTE O.
                  
                     LOcus obiurgandi, occaſion to chyde.Terent. i
                           •
                         And.
                  
                  
                     
                        Loca
                              •
                           e filiam,
                      to beſtowe his dowghter in mariage.
                  
                     Locuſta, a fyſhe callid a creuyſe.
                  
                     Locutor, he that ſpeaketh moche.
                  
                     Log, is the ſame meaſure of the Hebrues,Gellius. that Sextarius atticus, is amonge the Grekes. Rede more in Sextarius.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  L ANTE V.
                  
                     LVcigena, ingendred of lyght.
                  
                     Lucto, idem quod luctor.
                  
                  
                     
                        Ludos reddere, & ludos facere,
                        Terentius Martialis. Cicer. pro domo ſua.
                      to mock
                  
                     Ludia, a mery wene he full of ſporte.
                  
                     Lummibus obſtruere, to ſtoppe vp the lyght, to lette that the lyghte maye nat come into a houſe.
                  
                     Lumina preferre, to inſpyre.
                  
                     Lumminoſus, a, um▪
                      full of lyght.Cic. ante
                           
                              
                           
                           quam
                         iret in exilium.
                  
                  
                     Lumbrici, lytell fyſhes taken in ſmall riuers whyche are lyke to lampurnes, but they be moche laſſe, and ſomewhat yelowe, and are callyd in wylteſhire prides.
                  
                     Lupus, is a fyſhe, whiche ſome men take for a pyke.
                  
                     Lupus ſanctarius, hoppes, wherwith biere is made.
               
            
            
               
                  L ANTE Y.
                  
                     Lydius lapis, a prouerbe ſpoken of an exact iugement, or that whiche is exactly tried.
                  
                     
                     Lyſimachia, a cytie in Ponto, whiche felle downe with an erthquake.
               
            
            
               
                  M, ANTE A.
                  
                     
                        MACER, ſeu Macir, a ſpyce callyd Maces.
               
            
            
               
                  M ANTE E.
                  
                     ¶Medica, an herbe, whyche I ſuppoſe to be clouer graſſe with purple rounde floures.
                  
                     Melandria, the leane partes of the fiſhe callyd Tuny.
                  
                     Melanurus, a kynde of perches, callydde Ruffes.
                  
                     Melita, an yle lyenge betweene Sycile and Affryke, whiche is nowe callydde Malta, where at this tyme the companye of the knyghtes hoſpytilers do inhabite, as they dyd at the Rhodes.
                  
                     Merula, a fyſhe callyd Merlyng or whiting.
                  
                     
                        Minutum, idem quod l
                              •
                           pta.
                     
                  
                  
                     Mygala, a felde mouſe with a longe ſnoute, callyd a ſhrewe.
               
            
            
               
                  O ANTE C.
                  
                     OCymum, an herbe callyd Baſyll.
                  
                     Ocuiata, a perche fyſhe.
                  
                     Olus atrum, an herbe callid Aliſāder.
                  
                     Orchynus, a great Tuny fyſhe.
                  
                     Orphus, a fyſhe lyke to a Burnarde.
                  
                     Orcha, a great fyſhe of the ſee, whiche deuoureth men and beaſtes hole, of the whiche fyſſhe we do ſee great bones hanged vp in the kynges houſes. It is alſo a great pytcher, whiche ſerueth for wyne or oyle.
               
            
            
               
                  P, ANTE A.
                  
                     
                        PAGRI, fyſhes, which I ſuppoſe are dacis.
                  
                     Paliurus, ſome do ſuppoſe it to be a fyrſe, or a whyn.
                  
                     Partheniū, is ſuppoſed of ſome well lerned men to be tanſye, whiche opinion I thynke to be beſte.
               
            
            
               
                  P, ANTE E.
                  
                     PEctines, ſhell fyſhes callyd Scalopes.
                  
                     Pectunculi, cockylles.
                  
                     Perca, a fyſhe callyd a perche.
                  
                     Perſicaria, an herbe, whyche is ſuppoſed to be Arsſmerte.
                  
                     Pertica, a meaſure conteynyng .xvi. fete, and is callyd a perche or a pole, or a rodde, it is ſometyme but .x. fete, and in wodde land xviii. fete.
                  
                     Peraſites, a clote, the leaues whereof are layde on butter.
               
            
            
               
                  P ANTE H.
                  
                     PHellandrion, an herbe callid Filipēdula
                  
                  
                     Philago, Cudworte.
                  
                     Phiſides, fyſſhes lyke tenches, but that they are greener.
                  
                     Phyſiter, a greate fyſhe, whyche ſpoutethe out of his mouth great goulfes of water.
                  
                     Phoenix, waybenet or bent.
                  
                     Phocena, a fyſſhe callyd Porpuſe, or lyke vnto it.
               
            
            
               
                  P ANTE O.
                  
                     POlygonon, knotte graſſe.
                  
                     Pompilus, a kynde of great Tuny.Iouſus.
                  
                  
                     Populus alba, an aſpe tree.
                  
                     
                        Porca,
                        Columel.
                      in meſure was reckned halfe a roude lande, or the .vii. parte of an acre.
                  
                     Pſeudonardus, lauander.
                  
                     Pſitta, a fyſſhe callyd turbutte.
                  
                     Pugillus, as moche as the holownes of the hande may conteyne.
                  
                     Pychis, a cubyte.
                  
                     Pygmei, people, whyche are but a Cubyte in lengthe.
               
            
            
               
                  R ANTE A.
                  
                     
                        RAIA, a fyſhe callyd ſkeate.
                  
                     Ranunculus, an herbe callyd crowfote or goldeknappe.
                  
                     Rhombus, a Fyſſhe callyd a Turbutte.
                  
                     Ricinum, an herbe callydde Palma Chriſti.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  R ANTE V.
                  
                     RVbea maior, an herbe callyd madder.
                  
                     Rubea minor, an herbe callid cliuers.
                  
                     Rumex, dockes, ſometyme it is taken for Sorell.
                  
                     Ruſcum, holme or hethbruſhe.
               
            
            
               
                  S, ANTE A.
                  
                     
                        SABINA, an herbe callyd Sauyne.
                  
                     Sampſuchus, an herbe callyd Maioram gentyll.
                  
                     Satureia, an herbe callydde Sauerye.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  S ANTE C.
                  
                     ¶Scarus, is a fyſhe, whyche I ſuppoſe is in Deuonſhyre callyd a Bekar.
                  
                     Scilla, ſome do call it a ſturgion.
               
            
            
               
                  S, ANTE E.
                  
                     ¶SEDVM maius, houſeleke or ſyngrene
                  
                     Sedum minus, an herbe callid ſtonecroppe.
                  
                     
                     Selibra Romana, the Romayne half pound comprehended aſmoch as our hole poūd.
                  
                     Saepia, a fyſhe hauyng but one bone, wherin goldeſmythes do make mouldes, and is callyd a cuttyll.
                  
                     Seris, an herb callid white endiue & ſcariole
                  
                     Sextula gemina, is the thyrde parte of an ounce, callyd alſo Duella.
                  
                     ¶Siclus, amonge the hebrewes was halfe an ounce.
                  
                     Siliquaſtrum, an herbe whiche ſome do ſuppoſe to be coſte mary.
                  
                     Smilax, lacis, frenche peaſyn.
                  
                     ¶Solanum, an herbe, whych ſome do ſuppoſe to be nyghtſhade or morell.
                  
                     Solanum ſoporiferum, an herbe, whyche I ſuppoſe to be Dwale.
                  
                     Solonos ueſicaria, Alkakengi.
                  
                  
                     Sonchus, an herbe callyd Southiſtell.
                  
                     Sportula, the ſtipende giuen to cayly awaiters, for them and theyr company, amonge the noble Romayns, amounted to .ii. poyſe grotes, and a halfe grote, or .x. pence of the olde coynage.
                  
                     Stater argenteus, was a coyne of halfe an ounce weight, and was alſo callid Siclus & Terradragmon.
                  
                  
                     Striatus, ta, tum, imbowid or made with ridges and furrowes, or lyke vnto it.
                  
                     ¶Symphitum, an herbe callyd Comfrye.
                  
                     Syſimbrium, horſemynte as I ſuppoſe.
                  
                     Syſymbrium cardanine, water ereſſes.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     TIthimallus, a kynde of ſpurge. Some take it for wertwort.
                  
                     Tuſsilago, an herbe callyd coltisfote.
                  
                     Typhonicus uentus, a whyrle wynde, which plucketh vp trees by the rootes.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     VEttonica, an herbe callyd Bittayne.
                  
                     Vettonica coronaria, Byllofers.
                  
                     Vmbelicus veneris, an herbe callydde Penygraſſe.
                  
                     Verbena, an herbe callyd Veruen.
                  
                     Vitia, a pulſe callyd a vetche.
                  
                     Vlua, a flagge.
                  
                     Xeſtes, idem quod Sextarius.
                  
               
            
            Finis Dictionarij.
         
      
      
         
            TO THE HONEST AND gentylle readers.
            
               TO THE MORE playne declaration of theſe tables folowynge, briefely compiled out of the bokes of Georgius Agricola, and Robertus Senalis, whiche wrate laſt and moſt exactly of poiſes & meaſures, It ſhal be expedient to the reder to haue in remembrance theſe thynges folowynge.
            FYRST whan he redeth in any boke of poyſes, coynes, and meaſures, to conſyder whither they be of Rome, Grece, or of the Hebrues, and than to ſeke the columnes, ouer the which thoſe countreys ar written, & there ſhal he fynd that which he ſeketh for.
            Alſo to remember the valuation of all our coyns, as they be rated at this preſent time, and accompt .xii. d. to a ſhylling .xi. grotes & ii. d. to an oūce .xx. s. to a pound .xiii. s. iiii. d. to a marke .xii. ounces to a pounde, as well of meaſure as of poyſe.
            Moreouer that euery ounce or ynch meaſure quadrate as a dye, is diuyded into the ſame minutes or porciōs, that an oūce poiſe is, and .xii. ounces in meaſure, concernynge veſſelles, is not callydde there a foote, but a pounde meaſure.
            Alſo that the veſſelles or receptories are firſt counted by meaſure, bicauſe that therin it is more certain than poiſe, as a poiſe ofice of honye is not in quantitie lyke to a poyſe ounce of wyne or oyle. wherfore Vncia red in old authors without addicion of pondus, is to be taken for the meaſure ounce, as ye ſhall fynde more aboundantly in the bokes of the ſayde Agricola and Senalis.
            Item in the redyng the meſures of greke, yf ye fynde them not here declared, ye muſt alway remember, that the engliſhe pynte is xxiiii. ounce meaſures, the pynte of Rome callyd Sextarius, is .xx. ounce meſures, the greke pynte callyd alſo Sextarius, and the hebrue pynte callid Log, is but .xviii. ounce meſures, & accordyng to that rate, ye muſte make calculation in conferrynge togyther all other meaſures.
            And this I truſt ſhall at this tyme ſuffiſe, for the vnderſtanding of this matter, wherby the reders, as well of olde hyſtories, orations of Tulli, as alſo ancient phiſitions, & the bokes of holy ſcripture callyd the Bible, ſhall apprehende more vnderſtandinge, with ſingular dilectatiō and pleſure. For the whiche I ſhall require them to giue praiſes to god, of whom it hath chiefely proceded, and thankes to our moſt excellent ſouerayn lorde, by whoſe moſt gracious comfort and ayde, I haue perfourmed it, and to pray to god to gyue me grace and tyme, to accomplyſhe ſuche warkes, as I haue purpoſed for the cōmoditie honour and weale of this my naturall countrey.
         
         
            
            
               
                  The computation of Georgius Agricola.¶Romayne poyſe.
               
                  SCriptulum, the .xxiiii. parte of an ounce.
               
                  Victoriatus, the .xiiii. part of an ounce.
               
                  Denarius, the ſeuenth part of an ounce.
               
                  Sextula, the ſyxte parte of an ounce.
               
                  Sicilicus, the fourthe part of an ounce.
               
                  Duella, the thyrde part of an ounce.
               
                  Semuncia, halfe an ounce.
               
                  Vncia, an ounce, the .xii. part of a pounde troy.
               
                  Seſcuncia, an ounce and halfe.
               
                  Sextans, two ounces, or the ſyxt part of any thynge, hauyng poyſe or meaſure.
               
                  Quadrans, a quarterne of a pounde, or thre ounces, or the .iii. parte.
               
                  Triens, foure ounces, or the fourthe parte.
               
                  Quincunx, fyue oūces, or the fyfte parte.
               
                  Semiſsis, halfe a pounde or halfe any thynge.
               
                  Septunx, ſeuen ounces or the ſeuenth parte.
               
                  Beſ, viii. ounces, or the eight parte.
               
                  Dodrans, nyne ounces, or the nynthe parte.
               
                  Dextans, ten ounces, or the tenthe parte.
               
                  Deunx, xi. ounces, or the leuenth parte.
               
                  Libra, Pondo, ſeu As, twelue ounces.
               
                  As, is ſommetyme taken for the hole of that whyche is diuided in partes.
            
            
               Greke poyſe.
               
                  GRanum, the .iiii. part of Siliqua, the .CCCCC.xvi. parte of an ounce meaſure or poyſe.
               
                  Siliqua, the thyrde parte of obolus, the .Cxliiii. part of an ounce poyſe and meaſure.
               
                  Obolus, the halfe of Scriptulum, or Scrupulus, the .xxxii. part of an ounce.
               
                  Scriptulum, the third part of Drachma, the .xxiiii. parte of an ounce.
               
                  Drachma, the .viii. part of an ounce, whiche practyſers in phiſyke haue eſtemed to the weighte of .lx. barley cornes taken oute of the myddell of the ears, the .viii. parte of an ounce poyſe and meaſure.
               
                  Vncia, an ounce, the .xii. part of a poūd poyſe and meſure.
               
                  Mina Attica, twelue ounces and halfe.
               
                  Mina medica, xvi. ounces.
               
                  Mina Alexandrina, xx. oūces.
               
                  Talentū atticū minus, conteyneth .lx. Minas atticas, whiche of our Troy weight amounteth to .lxii. poundes and half a pounde.
               
                  Talentum atticum maius, cō
                  teyneth .lxxx. Minas, whiche is of troy weyghte .lxxxiii.li. and foure ounces.
            
            
               Hebrue poyſe.
               
                  SIclus, in poyſe is halfe an ounce or foure drāmes.
               
                  Mina hebraica, cōteineth two poundis and a half, troy, or .lx. Siclos.
               
                  Talentum hebraicum, conteineth. C. Minas, that amoūteth to .CCL. poundes troy.
               
                  Talentum Syrum, contayneth Minas Atticas .xv. that is .xv. poundes .vii. ounces & a half.
            
            
               ¶The olde Englyſſhe poyſe ſtanderde.
               FOure graynes of wheat poyſeth the .viii. parte of a penye, ſo .viii. graynes oughte to waye a farthynge xxxii. graynes a penye.
               Peny and farthynge maketh the .xvi. parte of an ounce.
               Foure Royalles maketh an ounce of golde.
               Xii. ounces maketh a pounde of troy weight.
            
            
               Romayne coyne.
               AS, before the tyme of Auguſtus the emperour, was rated to the tenth parte of Denarius,
                  The cōputation of Robertus Senalis, byſſhop of Abrent and afterwarde to the .xvi. parte of Denarius.
               
               
                  Sextans, the .vi. part of As.
               
                  Quadrans, the fourthe parte.
               
                  Semiſsis, halfe As.
               
               
                  Seſtertius, the fourthe part of Denarius, contayneth .iiii. Aſſes.
               
               
                  Victoriatus, the halfe of Denarius.
               
               
                  Denarius, whereof .vii. made one ounce, was by eſtimatiō of our moneye .vi. d. ob. and the .vii. parte of a halfpenye, after .xi. grotes and .ii. d. to an ounce.
               
                  Treſsis .iii. Aſſes.
               
               
                  Senarius .vi. Aſſes.
               
               
                  Decuſsis .x. Aſſes.
               
               
                  Solidus, was dyuerſly taken, ſometyme for a braſyn coyn, contayning .xii. ſmall coynes. ſomtyme for Drachma, in ſiluer, as primi Eſdrae octano ca. & .2. eiuſdem .7. et Paralipo .xxix. Some were the value of Drachma, as in the tyme of Alexander the emperour. Alſo Solidus aureus, was in the tyme of the ſame emperoure .ii. drammes of golde. After in the tyme of Iuſtinian .vi. of them made an oūce, whyche was the iuſte poyſe and value of our royals.
               
                  Centuſsis, x. denarij, of oure money .v. s. vi. d. ob. half farthyng, halfe halfe farthynge.
               
                  Mille aeris, a hūdred Cētuſſes, which is of our money xxvii.li.xvi. s. vi. d. q̄.
               
                  
                     XX. Seſtertij, ar .v. Denarij,
                   of our money .ii. s. vii. d. ob. half farthinge, and the .xxiiii. part of a farthynge.
               
                  XL. Seſtertij .v. s. iii. d. ferthīg & the .xii. parte of a farthing.
               
                  Lxxx. Seſtertij, x. s. vi. d. ob. and the .vi. parte of a farthyng.
               
                  Centum ſeſtertij, xiii. s. ii. d. halfe farthyng, the .vi. parte of a farthyng, and the .xxiiii. parte of a farthynge.
               
                  CC. Seſtertii .xxvi. s. iiii. d. q̄. the thyrde parte, and the .xii. part of a farthynge.
            
            
               
               Greke coyne.
               
                  CCCC. Seſtertij, iii. s. viii. d. ob. a half farthing, a quarter and the .vi. part of a farthing▪
               
               
                  DCCC. Seſtertij, v. 
                     ••
                  v. s. v. d. a farthing, half farthing, and the third part of a farthinge.
               
                  M. Seſtertij, 
                  
                     〈…〉
                  . ix. d. ob. or there 
                     〈◊〉
                  .
               
                  
                     Seſt
                           ••
                        tium,
                   i
                     •
                   euen as moch.
            
            
               ¶Greke coyne.
               
                  AEteolum, ſeu Chalchus the .xxxvi. parte of drachma, by eſtimatiō the poyſe of .ii. barly cornes.
               
                  Semiobolus, the .xii. parte of Drachma.
               
               
                  Obolus, the .vi. part of dra
                        •
                     .
               
               
                  Drachma argenteum, a coyne whereof .viii. made an ounce, which is of our money after the rate of this preſent tyme v. pens halfpeny farthing, an ounce conteininge .xi. grotes and .ii. pence.
               
                  Didrachma .ii. drachmas, of our money .xi. d. ob.
               
                  
                     Stater, ſeu, Tetra 
                           ••
                        achinū .iiii. drachmae,
                   of our mony .xxiii. d
               
               
                  
                     Decē draeli
                           •••
                        
                     
                   iiii. s. ix. d. ob.
               
                  XX. drachmae. ix. s. 
                     ••
                  . d.
               
               
                  XXX. drach .xiiii. s. iiii. d. ob.
               
                  XL. drach. 
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
               
               
                  L. drach. xxiii. s. xi. d. ob.
               
                  LX. drach. xxviii. s. ix. d
               
               
                  LXX. drach. xxxiii. s. vi. d. ob.
               
                  LXXX. drach .xxxviiii. s. iii
                     •
                   
                  d
               
               
                  LXXXX. drach 
                  
                     〈…〉
                   
                  d o
                     •
                  
               
               
                  Centum drach 
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
               
               
                  Drachma 
                  
                     〈…〉
                   
                  drach. argenti, 
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     Mina, or Mna 
                           〈◊〉
                         Solo
                           •••
                        ,
                   a h
                     •
                  ndred drachme, of our money .xlvii. s. xl. d.
               
               
                  Mina uaetus, xxxv. s. xi. d. q̄. lxxv. drach.
               
                  X. Mine ſeu Mnae 
                  
                     〈…〉
                   s. ii. d.
               
               
                  XX. 
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
               
               
                  XXX. 
                  
                     〈…〉
                   xvii. s. vi. d
               
               
                  XI minae, lxx 
                     〈…〉
                  
               
               
                  L. Minae, 
                  
                     〈…〉
                   x. d.
               
               
                  LX. Minae, 
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
               
               
                  Lxx. Minae. 
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
               
               
                  LXXX. Minae, 
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
               
            
            
               Hebrue coyne.
               
                  LXXXX. Minae, CCxv. 
                     ••
                  . xv. s. vi. d.
               
               
                  Centum Minae, CCxx
                     •••
                  . 
                     〈…〉
                   
                  d.
               
               
                  
                     Talentum atticum minus and 
                           〈◊〉
                        ,
                   cōtayneth .lx. Minas, whyche is of oure moneye Cxliii.li.xv. s.
               
                  
                     Talent
                           •••
                         atticum maius,
                   conteyneth .lxxx. M
                        •
                     ra
                        •
                     , of oure money .Clxxxxi li.xiii. s iiii. d
               
               
                  
                     V. Falen
                           •
                        a minora,
                   DCCxviii.li.xv. s.
               
                  X. Talenta, MCCCCxxxvii.l
                     ••
                  x. s.
               
                  XX. Talenta, 
                  MMDCCC.lxxv. li.
               
                  XXX. Talēta, 
                  MMMMCCC.xii l
                     •
                  .x. s.
               
                  Xl. Talē, 
                  MMMMMDCCl.li.
               
                  L. Talē, vii.M.Clxxxvii.li.x. s.
               
                  LX. Talen. viii.M.DCxxv.li.
               
                  LXX. Talen. x.M.lxii.li.x. s.
               
                  
                     LXXX. Talen
                           ••
                        .
                   xi. M.D.
                     ••
                  .
               
                  LXXXX. Talenta, xii.M.D.CCCCxxxvii.li.x. s.
               
                  Centum Talenta. xiiii.M 
                  
                     •
                  i.CCClxxv.li.
               
                  Mille Talenta, Clviii. thouſād and fyfty pounde.
               In the accomptynge of Talen
                        •••
                      atticum maius, adde to euery Talentum minus, xlvii. 
                     〈…〉
                  .
            
            
               Hebrue coyne.
               
                  SIctas argenicus, was in value 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  drachi
                        •
                     as, of our money .xxiii d.
               
               
                  
                     V▪ Sicl
                           •
                        
                        ▪
                     
                   
                  
                     •
                  x. s. vii. d.
               
                  
                     X 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                     
                   
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
               
               
                  XX. Sicli. xxxviii. 
                     〈…〉
                  
               
               
                  XXX. Sic. 
                  
                     〈…〉
                  
               
               
                  XL. Sicli. iii.
                     ••
                  .xvi. 
                     〈…〉
                  .
               
                  L. Sicli. iiii.
                     ••
                  .xv. s. 
                     •
                  . d.
               
                  LX. Sicli. v.
                     ••
                  .xv. 
                     •
                  .
               
                  LXX. Sicli. vi.
                     ••
                  .x
                     ••••
                  . s. ii. d.
               
                  LXXX. Sicli. 
                  
                     〈…〉
                   d
               
                  Lxxxx. Sicli, viii. 
                     〈…〉
                   d.
               
                  
                     Genti
                           ••
                         Sicli.
                   
                  
                     〈…〉
                   d.
               
                  
                     Mi
                           •••
                         Sicli,
                   Cv. 
                     〈…〉
                  .
               
                  Mna Hebraica, 
                  
                     〈…〉
                   of our money 
                     〈…〉
                  
               
               
                  
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   
                  
                     〈…〉
                   of oure money. 
                     •
                  . lxxv.
            
            
               Rom 
                     •
                   Greke meaſure.
               
                  
                     Talentum i
                           ••
                        lgare,
                   containeth halfe ſoo moche .CClxxxvii.li.x. s.
               
                  
                     V. Talēta 
                           •
                        ulgaria,
                   
                  MCCCC.xxxvii.li.x. s.
               
                  
                     X. Talen
                           •
                        ,
                   MMDCCClxxv.li.
               
                  XX. Talenta, v.M.DCCl.li.
               
                  XL. Talen. xi.M.CCCCC.li.
               
                  Lxxx. Talenta. xxiii.M.li.
               
                  
                     C
                           ••
                        luin Tal
                           •
                        nt
                           •
                        .
                   xxviii.M.DCCl.li.
            
            
               ¶Meaſure in length or breadthe. Romayne and Greke.
               
                  
                     GRan
                           •••
                        ,
                   is the fourthe part of digitus a finger.
               
                  Digitus, a finger brede is the length of foure grains iiii. digiri maketh .iii. ynches.
               
                  Pollex, ſeu Vncia, callydde an ynche is the iuſte lengthe of thre 
                     •
                  arly grayne
                     •
                   or foure where cornes, and a quarter, taken out of the myddelle of the care of this one is vncia linearis, or an ynche by lyne: 
                     •
                  n other quadrata, or ſquare, that is to ſay an ynch in lēgth & hiede an nother cubica, or in .iiii. quarters lyke a dyſe, euery quarter beinge an ynch.Exod. 25.
               
               
                  Palmus minor, cōtaineth .iiii. fyngers or .iii. ynches.
               
                  Palmus maior, cōtayneth the h
                     •
                  ndbrede .iiii. fyngers, & the rhumbe in depenes.
               
                  Palmus duplex ſeu dichas, conteyneth .
                     •
                  iii. fyngers.
               
                  
                     Sp
                           ••••••
                        ne ſeu Dodrans,
                   a ſpan whiche is the ſpace betwene the thumbe and the lytle finger ſtretched forth, & conteineth .ix. inches, or .xii. fingers
               
                  
                     Per, 
                           〈◊〉
                        ,
                   cōteineth .iiii. palmes .xii. inchis, or xv. fingers which meaſure is made with a ſpan and the length of halfe the myddell fynger, or with the two 
                     〈◊〉
                   cloſed, and the two 
                     〈…〉
                   extended metyng togither, but theſe meaſures are not to certayne as the ynche before reherſed, by reaſon that all mens handes are not like greate. 
                     •
                  nd

therefore as I haue proued, the foote whiche is made by the ſayd ynche, to be the fote which Budeus, ſuppoſeth to be brought by the Romayns into Fraunce, as Glareanus ſaith, but the Romayn foote, wherof Portius makith mē
                  cion, is ſhorter than that fote one inche, and the .vi. part of a fynger. And the fote of the ſquire vſed by our Carpentars is ſhorter than the Romayne foote of Budeus one ynche, ſoo that it conteyneth xv. fyngers, wherby apereth the diuerſitie of fote meſure, not withſtāding the ſaid firſt fote is the true fote, and therby all other meſures ſhall be compted moſt perfitely.
               
                  Palmipes, containeth a fote & a palme, or .v. palmes.
               
                  Cubitus, conteyneth one fote and halfe.
               
                  Greſſus, a ſteppe, conteineth two fote and a halfe.
               
                  Paſſus, a paſe, contein .v. fote.
               
                  Orgia, a fathome, it is proprely .vi. fete.
               
                  Pertica, a perche, amonge the Romans conteineth .x. fete.
               
                  
                     Pleth
                           •
                        um,
                   conteyneth a hundred fete.
               
                  Stadium, a furlonge, conteyneth .Cxxv. pacis.
               
                  Diaulus, conteinith .ii. furlōg.
               
                  Milliare, ſeu Milliatium, a mile conteineth .viii. furlong, or a thouſande pacis.
               
                  Dolichos, conteineth .xii. furlonges, or .MCCCCC. pacis.
               
                  Paraſanga, xxx. furlonges.
               
                  Schoenos. lx▪ furlonges.
               
                  Statlimos, Statio, ſeu Manſio, one days iourney conteineth xxviii. myles.
               
                  Porca, Cxx. fete in length, and xxx. in bredth.
               
                  Actus, Cxx. fete ſquare.
               
                  Iugerum Romanū. in lengthe CCxl. fete, in bredth Cxx. fete
            
            
               Hebrue meaſure
                     •
                  .
               
                  ZEreth, a palm
                     •
                  .
               
                  Cubitus ſanctuarij, conteineth .vi. palmes.
            
            
               Romayne meaſure.
               
                  Gomor, as moche as a man maye receyue betweene his two armes.
               
                  Calamus ſanctuarij, cōteinith x. fete and a halfe.
               
                  Calamus vulgaris, conteineth ix. fete, of our meaſure three yerdes.
               
                  Choemis, cōteineth .iiii. miles
               
                  Caſtra, ſeu Stationes, conteine euery of them .ix. myles.
               
                  Iuger, ſeu Iugerum, as moche land as a yoke of oxen coude falowe in a day.
               
                  
                     Decem iug
                           •
                        ra,
                   as moche land as ten yoke of oxen moughte falowe in a daye.
            
            
               Meaſure in veſſell or thinges to receyue. Romayne meaſure.
               
                  LIgula, ſine Coclilear, the iiii. part of Cyathus, and receyueth .iii. drachmas and one Scriptulū, of the inch meaſure.
               
                  Cyathus, wherof one maketh ace
                     •
                  abulum, and is of meſure one ynche & a half, a dramme, and a ſcriple, and receyueth of oyle one ounce and halfe, of 
                     •
                  yne one ounce .v▪ drachmas and one ſcriple, of hony two ounces dī.
               
                  Acetabulū, the halfe of Quartarius, is two inches and half of meſure, receiueth of oyle ii. ounces and .ii. drachmas, of wyne .ii. ounces and a half
                     •
                  , of hony .iii. ounces dī
                  ▪ and .ii. drachmas.
               
                  
                     Qua
                           •
                        tarins,
                   the halfe of H
                        •
                     
                     mina, is .v. inches of meaſure receiueth of oyle .iiii. ouncis and dī, of wyne fyue ounces, of hony .vii. ounces dī.
               
                  Hamina, the half of Sextarius is .
                     •
                  . inches of meaſure, and receiueth of oyle .ix. ounces, of myne ten ounces, of hony xv. ounces.
               
                  Sextarius Romanus, is .xx. inches of meaſure callyd Cubica, and receyueth, in noiſe of oyle .x
                     •
                  iii. ounces, of mine xx. ounces, of hony .xxx. ounces, & is the .vi. part of Congius, in our meaſure it is leſſe than a pynte by foure ynches of meaſure.
               
                  Modius, is of grayn and ſalt, and conteineth .xvi. Sextarios and of our meaſure a 
                     •
                  alon a pottell and a quarte, ſauynge iiii. ynche meaſures.
               
                  Congius, hath .vi. Sextarios, Cxx. ynches, in meſure callid Cubica, and receiueth of oile in poyſe .ix. poundes of wine x.li. of hony .xv. pounde
                     •
                  
                  ▪ of our meaſure it is .v. pintes, or a potttell and a pynte.
               
                  Vrna, cōteineth .iiii. Congios and receiueth of oyle .xxxvi. poundes: of wyne .xl. poundes: of hony .lx. poundes. It is of our meaſure, in galons and a pottell.
               
                  Amphora, ſeu quadrantal, conteineth .xlviii. Sextarios, is a foote ſquare in meaſure, callyd cubica, or lyke a dyſe, and cōteineth of oyle .lxxii. poūd of wyne .lxxx. pounde, of hony .Cxx. pound weight. It is of our meaſure .v. galons.
               
                  Culeus, conteyneth .xx. Amphoras, It is of our meaſure a hundred galons, a pype 
                     ••
                  
                  uynge .xxvi. galons.
            
            
               Greke meaſure.
               
                  
                     COchle
                           •
                        rium Atticū, ſeu medicum,
                   is of ynche meſure a dramme, halfe a ſcriple .ii. graynes, and two fiue partes of a grayne, and receiueth in poyſe a dramme and .ii. ſcriples of oyle, and of wyne as moche in poyſe as in meaſure.
               
                  Chema, hath .ii. Cochlearia, is in meſure .ii. drāmes one ſcriple .iiii. graynes, and .iiii. fyue partes of a grayn, and receiueth in poiſe double as moch as Cochl
                        ••
                     rium.
               
               
                  Myſtrum medicum, hathe .ii.
               
                  
                     Cochl
                           •
                        aria,
                   and a halfe, one Chem
                        •
                     , and a quarter, and 
                     〈◊〉
                   in meaſure .
                     •••
                  . drammes, and receiueth in poyſe of wi
                     ••
                   or

pure water, as moche as in meaſure.
               
                  Cochlearium ueterinariū, belongyng to cattell, is in meaſure a quarter of an ynche, & receyueth in poiſe of wyne a dramme .ii. ſcriples, one obolū, one graine and a thirde part of a grayn, of honye .ii. drāmes .ii. ſcriples .vii. grains and very lytle more.
               
                  
                     Myſtrū ue
                           •
                        erinariū,
                   belonging to catel, is in meſure halfe an ynche, and receiueth in poiſe of oile .iii. drāmes and a ſcriple, of wine .iii. drāmes .ii. ſcriples .ii. graynes and .ii. third partes of a grayne, of honye v. drammes, an half .iii. grains and .v. ſixte partis.
               
                  Myſtrum Georgicū, or of huſbandry is in meaſure halfe an ynche and half a dramme and receyueth in poyſe of wyne half an ounce and half a ſcriple, of hony halfe an ounce & two drammes, a quarter of a dr
                     •
                  m and half a ſcriple.
               
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        oncha,
                   is double as moche 
                     •
                  s Myſtrum.
               
               
                  Gyathus medicus, is double as moche as Concha, in meſure an inche and a halfe, and receyueth in poyſe of wyne, one oūce .iii. drāmes, and .iiii. Siliquas, of hony .ii. ounces & ii. ſcriples, of oyle one ounce and .ii. drammes.
               
                  Cyathus georgicus, or of huſbandry is in meſure .ii. inches and a quarter, and receyueth in poyſe of wine .ii. ounces & ii. ſcriples, of hony .iii. ounces one dramme and .ii. ſcriples, of oyle one ounce and ſeuen drammes.
               
                  Cyathus Veterinarius, pertaining to cattel, is in meſure .ii. ynches, a receyueth inpoyſe of wyne one ounce, an halfe, a drāme .ii. ſcriples .ii. ſiliquas ii. grains .ii. third partes of a grayne, of oyle one ounce, a halfe, one dramme, & a ſcriple of hony .ii. ounces, a halfe, a quarter, oone obolū .iii. graynes and a thyrd part.
               
                  Oxybaphum medicum, is in meaſure .ii. ynches a quarter, receiueth in poyſe of wine .ii. ounci
                     •
                   and .ii. ſcriples, of oile one 
                     〈…〉
                   half .iii. drammes.
               
                  
                     Oxyba
                           ••••
                         Georgicum,
                   or of huſbandrye, is in meaſure iii. inches a quarter, & a dram receiueth in po
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  f wine .iii. ounces and a dramme, of oile ii. ounces, a halfe, a quarter, a half, a dramme, of hony .iiii. ounces a halfe, a quarter, and half a dramme.
               
                  Oxybaphum ueterinariū, pertaynyng to cattell, is in meaſure .vi. inches, and receiueth in poyſe of wine .v. ounces & a half, one ſcriple .ii. ſiliquas: of oyle .v. ounces, of honye viii. ounces, a quarter and .ii. Scriples.
               
                  Quartarius, is double Oxybaphum.
               
               
                  Cotyle Medica, is dowble
               
                  
                     Quarta
                           ••
                        us,
                   and is in meaſure ix. ynches, and receyueth in poyſe of wyne .viii. ounces a quartern and .ii. Scriples, of oyle .vii. ounces and a halfe, of our meaſure it lacketh .iii. inche meſures of half a pynt. Galenꝰ ſaith, that there were dyuers opinions of Cotyle, for ſomme affirmed it to conteyne .xii. ounce meſures and ſome ſayd .xvi.
               
                  Cotyle georgica, is in meſure xiii. ynches and a halfe, and receiueth in poiſe of wyne, a pounde and half an ounce. of oyle .xi. ounces, of honye a pounde a halfe, and .vi. drammes, of our meaſure a pynte and one ounce meſure.
               
                  Cotyle ueterinaria, pertaining to cattel is in meaſure .xii. inches, and receiueth of wyne xi. ounces .ii. ſcriples, one obolum and one ſiliqua, of oile x. ounces, of hony one pound iiii. ounces a halfe one dram, and one ſcriple. It is of oure meaſure iuſte half a pynte.
               
                  Sextarius atticus, is .xviii. meſure ounces, and conteyneth in poyſe of oyle .xv. ounces, of wyne a pounde .iii. ounces v. 
                     ••••
                  mes and a Scriple, of hony .ii. pound and one oūce. It is of our meaſure a pynte ſauynge a quarterne or ſyxe ounces.
               
                  Chus artica, or mediea, receyueth .vi. Sextarios articos, and is in meaſure 
                     ••
                  . pounde in poyſe of oyle .vii. pounde & a halfe, of wyne .viii. pound iii. ounces, a halfe & .iii. drammes: of hony .xii. pounde and a halfe. It is of our meaſure a pottell and halfe a pynte.
               
                  Chus Georgica, or of huſbandry is in meaſure .xiii. pound and dī, and receiueth in poiſe of oile .xi. pounde .iii. ounces. of wyne .xii. pounde and dī, of hony .xviii. pounde and .ix. ounces, and is of our meſure vi. pyntes, a halfe, and a quarter or .xviii. ounces.
               
                  Chus veterinaria, is in meſure xii. pounde, and receyueth in poyſe of wyne .xi. pound one ounce .ii. drammes and .ii. ſcriples, of oyle .viii. pounde, of hony .xvi. pounde, a half, one ounce a halfe, and a dramme. It is of our meaſure a pottell and a quarte.
               
                  Metreres attica, contaynethe xii. Choas atticas, & is in meaſure. Cviii. pounde, in poyſe of wyne. C. pounde, of oyle lxxxx. pounde, of honye. Cl. pounde. It is of our meaſure ſyxe galons a pottelle and a quarte.
               
                  Metreres georgica, is in meaſure lyke to attica.
               
                  Choenix, conteyneth .iii. Cotylas, and is in meaſure .xxvii. ynches. It is in our meaſure a pynte and thre ynches.
               
                  Medimnus atticus, conteineth xlviii. Choenices. It is of our meaſure .vi. galons a pottelle and a quarte.
               
                  Medimnus georgicus, is 
                     •
                   hū
                  dred .lxii. meſure. It is of our meaſure .x. galons and oone pynte, or a buſhel a pecke and one pynte.
               
                  Sextarius Medimni, the ſyxte

parte of Medimnus.
               
                  Artaba, fyue Modios, of our meaſure, a buſhell, a pottell, a pynte, and .iiii. ynche meaſures.
            
            
               Hebrue meaſures.
               
                  LOg, 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   the hebrue Sextarius, and is equall to Sextarius atticus, and cō
                  teynyth in meaſure .xviii. ynchis.
               
                  Satum, contayneth .xxiiii. Logim, and is in meaſure .xxxvi. pounde, receiueth in poiſe of wyne .xxxiii. pound▪ an
                     •
                   oure ounces, of oyle .xxx
                     •
                  
                  ▪ of hony .l. pound. It is of our meſure .ii. galons and a quarte.
               
                  Hin, is halfe Satum, is in meſure .xviii. 
                     〈◊〉
                  , receyueth in poyſe of wyne .xvi.li. di, and ii. ounces. of oyle .xv.li. of hony .xxv.li. of our meſure a galon and á pynte.
               
                  Batus, conteyneth .iii. S
                     •
                  t
                     •
                  , whiche is of our meaſure .vi. galons a pottell and a quart.
               
                  Ephi, ſeu Epha, a meaſure of drye thynges, as corne & ſalt, and is equall with Batus.
               
               
                  Gomor, the tenth part of Ephi, & lacketh of our pynt .ii. ounces, and almoſte half one ounce.
               
                  Chorus hebraica, contayneth▪ 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   x. Ephim, whyche is of oure 
                     〈◊〉
                   meſure .vii. buſhell & a halfe.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
               THIS AT THIS TYME ſhall be ſufficient for the declaration of poiſis and meſures. And he that deſireth a more ample and exquiſite triall of them, let him diligently rede the bokes of Georgius Agricola, and Robertus Senalis, who writinge laſt of all other in that kind of matter, haue found dyuers thinges, which were nat before of other remēbred, as it dayly hapneth in all kyndes of writing. I knowe well that Budeus, Alceatus, and Portius are men of excellent lernynge, and their bokes to be made with an exact ſtudy & diligence: But Agricola beinge a great phiſition, and therfore more accuſtomed to rede the warkes of Galenus, than the other, whyche in their profeſſion be lawyers: ſemblablye the warkes of other, whiche wrate of the diſeaſes of cattel, and remedies for them, more ouer attaynyng the bokes of Cleopatras, a noble and great lerned woman, whiche alſo 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  •
               f meaſures, ſpecially pertaininge to 
                  •
               nd
                  ••
               : no meruail though that he more perfitly hath determined that thing, which among the other was in contencion. Semblably Senalis an honorable byſſhop, folowing Agricola, and approuyng his diligēce by makynge true conference betwene hym and the other, and more ouer beinge welle lerned in the hebrue tunge, and conſequētly in holy ſcripture, trieng out ſtudiouſely the poyſes and meſures to the hebrues pertaining: hath happily brought vnto lyght that whiche the other hath remembred, or elles nat vnderſtandyng ſubſtancially the hebrue tounge, they purpoſely omitted. For theſe cauſes I haue preferred the computation of theſe two before any other, exhortynge nat withſtanding al them that do vnderſtād latine, that they do not therfore neglect the others bookes, but to imbrace and read
                  •
                them ſtudiouſly, as in whom they ſhall 
                  〈◊〉
                meruailous knowledge, which els ꝑchaun
                  •
                they ſhal lacke. And as concerning my calculation, whiche I haue done with moche ſtudy and incredible labour for the profit of other, if I haue therin any thyng fayled, as I truſt that I haue not (although the diuiſion in breking of numbers callid fractions, is a thinge ſubtyll and meruailous harde to obſerue alway truly) I hartily pray al gentyll reders, fyndyng it by an exquiſite tryall to correct it without indignation: and lykewyſe all the reſydewe of the dictionarye preceding, and frendely communicate with me their labours, for the which I wyll giue vnto them moſte harty thankes, not leauing vnremembred, god gyuing to me lyfe, their honeſt labours, being beneſyciall vnto this theyr countrey.
         
         
            
               Tho. Berthelet. regius impreſſor excudebat. 
               ANNO. M.D.XXXVIII.
            
            
         
      
   