
      
         
            
            
               
THE Caſtell of Health, Corrected, and in ſome places Augmented by the first Author thereof, Sir Thomas Elyot Knight.
            
               AND NOVV NEVVLIE peruſed and printed in the Yeare of our Lord. 1595.
            
               BY WISDOME PEACE BY PEACE PLENTY.
            
            
               AT LONDON Printed by the Widdow Orwin, and are to be ſold by Matthew Lownes.
         
         
            
            
            THE PROHEME OF SIR THOMAS ELIOT KNIGHT, INTO his booke called the Castell of Health.
            
            
               
                  GAlen the moſt excellent Phiſition feared, that in writing a compendious doctrine for the curing of ſicknes, he ſhould loſe all his labour, for as much as no man almoſt did endeuour himſelfe to the finding of truth, but that all men did ſo much eſteeme riches, poſſeſſions, authoritie, and pleaſures, that they ſuppoſed them, which were ſtudious in any parte of Sapience, to bee mad or diſtract of their wittes, for as much as they deemed the chiefe Sapience, which is in knowledge of things belonging as wel to God as to man, to haue no being. Since this noble writer found that lacke in his time, when there floriſhed in ſundry Countries a great multitude of men, excellent in all kindes of learning, as it dooth yet appeare by ſome of their workes, why ſhould I be grieued with reproches, wherewith ſome of my Countrey doe recompence me, for my labours taken without hope of temporall reward, only for the feruent affection, which I haue euer borne toward the publique weale of my Countrey? A worthie matter, ſaith one, Sir Thomas Elyot is become a Phiſition, and writeth in Phiſicke, which beſeemeth not a Knight, he might haue been much better occupied. Truely if they will call him a Phiſition, which is ſtudious about the weale of his Countrey, I voutchſafe they ſo name me, for during my life, I will in that affection alway continue. And why, I pray you, ſhould men haue in diſdayne or ſmall reputation the ſcience of Phiſicke? Which being well vnderſtood, truely experienced, and diſcreetly ordered, dooth conſerue health, without the which all pleaſures be painefull, riches vnprofitable, company annoyance, ſtrength turned to feeblenes, beautie to lothſomneſſe, ſences are diſperſed; eloquence interrupted, remembrance confounded, which hath been conſidered of wiſe men, not only of the priuate eſtate, but alſo of Emperours, Kings, and other great Princes, who for the vniuerſal neceſſitie, and incomparable vtility, which they perceiued to be in that ſcience of Phiſicke, they did not only aduance & honour it with ſpeciall priuiledges, but alſo diuers & many of them were therein right ſtudious, in ſo much as Iuba the King of Mauritanie & Lybia, found out the vertuous qualities of the hearbe called Euforbium Gentius King of Illyria, found the vertues of Gentiā. The hearbe Lyſimachia tooke his name of King Lyſimachus▪ Mithridates the great King of Pontus, found firſt the vertues of Scordion, and alſo inuented the famous medicine againſt poyſon, called Mithridate. Arthemiſia Queene of Carta found the vertues of Mother wort, which in latine beareth her name, whereby her noble renoume hath longer continued, then by the making of the famous Monument ouer her dead huſband, called Mauſoleum, although it were reckoned among the wonderfull workes of the world, and yet her name with the ſaid hearbe ſtill abideth, whiles the ſayd Monument a thouſand yeares paſſed, was vtterly diſſolued.
            It ſeemeth, that Phiſick in this Realme hath been well eſteemed, ſince the whole ſtudie of Sale
                     •
                  ne, at the requeſt of a King of England, wrote and ſet forth a compendious and profitable treatiſe, called the Gouernance of Health, in latine Regimen Sanitatis: And I truſt in almightie God, that our ſoueraigne Lord the Kings Maieſty, who dayly prepareth to ſtabliſh among vs true and vnco
                  ••
               upted doctrines, will ſhortly examine alſo this parte of ſtudie, in ſuch wiſe, as things apt for medicines, growing in this Realme, by▪ cōference with moſt noble authors may be ſo known, that we ſhall haue leſſe neede of things brought out of farre Countries by the cor
               
                  〈…〉
               on whereof, innumerable people haue periſhed, without blame to be giuen to 
                  〈…〉
                hiſitions, ſauing only, that ſome of them be not diligent enough in beholding 
                  〈…〉
                drugges or ingredients, at all times diſpenſed and tried.
            Beſides the ſayd Kings whom I haue rehearſed, other honorable perſonages haue

written in this moſt excellent doctrine, and not onely of the ſpeculatiue part, but alſo of the practiſe thereof, whoſe workes doe yet remaine vnto their glory immortall, as Auicenna, Auenzoar, Raſis, Cornclius Celſus, Sorani
                     •
                  s, and which I ſhould haue fi
                  •
               ſt named Machaon, and Podal
                     •
                  rius noble Dukes in Grecia, which came to the ſiege of Troy, and brought with them xxx. great ſhippes with men of warre. This well conſidered, I take it for no ſhame to ſtudie that Science, or to ſet forth any bookes of the ſame, being thereto prouoked by the moſt noble and vertuous example of my moſt noble Maſter. King Henry the viij. whoſe health I heartely pray God as long to preſerue as GOD hath conſtituted mans life to contin
                  〈…〉
               : for his highnes hath not diſdayned to be the chiefe author and ſetter forth of an introduction into Grammer, for the children of his louing ſubiects, whereby hauing good maſters, they ſhall moſt eaſely and in ſhort time apprehend the vnderſtanding and forme of ſpeaking true and eloquent latine. O royall hart, full of very nobility. O noble breaſt, ſetting forth vertuous doctrine, and laudable ſtudy.
            But yet one thing much greeueth me, that notwithſtanding I haue euer honoured & ſpecially fauoured the reuerend Colledge of approued Phiſitions, yet ſome of them hearing me ſpoken of haue ſaid in deriſion, that although I were pretily ſeene in hiſtorics, yet being not learned in Phiſicke, I haue put in my booke diuers errors, in preſuming to write of hearbes and medicines. Firſt as concerning hiſtories, as I haue planted them in my workes, being well vnderſtood, they be not ſo light of importance, as they doe eſteeme them, but may more ſu
                  •
               ely cure mens affections then diuers Phiſitions doe eure maladies. Nor when I wrote firſt this booke, I was not all ignorant in phiſicke. For before that I was twentie yeares old, a worſhipfull Phiſition, and one of the moſt renoumed at that time in England, perceiuing me by nature enclined to knowledge, read vnto me the works of Galen, of temperaments, naturall faculties, the introduction of Iohannicius, with ſome of the Aphoriſmes of Hipocrates, And afterward by mine owne ſtudy, I read ouer in order the more part of the workes of Hipocrates, Galen, Oribaſius, Pa
                     •
                  lus Celſus, Alexander Trallianus, Celſus, Plimus, the one and the other, with Dioſcorides. Nor did I omit to reade the long Canons of A
                     •
                  icen
                     ••
                  , the commentaries of Aucrrois, the practiſes of Iſake, Haliabhas, Raſis, Meſue and alſo of the more part of them which were their aggregators and followers. And although I haue neuer been at Mountpellier, Pad
                     •
                  a, nor Sale
                     •
                  ne, yet haue I found ſome thing in Phiſicke, whereby I haue taken no little profite concerning mine owne health. Moreouer I wot not why Phiſitions ſhould be angry with me, ſince I wrote and did ſet forth the Caſtle of Health for their commoditie, that the vncertaine tokens of vrines, and other excrements ſhould not deceiue them, but that by the true information of the ſicke man, by me inſtructed, they might be the more ſure to prepare medicines conuenient for the diſeaſes.
            Alſo to the intent that men obſeruing a good order in diet, and preuenting the great cauſes of ſicknes, they ſhould of thoſe maladies the ſooner be cured. But if Phiſitions be angry, that I haue written Phiſick in Engliſh, let them remember that the Greekes wrote in Greeke, the Romaynes in Latine, Auicenna and the other in Arabike, which were their owne proper and maternall tongues. And if they had been as much attached with enuie & couetiſe, as ſome now ſeeme to be, they would haue deuiſed ſome particular language with a ſtrange cypher or fourme of letters, wherein they would haue written their ſcience, which language or letters no man ſhould haue known, that had not profeſſed and practiſed Phiſicke: but thoſe although they were Paynims & Iewes, yet in this part of charity they far ſurmounted vs Chriſtians, they that would not haue ſo neceſſary a knowledge as Phiſick is, to be hid from them which would be ſtudious about it.
            Finally God is my 
                  ••
               dge, I writ neither for glorie, rewa
                  ••
               le, nor promotion, only I deſire men to deeme well mine intent, ſince I dare aſſure them, that all that I haue written in this booke, I haue gathered of moſt principall writers in Phiſick. Which being throughly ſtudied, and remembred, ſhall bee profitable (I doubt not) vnto the reader, and nothing noyous to honeſt Phiſitions, that doe meaſure their ſtudie, with moderate liuing and chriſtian charitie.
         
         
            
            A Table of the ſpeciall things, which are contayned in this Booke.
            
               A
               ANnexed to things naturall. Fol. 2. 36.
               Ages. 16. 59
               Ayre. 2. 18
               Apples. 30
               Almonds. 32
               Anyſe ſeede. 36
               Ale. 54
               Abstinence. 83
               Affects of the minde. 95
               Autumne. 38
            
            
               B
               BLoud. 12
               Beetes. 35
               Byrdes. 44
               Braine exceeding in heate. 5
               Braine exceeding in cold. 6
               Braine moyst. ibidem.
               Braine dry. ibidem.
               Braine hot and moyst. ibidem.
               Braine hot and dry. 7
               Braine cold and moyst. ibidem.
               Braine cold and dry. ibidem.
               Braine ſicke. 129
               Breast ſicke. ibidem.
               Beefe, 42
               Beanes. 37.
               Breakefast. 64
               Bloudſuckers. 94
               Bourage. 39
               Bread. 41
               Blacke bird. 45
               Bustard. ibidem.
               Bittour, ibidem.
               Braine of beastes. 47
               Butter. 48
               Beere. 54
               By what tokens one may know whether the ſtomacke and head bee hoat or colde. 121
            
            
               C
               COnſiderations of things belonging to health. 1
               Complexions of man. 3
               Choberike bodie. 4
               Choler. 13
               Choler naturall. 14
               Choller 
                     〈…〉
                  nnaturall. ibidem,
               Colour. 17
               Colour of inward cauſes. ibidem.
               Colour of outward cauſes. ibidem.
               Colour of vrines. 130
               Colour of hayre. 17
               Cauſes whereby the ayre is corrupted. 18
               Custome. 24
               Commoditie happening by moderate vſe of the qualities of meate. 26
               Cucumbers. 28
               Cheries. 30
               Chestnuts. 32
               Capers. 33
               Colewortes and cabages. 34
               Cycory. ibidem.
               Cheruile. 35
               Carretes. 38
               Conſiderations in abstinence. 83
               Cloues. 41
               Conny. 43
               Capons, hens, and chickens. 44
               Crane. 45
               
                  
Cheeſe. 48
               Cyder. 54
               Confortatlues of the heart. 103
               Children. 102
               Counſailes against ingratitude. 100
               Chaunces of fortune. 102
               Crudity. 112
               Concoction. ibidem.
            
            
               D
               DIstemperature happening by exceſſe of ſundrie qualities of meates. 26
               Deere red and falow. 43
               Dates. 28
               Ducke. 45
               Diuerſitie of meates. 65
               Digestiues of choler. 89
               Digestiues of fleame. 90
               Diet concerning ſundrie times of the yeare. 59
               Dominion of ſundrie complexions. 104
               Diet of ſanguine perſons. 107
               Diet of cholerike perſons. ibidem.
               Diet of fleumaticke perſons. 109
               Diet of melancholike perſons. 110
               Diet of them which bee readie to fall into ſickneſſe. 126
               Diet in time of pestilence. 137
               Drinke betweene meales. 64
               Drinke at meales. 69
               Digested. 82
               Death of children. 102
            
            
               E
               ELementes. 2
               Earth. ibidem.
               Endiue. 35
               Egges. 48
               Exerciſe. 72. and 75
               Euacuation. 81
               Excrementes. 82
            
            
               F
               FLeumaticke bodie. 4
               Fyre. 2
               Fleame. 13
               Fleame naturall. ibidem.
               Fleame vnnaturall. ibidem.
               Fruites. 27
               Figges. 29
               Fenell. 36
               Fylberdes. 32
               Fleſh. 42
               Feſant. 44
               Feete of beastes. 47
               Fiſh. 48
               Fricaſics or rubbings. 73
            
            
               G
               GEnitories hot. 11
               Genitories cold. ibidem.
               Genitories moyst. ibidem.
               Genitories drie. ibidem.
               Genitories hot and moyst. ibidem.
               Genitories hot and dry. ibidem.
               Genitories cold and moyst. 12
               Genitories cold and dry. ibidem.
               Gourdes. 27
               Grapes. 29
               Garlike. 38
               Ginger. 41
               Gooſe. 45
               Gyſar of byrdes. 46
               Gluttonic. 67
               Gestation. 77
            
            
               H
               HArt 
                     •
                  oat distempered. 7
               Hart cold distempered. 8
               Hart moyst distempered. ibidem.
               Hart dry distempered. ibidem.
               Hart hot and moyst. ibidem.
               Hart hot and dry. ibidem.
               Hart cold and moyst. 9
               Hart cold and dry. ibidem.
               Hart ſicke. 129
               Humors. 12
               Humor ſuperfluous. 82
               Hearbes vſed in potage or to eate. 33
               Hare. 43
               Hearon. 45
               Hart of beastes. 46
               Head of beastes. 47
               Haſyll nuttes. 32
               Honey. 55
               
                  
Hemeroides or pyles. 95
               Heauineſſe or ſorrowe. 98
            
            
               I
               ISope. 39
               Ioye. 103
               Ire. 96
            
            
               K
               KIdde. 43
            
            
               L
               LIuer in heate distempered. 9
               Liuer cold distempered, ibidem.
               Liuer moyst distempered. ibidem.
               Liuer dry distempered. ibidem.
               Liuer ſicke. 129
               Lettiſe. 33
               Leekes. 38
               Lambe. 42
               Larke. 44
               Lyuers of birdes and beastes. 46
               Lunges of beastes. ibidem.
               Letting of blood. 91
               Leaches or blood ſucckers. 94
               Loſſe of goods. 102
               Lacke of promotion. ibidem.
               Laſſitude. 123. & 125
            
            
               M
               MElancholike bodie. 5
               Melancholy. 14
               Melancholy naturall. ibidem.
               Melancholy vnnaturall. ibidem.
               Members instrumentall. 15
               Meate and drinke. 19
               Meates making good iuice. ibidem.
               Meates making ill iuice. 20.
               Meates making thicke iuice. ibid. 21.
               Meates making choler. 20
               M
                     〈…〉
                  king fleume. ibidem.
               
                  
                     〈…〉
                  gendring melancholy. ibid.
               Meates hurting the teeth. 21
               Meates hurting the eyes. ibidem.
               Meates making opilations. 22
               Meates windie. ibidem.
               Melons. 27
               Medlars. 31
               Mallowes. 35
               Mutton. 42
               Moderation in dies. 62
               Meaies. 63
               M
                     •
                  ces. 41
               Members of birdes. 46
               Mylt or ſplene. ibidem.
               Marowe. 47
               Milke. 52
            
            
               N
               NVtmegges. 41
               Nauewes. 37
            
            
               O
               OFficiall members. 75
               Operations. 16
               Olyues. 32
               Orenges. 33
               Onions. 38
               Order in eating and drinking. 68
               Oppilations what they are. 61
               Obstruction or rupture. ibidem.
               Old men. 61
               Ordure. 82
            
            
               P
               PRincipall members. 14
               Partes ſimilaries. 14
               Powers naturall. 15
               Powers ſpirituall, ibidem.
               Powers animall. 16
               Pepons. 27
               Peaches. 30
               Peares. 31
               Pourſlane. 35
               Parſeley. 36
               Purgers of choler. 89
               Purgers of fleume. 90
               Purgers of melancholy. ibidem.
               Precebtes of Diocles. 133
               Pomegranates. 31
               Prunes. 32
               Peaſon. 37
               Parſneppes. 38
               Peniroyall. 40
               Pepper. ibidem.
               Partridge. 44
               
                  
Plouer. 45
               Pigeons. ibidem.
               Particular commodities of euery purgation, 87
               Peculiar remedies of euery humor. 106
               Purgations by ſiege. 86. and 87.
            
            
               Q
               QVantie of meate. 22
               Qualitie of meate. 22. 23. 24
               Quinces. 30
               Quailes. 44
            
            
               R
               RAiſons. 29
               Rapes. 37
               Radiſh. 38
               Rokat. 39
               Roſemarie. 40
               Replerian. 80
               Rheumes and remedies therefore. 116
            
            
               S
               SAnguine bodie. 3
               Stomacke hoat. 10
               Stomacke cold. ibidem.
               Stomacke moyst. ibidem.
               Stomacke drie. ibidem.
               Spirite naturall. 15
               Spirite vitall. ibidem.
               Spirit animall. 16
               Stones of beastes. 47
               Sorell. 36
               Sage. 39
               Stomacke in the which meate is corrupted. 130
               Stomacke ſicke. 129
               Sleepe and watch. 70
               Sauery. 39
               Saffron. 41
               Swines fleſh. 42
               Sparrowes. 45
               Shouelar. ibidem.
               Supper. 63
               Sugar. 56
               Syrope acetoſe. 126
               Springtime. 57
               Summer. 58
               Scarifying. 93
               Sickneſſes appropried to ſundry ſeaſons and ages. 126
               Significations of ſicknes. 128
               Substance of vrines. 131
               Spices. 40
            
            
               T
               THings naturall. 1
               Things not naturall. ibidem 18
               Things against nature. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               Things good for the head. 21
               Things good for the heart. ibidem.
               Things good for the liuer. 22
               Things good for the lunges. ibidem.
               Things good for the eyes. ibidem.
               Things good for the ſtomacke. ibid.
               Temperature of meates. 25
               Turneppes. 37
               Tyme. 39
               Towncreſſes. 40
               Trypes. 46
               Tounge of beastes. 47
               Time. 57. & 58
               Times in the day cōcerning meales 63
               Times appropried to euery humor 105
            
            
               V
               VEale. 43
               Veniſon. ibidem.
               Vdder. 47
               Vociferation. 78
               Vomit. 84
               Vrines. 130
               Vertue of meates. 136
            
            
               W
               WYndes. 18
               Wal
                     •••
                  s. 31
               Woodcockes. 45
               Water. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               VVynter. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               VVyne. 51
               VVhay. 55
            
            
               Y
               Young man. 60
            
            Thus endeth the Table.
         
      
      
         
            
            The firſt Booke of the Castell of Health.
            
            
               TO the conſeruation of the bodie of mankind, within the limitation of health, (which as Galen ſayth) is the ſtate of the bodie, wherein we be neither grieued with paine, nor let from doing our neceſſarie buſineſſe, doth belong the diligent conſideration of thrée ſorts of things, that is to ſay:
            
               Things naturall.
               Things not naturall, and
               Things againſt nature.
            
            
               Things naturall be 7. in number.
            
            
               Elements.
               Complexions.
               Humors.
               Members.
               Powers.
               Operations.
               Spirits.
            
            Theſe be neceſſarie to the being of health, according to the order of their kinde, and be alwayes in the naturall bodie.
            
               Things not naturall be 6 in number.
            
            
               Aire.
               Meates and drinke.
               Sleepe and watch.
               Mouing and reſt.
               Emptines & repletion.
               Affects of the minde.
            
            
               
               Things againſt nature be three.
            
            
               Sickneſſe.
               Cauſe of ſickneſſe.
               Accident which followeth ſickneſſe.
            
            
               Annexed to things naturall.
            
            Age, Colour, Figure, and diuerſitie of kindes.
            The elementes bee thoſe originall things vnmixt and vncompound, of whoſe temperance and mixture, all other things hauing corporall ſubſtance, bee com
               
                  •
               act. Of them be foure, that is to ſay:
            
               Earth.
               Water.
               Aire.
               Fire.
            
            Earth is the moſt groſſe and ponderous element, and of her proper nature is cold and drie.
            Water is more ſubtile and light then earth, but in reſpect of Aire and fire, it is groſſe and heauie, and of her proper nature is cold and moyſt.
            Aire is more light and ſubtile than the other two, and being not altered with any exterior cauſe, is properly hot and moyſt.
            Fire is abſolutely light and cléere, and is the clarifier of other elements, if they bee vitiat or out of their naturall temperance, and is properly hote and drie.
            This is to be remembred, that none of the ſayd elements be commonly ſeene or felt of mortall men, as they are in their originall being: but they which by our ſenſes bee perceiued, bee corrupted with mutuall mixture, and be rather earthly, waterie, airie, and fierie, than abſolutely earth, water, aire, and fire.
            
               
               Of the complexion of man. CAP. 2.
               COmplerion is a combination of two diuers qualities of the foure elements in one bodie, as hot and drie of the fire, hot and moiſt of the aire, cold and moiſt of the water, cold and drie of the earth. But although all theſe complexions bee aſſembled in euery bodie of man and woman, yet the bodie taketh his denomination of thoſe qualities which abound in him, more than in the other, as hereafter enſueth.
               The bodie, where heate and moyſture haue ſoueraintie, is called Sanguine, wherein the aire hath preheminence, and it is perceiued and knowne by theſe ſignes, which doe follow.
               
                  Sanguine.
                  
                     
                        Carnoſttie or fleſhineſſe.
                        The veines and arteries large.
                        Haire plentie and red.
                        The viſage white and ruddie.
                        Sléepe much.
                        Dreames of bloudie things, or things pleaſant.
                        Pulſe great and full.
                        Digeſtion perfect.
                        Angrie ſhortly.
                        Siege, vrine, and ſweat abundant.
                        Falling ſhortly into bléeding.
                        The vrine red and groſſe.
                     
                  
               
               Where cold with moyſture preuaileth, that bodie is called fleumatike, wherein water hath preheminence, and is perceiued by theſe ſignes following.
               
                  
                  Fleumatike.
                  
                     
                        Fatnes quauing and ſoft.
                        Ueines narrow.
                        Haire much and plaine.
                        Colour white.
                        Sléepe ſuperfluous,
                        Dreames of things waterie or fiſh.
                        Slowneſſe.
                        Dulneſſe in learning.
                        Cowardiſe.
                        Pulſe ſlow and little.
                        Digeſtion weake.
                        Spettle white, aboundant, and thicke vrine groſſe, white and pale.
                     
                  
               
               Cholericke, is hate and drie, in whom the fire hath preheminence, and is diſcerned by theſe ſignes following.
               
                  Cholerike.
                  
                     
                        Leannes of bodie.
                        Coſtifeneſſe.
                        Haire blacke or darke, aburne, curled.
                        Uiſage and ſkinne red as fire, or ſalowe.
                        Hot things noyfull to him.
                        Little ſleepe.
                        Dreames of fire, fighting, or anger.
                        Wit ſharpe and quicke.
                        Hardie, and fighting.
                        Pulſe ſwift and ſtrong.
                        Urine high coloured and cléere.
                        Uoyce ſharpe.
                     
                  
               
               Melancholike is colde and drie, ouer whome the earth hath dominion, and is perceiued by theſe ſignes following.
               
                  
                  Melancholike.
                  
                     
                        Leannes with hardnes of ſkinne.
                        Haire plaine and thin.
                        Colour duſkiſh, or white with leannes.
                        Much watch.
                        Dreames fearfull.
                        Stiffe in opinions.
                        Digeſtion ſlow and ill.
                        Timorous and fearfull.
                        Anger long fretting.
                        Pulſe little.
                        Seldome laughing.
                        Urine waterie and thin.
                     
                  
               
               BEſides the ſayd complexions of all the whole bodie, there bée the particular members complexion, wherein if there bee any diſtemperance, it bringeth ſickneſſe or griefe into the member: wherefore to knowe the diſtemperature, theſe ſignes following would be conſidered. Foreſeene that it be remembred, that ſome diſtemperatures be ſimple, & ſome bee compound. They which be ſimple, be in ſimple qualities, as in heate, cold, moyſt, or drie.
               They which be compound, are in compound or mixt qualities, as heate and moiſture: heate and drith: cold and moyſt: cold and drie. But now firſt will we ſpeak of the ſimple complexions of euery principall member, beginning at the braine.
               
                  The braine exceeding in heat, hath
                  
                     
                        The head and viſage very red and hot.
                        The haire growing faſt, black & curled.
                        The veines in the eyes apparant.
                        Superfluous matter in the noſethrils, eyen, and eares.
                        The head much annoyed we hot meates, drinkes, and ſauours.
                        Sleepe ſhort and not ſound.
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  The braine exceeding in cold, hath
                  
                     
                        Much ſuperfluitie running out of ye noſe, mouth, eares and eyen.
                        Haire ſtraight and fine, growing ſlowly and flaxen.
                        The head diſpoſed by ſmall occaſion to poſes and murres.
                        It is ſoone annoyed with cold.
                        It is cold in touching.
                        Ueines of the eyen not ſeene.
                        Sléepie ſomewhat.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Moiſt in exceſſe, hath
                  
                     
                        Haires plaine.
                        Seldome or neuer balde.
                        Wit dull.
                        Much ſuperfluities.
                        Sléepe much and deepe.
                     
                  
               
               
                  The braine drie, hath
                  
                     
                        No ſuperfluities running.
                        Wits good and readie.
                        Watchfull.
                        Haires blacke, hard, and faſt growing.
                        Bald ſhortly.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Complexions compounded.
                  
                     
                        Braine hote & moyſt diſtempered, hath
                        
                           
                              The head aking and heauie.
                              Full of ſuperfluities in the noſe.
                              The Southerne winde grieuous.
                              The Northerne winde wholeſome.
                              Sléepe deepe, but vnquiet, with often waknings, and ſtraunge dreames.
                              The ſenſes and wit vnperfect.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        Braine hote and drie diſtempered, hath
                        
                           
                              None abundance of ſuperfluitie which may be expelled.
                              Sences perfect.
                              Much watch.
                              Sooner bald then other.
                              Much haire in childhoode, and blacke or browne and curled.
                              The head hot and ruddie.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Braine cold & moyſt diſtempered, hath
                        
                           
                              The ſence and wit dull.
                              Much ſleepe.
                              The head ſoone repleniſhed with ſuperfluous moyſture.
                              Diſtillations and poſes, or murres.
                              Not ſhortly balde.
                              Soone hurt with cold.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Braine cold and drie diſtempered, hath
                        
                           
                              The head colde in feeling, and without colour.
                              The veines not appearing.
                              Soone hurt with cold.
                              Often diſgraced.
                              Wit perfect in childhood, but in age dull.
                              Aged ſhortly and balde.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Of the Heart.
                  
                     
                        The heart hot diſtempered, hath
                        
                           
                              Much blowing and pu
                                    ••
                                 ing.
                              Pulſe ſwift and buſie.
                              Hardineſſe and manhood.
                              Much promptneſſe, actiuitie, and quickneſſe in doing of things.
                              Furie and boldneſſe.
                              The breaſt hairie toward the left ſide.
                              The breaſt broad and the head little.
                              The bodie hot, except the liuer doe let it.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        The heart colde diſtēpered, hath
                        
                           
                              The pulſe very little.
                              The breath little and ſlow.
                              The breaſt narrow.
                              The body al cold, except ye liuer do enflame it▪
                              
                              Fearefulnes.
                              Scrupuloſitie and much care.
                              Curioſitie.
                              Slowneſſe in acts.
                              The breaſt cleane without haires.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        The heart moyſt diſtē
                           pered, hath
                        
                           
                              The pulſe ſoft.
                              Soone angrie, and ſoone pacified.
                              The bodie al moyſt, except the liuer diſpoſeth contrary.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        The heart drie diſtempered, hath
                        
                           
                              The pulſe hard.
                              Not lightly angry, but being angry, not ſoone pacified.
                              The bodie drie except the liuer doth diſpoſe contrary.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        The heart hot & moiſt, hath
                        
                           
                              The breaſt and ſtomacke hairie.
                              Promptnes in acts.
                              Soone angrie.
                              Fiercenes, but not ſo much as in hot and drie.
                              Pulſe ſoft, ſwift and buſie.
                              Breath or winde according, ſhortly falleth into diſeaſes cauſed of putrifactiō.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        The heart hot and dry.
                        
                           
                              The heart pulſe great and ſwift.
                              The breath or wind according.
                              The breaſt and ſtomacke all hairie.
                              Quick in his doings.
                              Boldnes and hardnes.
                              Swift, and haſtie in mouing.
                              Soone ſtirred to anger, and tyrannous in manners.
                              The breaſt broade, and all the bodie hot and drie.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        The heart colde and moyſt, hath
                        
                           
                              The pulſe ſoft.
                              Fearefull and timorous.
                              Slow.
                              The breaſt cleane without haire.
                              Not haſtily angrie, nor retaining anger.
                              The breaſt narrow.
                              All the bodie cold and moyſt.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        The heart cold & drie, hath
                        
                           
                              The pulſe hard and little.
                              The winde moderate.
                              Seldome angrie, but when it happeneth it dureth long.
                              The breaſt cleane without haire and litle.
                              All the bodie cold and drie.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Of the Liuer.
                  
                     
                        The liuer in heat diſtempered, hath
                        
                           
                              The veines great.
                              The bloud more hot then temperate.
                              The bellie hairie.
                              All the bodie hot exceeding temperate.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        The liuer cold diſtempered, hath
                        
                           
                              The veines great.
                              Abundance of fleame.
                              The bloud cold.
                              All the bodie cold in feeling.
                              The belly without haire.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        The liuer moyſt diſtē
                           pered, hath
                        
                           
                              The veines ſoft.
                              Much bloud and thin.
                              All the bodie moyſt in feeling, except the heart diſpoſeth it contrarie.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        The liuer drie diſtempered, hath
                        
                           
                              The veines hard.
                              The bloud little and thicke.
                              All the bodie drie.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
The complerions compound may be diſcerned by the ſayd ſimple qualities. And here is to bee noted, that the heat of the heart may vanquiſh the cold of the liuer. For heate is in the heart, as in the fountaine or ſpring: and in the liuer, as in the riuer.
               
                  Of the ſtomacke.
                  
                     
                        The ſtomack hot diſtempered.
                        
                           
                              He digeſteth wel, eſpecially hard meates, and that will not bee ſhortlie altered.
                              Light meats and ſoone altered, be therein corrupted.
                              The appetite little and ſlow.
                              He delighteth in meates and drinks which bee hot: for euery naturall complexion delighteth in his ſemblable.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        The ſtomack cold diſtempered.
                        
                           
                              He hath good appetite.
                              He digeſteth ill & ſlowly, ſpecially groſſe meates and hard.
                              Colde meates doe waxe ſowre, being in him vndigeſted.
                              He delighteth in meates & drinkes which be cold, & yet in them he is indamaged.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        The ſtomack moyſt diſtempered.
                        
                           
                              He thirſteth but ſeldome, yet he deſireth to drinke, with ſuperfluous drinke he is hurt.
                              He delighteth in moyſt meates.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        The ſtomacke dry diſtempered.
                        
                           
                              He is ſoone thirſtie.
                              Content with a little drinke.
                              Diſeaſed with much drinke.
                              He delighteth in drie meates.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               It is to be noted, that the diſpoſitions of the ſtomacke naturall, doe deſire that which is of like qualities. The diſpoſitions vnnaturall, doe deſire things of contrarie qualities.
               
                  
Alſo not the ſtomacke onely cauſeth a man to thirſt, or not thirſt, but alſo the liuer, the lungs, and the heart.
               
                  Of the genitories or ſtones of generation.
                  
                     
                        The genitories hot diſtempered, haue
                        
                           
                              Great appetite to the act of generation.
                              Ingendring men children.
                              Hayre ſoone growne about the members.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        The genitories cold diſtempered, haue
                        
                           
                              Small appetite to the act of generation.
                              Ingendring women children.
                              Slow growth of haire about the members.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        The genitories moyſt diſtempered, haue
                        Séede abundant, but thinne and watrie.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        The genitories dry diſtempered, haue
                        Séede little, but méetly thicke in ſubſtance.
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Genitories hot & moyſt, haue
                        
                           
                              Leſſe appetite to lecherie than in thē which be hot and drie.
                              More puiſſance to doe it, and without leſſe damage.
                              Hurt by abſtaining from it.
                              Leſſe hairines than in hot and drie.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        The genitories hot and drie, haue
                        
                           
                              The ſeede thicke.
                              Much fruitfulnes of generation.
                              Great appetite and readines to the act.
                              Haire about the mēbers ſoone growne.
                              Swiftnes in ſpeeding of the act.
                              Soone there with ſatiſfied.
                              Damage by vſing thereof.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        The genitories colde & moyſt, haue
                        
                           
                              The ſeede waterie and thin.
                              Little deſire to the act, but more puiſſance then in them which be cold and drie.
                              Little haire or none about the members.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        The genitories colde & drie, haue
                        
                           
                              Haires none or few.
                              Little appetite or none to lecherie.
                              Little puiſſance to doe it.
                              Ingendring more females than men children.
                              That little ſeed is thicker than in cold and moyſt.
                           
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  Of Humours.
                  IN the bodie of man be foure principal humours, which continuing in the proportion, that nature hath li
                        〈…〉
                     
                     ted, the bodie is free from all ſicknes. Contrariwiſe, by the increaſe or diminutiō of any of them in quantitie or qualitie, ouer or vnder their naturall aſſignement, vnequall temperature commeth into the bodie, which ſickneſſe followeth more or leſſe according to the lapſe or decay of the temperatures of the ſayd humours, which be theſe following.
               
               
                  Bloud, Fleume, Choler, Melancholy.
                  Bloud hath preheminence ouer all other humours in ſuſteining of all liuing creatures, for it hath more cōformitie with the originall cauſe of liuing, by reaſon of temperatnes in heate and moyſture, alſo nouriſheth more the bodie, and reſtoreth that which is decayed, being the very treaſure of life, by loſſe whereof death immediatly followeth. The diſtemperature of bloud happeneth by one of the other thrée humours, by the inordinate or ſuperfluous mixture of them.
                  
                     
                     Of Fleume.
                     Fleume is of two ſorts.
                     Naturall, and vnnaturall.
                  
                  Naturall fleume is a humour cold & moyſt, white and ſweete, or without taſte, ingendred by inſufficient decoction in the ſecond digeſtion of the waterie or rawe parts of the matter decoct, called Chilus, by the laſt digeſtion made apt to bée conuerted into bloud. In this humour water hath dominion moſt principall.
                  Fleume vnnaturall is that which is mixt with other humours, or is altered in his qualitie: and therof is eight ſundrie kinds.
                  
                     Fleume.
                     
                        
                           Watrie, which is found in ſpettle of great drinkers, of them which digeſt it.
                           Slimy or raw.
                           Glaſie like to white glaſſe, thicke.
                           Uiſcous like bird-lime and heauie.
                           Plaiſtrie which is very groſſe, and as it were chalkie, ſuch is found in the ioynts of them which haue the gowte.
                           Salt that is mingled with choler.
                           Sower mixt with melancholy, that commeth of corrupt digeſtion.
                           Harſh, thicke and groſſe, which is ſeldome found, which taſteth like greene crabs or ſlowes.
                           Stiptick or binding is not ſo groſſe nor cold, as harſh, and hath the taſte like to greene red wine, or other like ſtraining ye tongue.
                        
                     
                  
                  Choler doth participate with naturall heate as long as it is in good temperance. And thereof is alſo two kindes. Naturall, and vnnaturall.
                  
                     
                     Choler naturall.
                     Naturall choler is the fome of bloud, the colour whereof is red and cléere, or more like to an orenge colour, and it is hot & dry, wherein the fire hath dominion: & is light and ſharpe, and is engendred of the moſt ſubtile part of matter decoct or boyled in the ſtomack, whoſe beginning is in ye liuer.
                  
                  Unnaturall choler is that which is mixt or corrupted with other humours, whereof be foure kinds.
                  Citrine or yellow choler, which is the mixture of naturall choler, and watrie fleume: and therefore hath leſſe heate then other choler.
                  Yolkie like the yelks of egges, which is of the mixture of 
                        〈◊〉
                      conge
                        〈…〉
                     d, and 
                        ••
                     oler naturall, and is yet leſſe hot then the other.
                  Gréene like vnto léekes, whoſe beginning is rather of the ſtomacke then of the liuer.
                  Gréene like to gréene canker of mettall, and burneth like venime, and is of excéeding 
                        〈…〉
                     ſtion of choler or fleume, and by thoſe two 
                        〈…〉
                     ds nature is mortified.
                  
                     Melancholy or black choler in diuided into two kinds.
                     Naturall, which is the dregges of pure bloud, and is knowne by the blacknes when it iſſueth either downward or vpward, and is verily cold or drie.
                     Unnaturall, which pr
                           〈…〉
                        deth of the aduſtion of cholerike mixture, and is hoter and lighter, hauing in it violence to kill, with a dangerous diſpoſition.
                  
               
               
                  Of the Members.
                  
                     There be 
                           〈◊〉
                         of members: that is to ſay,
                     The braine.
                     The liuer.
                     The heart.
                     The ſtones of generation.
                  
                  
                     
                     Officiall members.
                     
                        
                           Synewes which doe ſerue to the braine.
                           Arteries or pulſes, which doe ſerue to the heart.
                           Ueines which doe ſerue to the liuer.
                           Ueſſels ſpermaticke, wherein mans ſeede lieth, which doe ſerue to the ſtones.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Partes called Similares, for being diuided, they remaine in themſelues like as they were.
                     
                        
                           Bones.
                           Griſtell.
                           Cales betwixt the vttermoſt ſkinne and the fleſh.
                           Muſcules or fillets.
                           Fat fleſh.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Members inſtrumentall.
                     
                        
                           The ſtomacke.
                           The raines.
                           The bowels.
                           All the great ſynewes.
                        
                     
                  
                  Theſe of their vertue doe appetite meate and alter it.
                  
                     Of powers.
                     
                        
                           Animall.
                           Spirituall.
                           Naturall.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Naturall power.
                     
                        
                           Which doe miniſter.
                           To whom is miniſtred.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Which doth miniſter.
                     
                        
                           Appetiteth.
                           Retaineth.
                           Digeſteth.
                           Expelleth.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     To whom is miniſtred.
                     
                        
                           Ingendreth.
                           Nouriſheth.
                           Feedeth.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Power ſpirituall.
                     
                        
                           Working, which dilateth the heart and arteries, and eftſoones ſtreineth them.
                           Wrought, which is ſtirred by an exteriour cauſe to worke, whereof commeth anger, indignation, ſubtiltie and care.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     Power animall
                     
                        
                           That which ordaineth, decerneth and compoſeth.
                           That moueth by voluntarie motion.
                           That which is called ſenſible, whereof doe procéede the fiue wits.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Of that which ordaineth doe proceede
                     
                        
                           Imagination in the forehead.
                           Reaſon in the braine.
                           Remembrance in the noddle.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Operations,
                     
                        
                           Appetite by heate and drith.
                           Digeſtion by heate and moyſture.
                           Retaining by cold and drith.
                           Expulſion by cold and moyſt.
                        
                     
                  
                  Spirit is an ayrie ſubſtance, ſubtile, ſtirring the powers of the bodie, to performe their operations, which is diuided into
                  
                     Naturall, which taketh his beginning of the liuer, & by the veines which haue no pulſe, ſpreadeth into the whole bodie.
                     Uitall, which proceedeth from the heart, & by the arteries or pulſes is ſent into the whole bodie.
                     Animall, which is ingendred in the braine, and is ſent by the ſynewes throughout the bodie, and maketh ſence or feeling.
                  
                  
                     Annexed to things naturall.
                     
                        
                           
                              Ages, be 4.
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Adoleſcentie to 25. yeares, hot and moyſt, in the which time the bodie groweth.
                                 
                                    Iuuentute vnto 40. yeares, hote and drie, wherein the bodie is in perfect growth.
                                 
                                    Senectute vnto 60. yeares, colde and drie, wherein the body beginneth to decreaſe.
                              
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  Age decrepite vntill the next time of life, accidently moyſt, but naturally cold and drie, wherein the powers and ſtrength of the bodie be more and more miniſhed.
                  
                     
                     Colour.
                     Of inward cauſes.
                     Of outward cauſes.
                  
                  
                     Colours of inward cauſes.
                     
                        
                           Of equalitie of humours, as he that is red and white.
                           Of inequalitie of humours, whereof doe proceede blacke, ſalowe, pale, or white onely.
                           
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       
                                          Blacke
                                          Red
                                          Salow
                                       
                                    
                                    doe betoken dominion of heate.
                                 
                              
                           
                           White, cold fleume.
                           Pale, cold melancholy.
                           Red, abundance of bloud.
                           Salow, choler citrine.
                           Black, melancholy or choler aduſt.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Colour of outward cauſes.
                     
                        
                           Of colde or heate, as Engliſh men bee white, Moores be blacke.
                           Of things accidentall, as of feare, of anger, of ſorrow, or other like motiōs.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Colour of haire.
                     
                        
                           Blacke, either of abundance of choler inflamed, or of much incending or aduſtion of bloud.
                           Red haire of much heate, not aduſt.
                           Gray haires of abundance of melancholie.
                           White haires of the lack of naturall heat, and by occaſion of fleume putrified.
                        
                     
                  
                  All the reſidue concerning things naturall contayned in the Introduction of Ioannitius, and in the little craft of Galen, I purpoſely paſſe ouer for this time, for as much as it doth require a reader hauing ſome knowledge in philoſophy natural, or els, it is hard and tedious to be vnderſtood. Moreouer, this which I haue written

in this firſt table, ſhall be ſufficient to the conſeruation of health, I meane with that which now followeth in the other tables.
               
               
                  The ſecond Table.
                  THings not naturall be ſo called, becauſe they bee no portion of a naturall bodie, as they be, which bee called naturall things, but yet by the temperance of them, the bodie being in health, ſo conſiſteth: by the diſtemperance of them, ſicknes is induced, and the body diſſolued.
                  The firſt of things not naturall, is ayre, which is properly of it ſelfe, or of ſome materiall cauſe or occaſion good or ill.
                  That which is of it ſelfe good, hath pure vapors and is odoriferous.
                  Alſo it is of it ſelfe, ſwift in alteration from hot and cold, wherein the bodie is not much prouoked to ſweate for heate, ne too chill for vehemencie of cold.
                  Ayre among al things not naturall is chiefly to be obſerued, for as much as it doth incloſe vs, and alſo enter into our bodies, ſpecially the moſt notable member, which is the hart, and we cannot be ſeparated one houre from it, for ye neceſſitie of breathing & fetching of winde.
                  The cauſes whereby the ayre is corrupted bee ſpecially ſoure.
                  
                     Influence of ſundrie ſtarres.
                     Great ſtanding waters neuer refreſhed.
                     Carraine lying long aboue ground.
                     Much people in ſmall roume lying vncleanly and ſluttiſhly.
                  
                  
                     Winde bringing wholſome ayre.
                     
                        
                           North which prolongeth life, by expulſing ill vapours.
                           Eaſt is temperate and luſtie.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Winde bringing ill ayre.
                     
                        
                           South corrupteth and maketh ill vapours.
                           Weſt is very mutable, which nature doth hate.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                  Meates and drinkes.
                  
                     In meate and drinke we muſt conſider ſixe things.
                     Subſtance.
                     Quantitie.
                     Qualitie.
                     Cuſtome.
                     Time.
                     Order.
                  
                  Subſtance, ſome is good, which maketh good iuyce and good bloud: ſome is ill, and ingendreth ill iuyce and ill bloud.
                  
                     Meates and drinkes making good iuyce.
                     Bread of pure flower, of good wheate ſomewhat uened, well baked, not too old, nor too ſtale.
                     Egges of Feſants, Hennes, Partriches, new layde, leapotched, meane betweene rere and hard.
                     Milke new milked dronke faſting, wherein is Sugar or the leaues of mints.
                     Feſants, Partriches or Chickens.
                     Capons or Hennes, Birds of the fields.
                     Fiſh of ſtony riuers, Ueale ſucking.
                     Porke young, Béefe not paſſing thrée yeares old.
                     Pigeons, Ueniſon of red Déere.
                     Peaſe pottage with mints, Féete of ſwine or calues.
                     
                        
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Figges ripe,
                                    Bourage,
                                    Raiſons.
                                 
                              
                              before meales.
                           
                        
                     
                     Languedebéefe, Parſley, Mints.
                     Rice with Almond milke.
                     Lettice, Cicorie, Grapes.
                     Wines good moderatly taken, well fined.
                     Ale and Béere ſixe dayes olde, cleane brewed and not ſtrong.
                     Mirth with gladnes.
                     The liuer and braines of Hennes and Chickens, and young Géeſe.
                  
                  
                     
                     Meates and drinkes making 
                           •
                        ll iuyce.
                     Old béefe, Old mutton, Géeſe old, Swan old.
                     Duckes of the 
                           〈…〉
                        ell, Inwards of beaſts.
                     Blacke puddings.
                     The heart, liuer, and kidneies of all beaſts.
                     The braines and marow of the backe bone.
                     Wood culuers, Shelfiſh, except Creuiſe de eau dulce.
                     Chéeſe hard, Apples and peares much vſed.
                     Figges and grapes notripe.
                     All raw hearbes, except Lettice, Borage and Cicorie.
                     
                        
                           
                              
                                 
                                    Onions,
                                    Garlike,
                                    Léekes,
                                 
                              
                              Immoderatly vſed, ſpecially in cholericke ſtomackes.
                           
                        
                     
                     Wine muſtie and ſowre. Feare, ſorow, & penſiuenes.
                  
                  
                     Meates ingendring choler.
                     Garlike, Onions, Roket, 
                           •
                        erſis, Léekes, Muſtard.
                     Pepper, Hony, Wine much drunken, Swéet meates.
                  
                  
                     Meates ingendring fleume.
                     All ſlimie and cleauing meates, Chéeſe newe.
                     All fiſh, ſpecially in a fleumatike ſtomacke.
                     Inwards of beaſts, Lambes fleſh.
                     The ſtnew parts of fleſh, Skinnes, Braines, Lungs.
                     Rapes, Cucumbers, Repletion, Lacke of exerciſe.
                  
                  
                     Meates ingendring Melancholy.
                     Béefe, Goates fleſh, Hares fleſh, Boares fleſh.
                     Salt fleſh, Salt fiſh, Coleworts.
                     All pulſe, except white peaſon, Browne bread courſe.
                     Thicke wine, Blacke wine, Old chéeſe, Old fleſh.
                     Great fiſhes of the ſea.
                  
                  
                     Meates making thicke iuyce.
                     Rie bread muſtie, Bread without leauen, Cake bread.
                     Sea fiſh great, Shell fiſh, Béefe the kidneis.
                     The liuer of a ſwine, The ſtones of beaſts.
                     
                        
Milke much ſodden, Rapes, All round rootes.
                     Cucumbers, Swéet wine, Déepe red wine, Garlike,
                     Muſtard, Origanum, Hyſope, Baſill, Fenell, Cheeſe,
                     Egges fried or hard, Cheſtnuts, Nauewes.
                     Figges greene, Apples not ripe, Pepper, Roket.
                     Leekes, Onions, much vſed.
                  
                  
                     Meates which doe hurt the teeth.
                     Uery hot meates, Nuts, Swéet meates and drinkes.
                     Radiſh rootes, Hard meates, Milke, Bitter meates.
                     Much vomit, Léekes, Fiſh fat, Limons, Coleworts.
                  
                  
                     Things hurtfull to the eyes.
                     Drunkenneſſe, Lecherie, Muſt, All pulſe.
                     Swéet wines and thicke wines, Hempſeede.
                     Uery ſalt meates, Garlike, Onions, Coleworts.
                     Radiſh, Reading after ſupper immediatly.
                  
                  
                     Making great opilations.
                     Thicke milke, All ſweete things.
                     Rie bread, Sweet wines.
                  
                  
                     Meates inflating or windie.
                     Beanes, Lupines, Cicer, Mille, Cucumbers.
                     All iuyce of hearbs, Figs drie, Rapes, Nauewes raw.
                     Milke, Hony not well clarified, Muſt.
                  
                  
                     Things good for the head.
                     Cubebes, Galingale, Lignum aloes, Marioram.
                     Baulme mints, Gladen, Nutmegges, Muſke.
                     Roſemary, Roſes, Pyony, Hyſope, Spike, Camomill.
                     Mellilete, Rew, Frankinſence.
                  
                  
                     Things good for the heart.
                     Cinamom, Saffron, Corall, Cloues, Lignum aloes,
                     Pearles, Macis, Baulme mints, Myrabolanes,
                     
                        
Muſke, Nutmegs, Roſemary.
                     The bone of the heart of the red Déere.
                     Marioram, Bugloſſe, Bourage, Setwall.
                  
                  
                     Things good for the Liuer.
                     Wormwood, Withwind, Agrimonie, Saffron.
                     Cloues, Endiue, Liuerwort, Cicorie, Plaintaine.
                     Dragons, Raiſons great, Saunders, Fenell.
                     Uiolets, Roſe water, Lettice.
                  
                  
                     Things good for the Lungs.
                     Elicampane, Hyſope, Scabioſe, Licoriſe, Raiſons,
                     Maidenhaire, Penidies, Almonds, Dates, Piſtaces.
                  
                  
                     Things good for the eyes.
                     Eyebright, Fenell, Ueruaine, Roſes, Celendine.
                     Agrimony, Cloues, Cold water.
                  
                  
                     Things good for the ſtomacke.
                     Myrabolanes, Nutmegs, Organum, Piſtaces.
                     Quinces, Olibanum, Wormwood, Saffron, Corall.
                     Agrimony, Fumetorie, Galingale, Cloues.
                     Lignum aloes, Maſtix, Mint, Spodium.
                     The innermoſt ſkinne of a Hennes gyſar.
                     Coriander prepared.
                  
               
            
         
         
            The ſecond Booke of the Castell of Health.
            
            
               Of quantitie. CAP. 1.
               
                  THe quantitie of meate muſt bee portioned after the ſubſtance and qualitie thereof, and according to the complexion of him that eateth.
               Firſt it ought to bee remembred, that meates hot and moyſt which are qualities of the bloud, are ſoone turned into bloud, and therefore much nouriſheth the bodie.

Some meates doe nouriſh but little, hauing little conformitie with bloud in their qualities. Of them which doe nouriſh: ſome are more groſſe, ſome lighter in digeſtion. The groſſe meate ingendreth groſſe bloud, but where it is well concoct in the ſtomacke and well digeſted, it maketh the fleſh more firme, and the officiall mē
                  bers more ſtrong then fine meates. Wherefore of men which vſe much labour or exerciſe, alſo of them which haue very cholerike ſtomackes here in England, groſſe meates may be eaten in a great quantitie: and in a cholerike ſtomacke, béefe is better digeſted then a chickens legge, for as much as in a hot ſtomacke fine meates bee ſhortly aduſt and corrupted. Contrariwiſe, in a cold or fleumatike ſtomacke groſſe meate abideth long vudigeſted, and maketh putrified matter: light meates therefore to ſuch a ſtomacke be more apt and conuenient.
               The temperate bodie is beſt nouriſhed with a little quantitie of groſſe meates, but of temperate meates in ſubſtance and qualitie they may ſafely eate a good quantitie: foreſeene alway that they eate without gourmandiſe, or leaue without appetite. And here it would be remembred, that the cholerike ſtomacke doth not deſire ſo much as he may digeſt: the melancholy ſtomacke may not digeſt ſo much as he deſireth: for cold maketh appetite, but naturall heate concocteth or boyleth. Notwithſtanding, vnnaturall or ſupernaturall heate deſtroyeth appetite and corrupteth digeſtion, as it appeareth in feuers. Moreouer, fruites and hearbes, ſpecially rawe, would bee eaten in a ſmall quantitie, although the perſon be very cholerike, for as much as they doe ingender thin watrie bloud apt to receiue putrification, which although it bée not ſhortly perceiued of him that vſeth it, at length they feele it by ſundrie diſeaſes which are long in comming, and ſhortly ſleieth, or bee hardly eſcaped. Finally, exceſſe of meates is to bée abhorred. For as it is ſayd in the booke called Eccleſiaſticus: In

much meate ſhall be ſicknes, & inordinate appetite ſhall approch vnto choler. Semblably the quantity of drinke would bee moderated, that it exceede not, nor bee equall vnto the quantity of meate, ſpecially wine which moderatly taken, aydeth nature, and comforteth her: and as the ſayd author of Eccleſiaſticus ſayth: Wine is a reioyſing to the ſoule and bodie. And Theogines ſayth, in Galens worke: A large draught of wine is ill, a moderate draught is not euill, but commodious and profitable.
            
            
               Of qualitie of meates. CAP. 2.
               QUalitie is the complexiō, that is to ſay, it is the ſtate thereof, as hot, cold, moyſt, or drie. And ſome meates be in winter cold in act, and in vertue hot.
               And it would be conſidered, that euery complexion tē
                  perate and vntemperate, is cōſerued in his ſtate, by that which is like thereto in forme & degrée. But that which excéedeth much in diſtemperance, muſt be reduced to his temperance, by that which is contrarie to him in forme or qualitie, but like in degree moderatly vſed. By forme is vnderſtood groſſenes, finenes, thicknes, or thinnes, by degrée, as the firſt, the ſecond, the third, the fourth in heate, cold, moyſture, or drith.
               
                  Of cuſtome.
                  CUſtome in féeding is not to bee contemned, or little regarded: for thoſe meates, to the which a man hath béen of long time accuſtomed, though they be not of ſubſtance commendable, yet doe they ſometime leſſe harme then better meates, whereunto a man is not vſed. Alſo the meates and drinkes, which do much delight him that eateth, are to bee preferred before that which is better, but more vnſauorie. But if ye cuſtome be ſo pernicious, that it néedes muſt be left, then would it be withdrawne

by little and little in time of health, and not of ſickneſſe. For if it ſhould bée withdrawne in time of ſickneſſe, nature ſhould ſuſtaine treble detriment, firſt by the griefe induced by ſickneſſe: ſecondly, by receiuing of medicines: thirdly, by forbearing the thing wherein ſhe delighteth.
               
            
            
               Of the temperature of meates to be receiued. CAP. 4.
               TO keepe the bodie in good temper, to them whoſe naturall complexion is moyſt, ought to bee giuen meates that bée moiſt in vertue, or power: contrariwiſe to them, whoſe naturall complexion is drie, ought to be giuen meates drie in vertue, or power. To bodies vntemperate, ſuch meates or drinkes, which bee in power contrarie to the diſtemperance, but the degrées are alway to bée conſidered as well of the temperance of the bodie, as of the meates. For where the meates doe much excéede in degree the temperature of the bodie, they annoy the bodie in cauſing diſtemperance. As hot wines, pepper, garlike, onyons, and Salt, bée noyfall to them which bée cholerike, becauſe they bée in the higheſt degrée of heate and drith aboue the iuſt temperance of mans bodie in that complexion. And yet bée they oftentimes wholeſome to them which bee fleumatike. Contrariwiſe, cold water, cold hearbes, and cold fruits moderatly vſed, bée wholeſome to cholerike bodies, by putting away the heate, excéeding the naturall temperature, and to them which bee fleumatike they bée vnwholeſome, and doe bring into them diſtemperance of cold and moyſt.
            
            
               
               What diſtemperance happeneth by the exceſſe of sundrie qualities in meates and drinks. CAP. 5.
               
                  Meates.
                  
                     
                        Cold, doe congeale and mortifie.
                        Moyſt, doe putrifie and haſten age.
                        Dry, ſucketh vp naturall moyſture.
                        Clanmie, ſtoppeth the iſſue of vapors and vrine, & ingendreth rough fleume and grauel.
                        Fat and oyly ſwimmeth long in ye ſtomacke, and bringeth in lothſomnes.
                        Bitter, doth not nouriſh.
                        Salt, doe fret much the ſtomacke.
                        Harriſh, like the taſte of wild fruits, doe conſtipate and reſtraine.
                        Swéete chaſeth the bloud, and cauſeth opilations or ſtoppings of the pores and conduites of the bodie.
                        Sower cooleth nature, and haſteneth age.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               What commoditie happeneth by the moderate vſe of the ſayd qualitie of meates and drinkes. CAP. 6.
               
                  Meates.
                  
                     
                        Cold aſſwageth the burning of choler.
                        Moyſt, humecteth that which is dried.
                        Dry, conſumeth ſuperfluous moyſture.
                        Clāmy, thicketh yt which is ſubtil & pearcing.
                        Bitter, clenſeth and wipeth off, alſo mollifieth and expelleth fleume.
                        Salt, relenteth fleume clammy, and drieth it.
                        Fat & vnctuous, nouriſheth & maketh ſoluble.
                        Stiptike or rough on the tongue, bindeth and comforteth appetite.
                        Swéet doth clenſe, diſſolue, and nouriſh.
                     
                  
               
            
            
               
               Of fruites. CAP. 7.
               FOraſmuch as before that tillagē of corne was inuented, and that deuouring of fleſh and fiſh was of mankind vſed, men vndoubtedly liued by fruites, and nature was ther with contented and ſatiſfied, but by chaunge of the diet of our progenitors, there is cauſed to bee in our bodies ſuch alteration, from the nature which was in man at the beginning, that now all fruits generally are noyfull to man, and doe ingender ill humours, and bée oft times the cauſe of putrified feuers, if they bée much and continually eaten. Notwithſtanding, vnto them which haue abundance of choler, they bee ſometime conuenient to repreſſe the fieume which procéedeth of choler. And ſome fruites which bee ſtiptike or binding in taſte, eaten before meales, doe bind the belly, but eaten after meales, they be rather laxatiue. Now ſhall it bee expedient to write of ſome fruites particularly, declaring their noyfull qualities in appearing of nature, and how they may be vſed with leaſt detriment.
               
                  Of Gourds.
                  GOurds rawe be vnpleaſant in eating, ill for the ſtomacke, Galen de 
                           •
                        imen. 2. and almoſt neuer digeſted, therefore he that muſt needes eate them, muſt boyle them, roſt them, or frie them, euery way they bee without ſauour or taſte, and of their proper nature they giue to the bodie colde and moyſt nouriſhment, and that very little: but by reaſon of the ſlipperines of their ſubſtance, and becauſe al meates which be moyſt of their nature, bee not binding, they lightly paſſe foorth by the belly. And being well ordered, they will be méetly concoct, if corruption in ye ſtomacke doe not preuent them: they be cold and moyſt in the ſecond degrée.
               
               
                  Of Melons and Pepons.
                  MElons and Pepons bée almoſt of one kinde, but that the Melon is round like an Apple, and the

innermoſt part thereof, where the ſeedes are contained, is vſed to be eaten. The Pepon is much greater, & ſomewhat long, and the inner part thereof is not to be eaten. They both are very cold & moyſt, and do make ill iuyce in the bodie, if they be not well digeſted, but the Pepon much more then the Melon, they doe leaſt hurt, if they bee eaten afore meales. Albeit if they doe finde in the ſtomack fleume, they be turned into fleume: if they find choler, they bee turned into choler. Not withſtanding, there is in them the vertue to clenſe and to prouoke vrine: they be cold and moyſt in the ſecond degree.
               
               
                  Cucumbers.
                  CUcumbers doe not excéede ſo much in moyſture as Galen de alimen. 2. Melons, and therefore they be not ſo ſoone corrupted in the ſtomacke. But in ſome ſtomackes, being moderatly vſed, they doe digeſt well: but if they be abundantly eaten, or much vſed, they ingender cold and thick humours in the veines, which neuer or ſeldome is turned into good bloud, and ſometime bringeth in feuers. Alſo they abate carnall luſt. The ſéedes as well thereof, as of Melons and Gourds, being dried and made cleane from the huſkes, are very medicinable againſt ſickneſſes procéeding of heate, alſo the difficultie or let in piſſing: they be cold and moyſt in the ſecond degrée.
               
               
                  Dates.
                  BE hard to digeſt, therefore being much eaten and not well digeſted, they annoy the head, and cauſe gnawing in the ſtomacke, and maketh groſſe iuyce, and ſometime cauſe obſtructions, or ſtoppings in the liuer and ſpléene. And where there is inflāmation or hardnes in the bodie they are vnwholſome, but being well digeſted and temperatly vſed, they nouriſh & make the fleſh firme, and alſo bindeth the belly: old Dates bee hot and drie in the firſt degrée: new gathered are hot and moyſt in the firſt degree.
               
               
                  
                  Of Figges.
                  FIgges eaten doe ſhortly paſſe out of the ſtomacke, and are ſoone diſtributed into all the partes of the bodie, and haue the power to cleanſe ſpecially grauell, being in the raines of the back: but they make no ſubſtantiall nouriſhment, but rather ſomewhat looſe and windie, but by their quicke paſſage, the winde is ſoone diſſolued. Therefore if they bee ripe, they doe leaſt harme of anie fruites, or almoſt none. Drie figs and old, are more hotte and moiſt than new gathered, but being much eatē they make ill blood and iuyce, and as ſome doe ſuppoſe, doe ingender Lice: & alſo annoyeth the liuer and the ſpléene, if they bée inflamed: but hauing the power to attenuate or make humors currant, they make the bodie ſoluble, and doe clenſe the raines. Alſo being eaten before dinner with ginger or pepper, or powder of Time, or Peniryall: they profit much to them which haue opilations or hard congealed matter in the inner parts of the bodie, or haue diſtillations or rewmes falling into the breaſt & ſtomack. New figges are hot and moyſt, olde figges are hot in the firſt degrée, and drie in the ſecond.
               
               
                  Of Grapes, and Rayſons.
                  GRapes doe not nouriſh ſo much as figges, but being ripe, they make not much ill iuyce in the bodie: albeit newly gathered they trouble the bellie, and filleth the ſtomacke with winde, therefore if they bee hanged vp a while, ere they be eaten they are the leſſe noyfull. Swéet grapes, are hotteſt, and doe looſe ſomewhat, and make a man thirſtie. Sowre grapes are cold, and doe alſo looſe, but they are hard of digeſtion; and yet they doe not nouriſh. They which are in taſte bitter or harriſh, be like to them that are ſowre. Rayſons doe make the ſtomacke firme and ſtrong, and doe prouoke appetite, and do comfort weake bodies: being eaten afore meales, they be hot

in the firſt degrée, and moiſt in the ſecond.
               
               
                  Of Cheries.
                  CHeries if they be ſwéete, the do ſoone slip downe into the ſtomacke, but if they be ſowre or ſharpe, they bée more holeſome, and do looſe: if they be eaten freſh & newly gathered, they be cold and moiſt in the firſt degrée.
               
               
                  Of Peaches.
                  PEaches doe leſſe harme, and doe make better iuyce in the bodie, for they are not ſo ſoone corrupted being eaten: of the iuyce of them may be made a ſyrupe very holeſome againſt the diſtemperance of choler, whereof procéedeth a ſtinking breath, they be cold in the firſt degrée, and moyſt in the ſecond.
               
               
                  Of Apples.
                  AL apples eaten ſoon after yt they be gathered, are cold, hard to digeſt, and doe make ill and corrupted bloud, but being well kept vntill the next winter, or the yeare following, eaten after meales, they are right holeſome, & doe con
                        •
                     rme the ſtomacke, & make good digeſtion, ſpecially if they bee roſted or baked, moſt properly in a cholericke ſtomack: they are beſt preſerued in hony, ſo the one touch not an other. The rough taſted apples are holeſome, where the ſtomacke is weake by diſtemperance of heate or much moyſture. The bitter apples, where the griefe is increaſed. The ſowre apples, where the matter is congealed or made thick with heate: in diſtemperature of heate and dryeth by drinking much wine, they haue béene found commodious being eaten at night going to bed, without drinking to them: they be cold and moiſt in the firſt degrée.
               
               
                  Of Quinces.
                  QUinces bee colde and drie: eaten afore meales they bind and reſtraine the ſtomacke, that it may not digeſt

well the meate, except that they be roſted or ſodden, the core taken out and mixed with hony clarified, or ſugar, then they cauſe good appetite, and preſerueth the head from drunkennes: taken after meate, it cloſeth and draweth the ſtomacke together, and helpeth il digeſtion, and mollifieth the belly, if it be aboundantlytaken, they be cold in the firſt degrée, and dry in the beginning of the ſecond.
               
               
                  Of Pomegranates.
                  POmegranates be of good iuyce, and profitable to the ſtomacke, ſpecially they which are ſwéete: but in a hotte feuer, they that are ſowre bée more expedient and holeſome, for than the ſwéete doth incende heate, and puffe vp the ſtomacke.
               
               
                  Of Peares.
                  PEares are much of the nature of apples, but they are heauier: but taken after meales roſted or baken, they are not vnholeſome, and doe reſtrayne and knit the ſtomacke being ripe: they bée colde and moyſt in the firſt degree.
               
               
                  Medlars.
                  MEdlars are colde and drie, and conſtrictiue or ſtraining the ſtomacke, and therefore they may bée eaten after meales, as a medicine, but not vſed as meate, for they ingender melancholie: they bee cold and dry in the ſecond degrée.
               
               
                  Walnuttes.
                  WAlnuttes, if they be blaunched, are ſuppoſed to be good for the ſtomacke, and ſomewhat looſing the belly: mixte with Sugar, they doo nouriſh temperately. Of two dry nuts, as many figs, and xx. leaues of rew, with a grain of ſalt, is made a medicine whereof if one doo eate faſting, nothing which is venemous may that day

hurt him, and it alſo preſerueth againſt the 
                        〈…〉
                     , and this is the very right Mithridate, they 
                        〈…〉
                      in the ſecond degree, after ſome opinion
                        •
                      hot
                        〈…〉
                      degrée, dry in the ſecond.
               
               
                  Fiberd and haſell nuttes.
                  THey bee more ſtrong in ſubſtance, the
                        〈…〉
                     , whereof they are not ſo eaſily or ſoone dig
                        〈…〉
                     ſo they doe inflate the ſtomacke, and cauſe headache, but they ingender fatte. And if they be roſted, the
                        〈…〉
                      to reſtraine rewmes. Alſo eaten with pepper, the
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈…〉
                      againſt torments of the belly, and the ſtopping of 
                        〈…〉
                      They be hot and dry in the firſt degrée.
               
               
                  Of Almondes.
                  THey doe extenuate and cleanſe without any binding, wherefore they purge the breaſt and lungs, ſpecially bitter Almondes, alſo they do mollifie the bellie, prouoke ſléepe, and cauſeth to piſſe well, 5, or 6. of them eaten afore meate kéepe a man from being drunke: they bee hot and moiſt in the firſt degrée.
               
               
                  Of Cheſtnuttes.
                  THey being roſted vnder the embers, or hot aſhes, doe nouriſh the body ſtrongly, and eaten with honie faſting, do helpe a man of the cough.
               
               
                  Of Prunes.
                  OF the garden and ripe, doe diſpoſe a man to the ſtoole, but they doe bring no manner of nouriſhment. To this fruit like as to figges this propertie remaineth, that being dried they doe profite: the Damaſke prune rather bindeth then looſeth, and is more commodious vnto the ſtomacke, they be cold and moiſt in the third degrée.
               
               
                  Oliues.
                  COndite in ſalt licoure, taken at the beginning of a meale, doth corroborate the ſtomacke, ſtirreth appetite

and looſeth the belly being eaten with vineger. They which be ripe are temperately hot, they which be gréene are cold and drie.
               
               
                  Of Capers.
                  THey nouriſh nothing after that they be ſalted: but yet they make the belly looſe, and purgeth fleume, which is therein contained. Alſo ſtirreth appetite to meate and openeth the obſtructions, or ſtopping of the liuer and ſpléene, being eaten with oximel, before any other meat: they be hot and drie in the ſecond degrée.
               
               
                  Orenges.
                  THe rindes taken in a little quantitie doe comforte the ſtomacke wherin it digeſteth, ſpecially condite with ſugar, and taken faſting in ſmall quantitie. The iuyce of Orenges hauing a toſt of bread put into it, with a little pouder of mints, ſugar, and a little cinamome maketh a very good ſauce to prouoke appetite. The iuyce eaten with ſugar in a hotte feuer, is not to bee diſcommended. The rynde is hotte in the firſt degrée, and drie in the ſecond, the iuyce of them is colde in the ſecond degrée, and drie in the firſt.
               
            
            
               Herbes vſed in potage, or to eate. CAP. 8.
               GEnerally all hearbes raw, and not ſ
                     •
                  dden, d
                     ••
                  ingender cold and watry iuyce, if they be eaten cuſtomably or in abundance, albeit ſome hearbes are more comeſtible, and leſſe harme vnto nature, and moderarely vſed, maketh méerely good blood.
               
                  Lettice.
                  AMong al hear bs none hath ſo good iuice as lettice, for ſome men doe ſuppoſe that it maketh abundance of bloud, albeit not very pure or perfect: it doth ſet a hot appetite: and eaten in the euening it prouoketh ſléepe: albeit, it neither doth looſe, nor binde the belly of his owne propertie. It increaſeth milke in a womans breaſt, but it abateth carnal appetite, and much vſing thereof hurteth

the eyeſight. It is cold and moi
                        ••
                      temperately.
               
               
                  Colewortes and Cabages.
                  BEfore that auarice cauſed Marchauntes to fetch out of the Eaſt and South partes of the worlde, the traffique of ſpice, and ſundrie drugges to content the vnſaciable neſſe of wanton appetites: Colewortes for the vertues ſuppoſed to bee in them were of ſuch eſtimation, that they were iudged to be a ſufficient medicine againſt all diſeaſes, as it may appeare in the booke of wiſe Caro wherein hee writeth of huſbandrie. But now I will no modre remember, than ſhall be required, in that which ſhalle vſed as meat, and not pure Medicine. The iuyce thereof hath vertue to purge: The whole leaues being halfe ſodden, and the water powred out, and they being put e
                        ••
                     ſoones into hot water, & ſodden vntil they be tender, ſo eaten they doe bind the belly. Some do ſuppoſe if they be eaten raw with vineger before meat, it ſhall preſerue the ſtomacke from ſurfetting, and the head from drunkennes 
                        •
                     albeit, much vſing of them dulleth the ſight, except the eyes be verie moiſt. Finally, the iuyce that it maketh in the body, is not ſo commēdable, as that which is ingendred of lettice. It is hotte in the firſt degree, and drie in the ſecond.
               
               
                  Cycory or Suckory.
                  IT is like in operation to Lettiſe, and tempereth choler wonderfully, and therefore in all cholericke feuers, the decoction of this hearbe, or the water thereof ſtilled, is right expedient. Semblably the hearbe and roote boyled with fleſh that is freſh, being eaten, kéepeth the ſtomacke & head in very good temper. I ſuppoſe that Southiſtle and Denidelion be of like qualities, but not ſo cō
                     uenient to bee vſed of them which are hole, becauſe they are wilde of nature and more bitter, and therefore cauſeth faſtidiouſneſſe or lothſomeneſſe of the ſtomacke. It

is cold and dry in the ſecond degrée.
               
               
                  Endiue and Scariole.
                  BEe much like in their operations to Cicory, but they are more conuenient to medicine then to meat. Albeit Scariole called white Endiue, hauing the toppes of the leaues turned in, and laide in the earth, at the latter ende of ſommer, and couered, becommeth white and cryſpe, like to the great ſtalkes of Cabage lettice, which are in winter taken vp and eaten. And to them that haue hot ſtomackes and dry, they be right holeſome, but being too much vſed or in very great quantitie, they ingender the humour which maketh the collicke: they bee colde and moyſt in the firſt degrée.
               
               
                  Mallowes.
                  ARe not cold in operation, but rather ſomwhat warm, Galen de alimen. 2. and haue in them a ſlipperines. Wherfore being boyled and moderatly eatē with oyle and vineger, they make 
                        •
                     éetly good concoction in the ſtomacke, and cauſeth the ſuperfluous matter therein eaſily to paſſe, and clenſeth the belly. It is hot and moiſt in the firſt degrée.
               
               
                  White beetes.
                  ARe alſo abſterſiue and looſeth the belly, but much eaten annoieth the ſtomacke, but they are right good againſt obſtructions or ſtopping of the liuer, if they be eaten with vineger or muſtard, like wiſe it helpeth ye ſpléen. It is cold in the firſt degrée, and moiſt in the ſecond.
               
               
                  Purſlaine.
                  Doth mitigate the great heate in all the in ward parts of the bodie, ſemblably of the head and eyes, alſo it repreſſeth the rage of Uenus, but if it bee preſerued in ſalt or brine, it heateth and purgeth the ſtomacke. It is cold in the third degrée, and moiſt in the ſecond.
               
               
                  Charuayle.
                  It is very profitable vnto the ſtomacke, but it may not

ſuſteyne very much boyling, eaten wt vineger, it prouoketh appetite, & alſo vrine. The decoction thereof drunke with wine cleanſeth the bladder.
               
               
                  Sorrell.
                  Being ſodden it looſeth the belly. In a time of peſtilence, if one being faſting, doe chewe ſome of the leaues, and ſucke downe the iuyce, it meruallouſly preſerueth from infections, as a new practiſer called Gualnerius doth write. And I my ſelfe haue proued it in my houſhould.
                  The ſéedes thereof brayed and drunke with wine and water, is the collicke and fretting of the guttes: it ſtoppeth 
                        〈◊〉
                     , and helpeth the ſtomack annoyed with rep
                        〈…〉
                     . It is told in the third degrée and drie in the ſecond.
               
               
                  Parſley.
                  Is very conuenient to the ſtomacke, and comforteth appetite, and 
                        〈…〉
                      the breath ſwéet, the ſéedes and root maketh vr
                        〈…〉
                      well, and breaketh the ſtone, diſſolueth windes: the 
                        〈◊〉
                      boyled in water, and thereof 
                        〈…〉
                     ell being made, it diſſolueth fleume, & maketh good digeſtion. It is hot and dry in the third degrée.
               
               
                  Fenell.
                  Being eaten the ſéede or roote maketh abundance of milke, likewiſe drunke with P
                        ••
                     ſane or ale. The ſéede ſome what reſtrayneth fluxe, prouoketh to piſſe, and mitigateth frettings of the ſtomacke and guttes, ſpecially Galen ſimplici. de medicamen. lib. aca. 7. the decoction of the roote, if the matter, cauſing fretting, bée colde, but if it bée of a hotte cauſe, the vſe thereof is dangerous for inflāmation or exulceration of the raines or bladder. It is hotte in the third degrée, and dry in the firſt.
               
               
                  A
                        •
                     yſeſeede.
                  Maketh ſwéete breath, prouoketh vrine, and driueth downe things cleaning to the raynes or bladder, ſtirreth vp courage, and cauſeth abundance of milke. It is hotte and dry in the third degrée.
               
               
                  
                  Beanes.
                  They make winde, howſoeuer they bee ordered: the ſubſtance which they do make is ſpungie, and not firme, albeit they be abſterſiue, or cleanſing the bodie, they tarie long ere they bee digeſted, and make groſſe iuyce in the bodie: but if onyons bee ſodden with them, they be leſſe noyfull.
               
               
                  Peaſon.
                  Are much of the nature of Beanes, but they bée leſſe windie, and paſſeth faſter out of the bodie: they bee alſo abſterſiue, or cleanſing, ſpecially white peaſon, and they alſo cauſe m
                        ••
                     tly good nouriſhing, the huſkes taken away. And the broth wherein they bee ſodden, clenſeth right well the raines and bladder.
               
            
            
               Rape rootes, and Nauewes. CAP. 9.
               THe iuyce made by them is very groſſe, and therefore being much eaten, if they bee not perfectly 
                     〈◊〉
                   in the ſtomacke, they doe make crude or raw 
                     〈…〉
                   in the 
                     •
                  eines. Alſo if they be not wel boyled, they cauſe winds, and annoy the ſtomacke, and make ſometime 
                     〈…〉
                  gs: if they be well boyled firſt in cleane water▪ and that being caſt away, the ſecond time with fat fleſh, they 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  riſh much, and doe neither looſe nor binde the bellie. But Nauewes do not nouriſh ſo much as Rapes, but they be euen as windie.
               
                  Turnep
                        •
                     .
                  Being well boyled in water, and after with fat fleſh, nouriſheth much, augmenteth the ſéede of man, prouoketh carnall luſt. Eaten raw, they ſtirre vp appetite to eate, being temperatly vſed, and be conuenient vnto thē which haue putrified matter in their breaſts or lungs, cauſing them to 
                        •
                     aſtly: but being much and often eaten, they make raw iuyce and windſnes.
               
               
                  
                  Parſneps and Carrets.
                  They do nouriſh with better iuice then ye other rootes, Ga
                           •
                        . ſimp. medica. lib. 7. ſpecially Carrets, which are hot and dry, and expelleth winde. Notwithſtanding, much vſed they ingender ill iuyce, but Carrets leſſe then Parſneps, the one and the other expelleth vrine.
               
               
                  Radiſh rootes.
                  Haue the vertue to extenuate or make thinne and alſo to warme. Alſo they cauſe to breake wind, & to piſſe. Being eaten afore meales, they let the meate that it may not deſcend: but being eaten laſt, they make good digeſtion and looſeth the belly, though Galenus write contrarie. For I among diuers other, by experience haue proued it. Notwithſtanding, they be vn wholſome for them that haue continually the gowt or paine in the ioynts.
               
               
                  Garlike.
                  It doth extenuate and cut-groſſe humours, and ſlimie, diſſolueth groſſe windes, and heateth all the bodie: alſo openeth the places which are ſtopped generally where it is well digeſted in the ſtomacke: it is wholeſome to diuers purpoſes, ſpecially in the bodie, wherein is groſſe matter, or much cold encloſed, if it be ſodden vntill it looſeth his 
                        〈…〉
                     eſſe, it ſome what nouriſheth, and yet looſeth his 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        〈…〉
                     te groſſe humours▪ being ſodde
                        〈…〉
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     , it profiteth much againſt diſtillations from the head into the ſtomacke.
               
               
                  Onyons.
                  Doe alſo extenuate, but the long onyons more then the round, the red more then the white, the dry more thē they which be 
                        〈◊〉
                      alſo raw more then ſodden, they ſtirre appetite to meate, and put away lothſomnes, and looſe the belly, they quicken ſight, & being eaten in great abundance with meate, they cauſe one to ſléepe ſoundly.
               
               
                  Leekes.
                  Be of ill iuyce, and doe make 
                        〈…〉
                     us dreames, but they doe extenuate and clenſethe bodie, and alſo make it

ſoluble, and prouoketh vrine. Moreouer, it cauſeth one to ſpit out eaſily the fleume which is in the breaſt.
               
               
                  Sage.
                  It heateth, and ſome what bindeth, and therwith prouoketh vrine, the decoction of the leaues and braunches being dronke. Alſo it ſtoppeth bléeding of wounds, being layd vnto them. Moreouer, it hath béen proued that women, which haue béen long time without children, and haue dronke ten ounces of the iuyce of Sage, with a grain of ſalt, a quarter of an houre before that they haue companied with their huſbands, haue conceiued at that time. It is hot and dry in the third degrée, the vſing therof is good againſt palſies.
               
               
                  Hyſope.
                  Doth heate and extenuate, whereby it digeſteth ſlimie fleume: being prepared with figges, it purgeth fleume downward, with honey and water, vpward: boyled in vineger it helpeth the toothach, if the téeth bee waſhed there with. It is hot and drie in the third degrée.
               
               
                  Bourage.
                  Comforteth the heart and maketh one merrie, eaten raw before meales, or layd in wine that is dronke. Alſo it mollifieth the bellie and prepareth to the ſtoole. It is hot and moyſt in the middle of the firſt degrée.
               
               
                  Sauery.
                  Purgeth fleume, helpeth digeſtiō, maketh quick fight, prouoketh vrine, and ſtirreth carnall appetite. It is hot and dry in the third degrée.
               
               
                  Roket.
                  Heateth much, and increaſeth the ſeede of man, prouoketh courage, helpeth digeſtion, and ſomewhat looſeth. It is hot and moyſt in the ſecond degrée.
               
               
                  Time.
                  Diſſolueth windes, breaketh the ſtone, expelleth vrine, and ceaſeth frettings. It is hot and drie in the third degrée.
               
               
                  
                  Peniroyall.
                  Doth extenuate, heat, and deroit, it reformeth the ſtomacke oppreſſed with ſteume, it doth recomfort the faint ſpirit, it expelleth melancholy by ſiege, & is medicinable againſt many diſeaſes. It is hot and drie in the third degree.
               
               
                  Towncreſſes.
                  Paulus diſcommendeth, ſaying, that it reſiſteth concecſion, and hurteth the ſtomacke, and maketh it iuyce in the bodie: taken as medicine, it helpeth many diſeaſes. It is hot and drie in the third degrée.
               
               
                  Roſemary.
                  Hath the vertue to heate, and therefore it inſolueth humours congealed with colde: it helpeth againſt palſres, falling ſicknes, old diſeaſes of the breaſt, torments or fretting, it prouoketh brine and ſweat: it helpeth the cough, taken with pepper and honey: it putteth away tootach, the roote being chewed, or the iuyce thereof put into the tooth being burned, the fume thereof reſiſteth the peſtilence: the rinde thereof ſodden or burned, the fume receiued at the mouth, ſtoppeth the re
                        ••
                     e which falleth out of the head into the chéekes or throate, which I my ſelfe haue proued the gréene leaues 
                        •
                     ruſed, do ſtop the Hemer
                        •
                     oides, if they be laid vnto them. That hear
                        •
                      is hot and drie in the third degree.
               
            
            
               Spices growing out of this realme vſed in meate and drinke. CAP. 10.
               
                  Pepper.
                  BLackepepper is hotteſt, and moſt drie, whitepepper is next, long pepper is moſt temperate. The generall propertie of all kinds of pepper is to heate the bodie, but as Galen ſayth, it pe
                        •
                     reeth downward, and doth not ſpred into the veines, it helpeth dige
                        •
                     ſSpan
                        •
                     pulſeth vrine, and it helpeth againſt the diſeaſes of the breaſt, procéeding

of colde. It is hot in the firſt degrée, and drie in the ſecond.
               
               
                  Ginger.
                  Heateth the ſtomack, and helpeth digeſtion, but it heateth not ſo ſoone as pepper: but afterward the heate remaineth longer, and cauſeth the mouth to be moyſt. Being gréene or well confectioned in ſirupe, it comforteth much the ſtomacke and head, and quickeneth remembrance, if it be taken in the morning faſting. It is hot in the ſecond degrée, and drie in the firſt.
               
               
                  Saffron.
                  Somewhat bindeth, heateth and comforteth the ſtomacke, and the heart ſpecially, and maketh good digeſtion, being eaten or dronken in a ſmall quantitie. It is hot in the ſecond degrée, and drie in the firſt.
               
               
                  Cloues.
                  Haue vertue to comfort the ſinewes, alſo to conſume and diſſolue ſuperfluous humours. They be hot and drie in the third degrée: ſodden with milke, it comforteth the debilitie of nature.
               
               
                  Maces.
                  
                     Dioſcorides commēdeth to be dronk againſt ſpitting of bloud, and bloudie fluxes, & exceſſiue laxes. Paulus Aegineta addeth to it, that it helpeth ye col
                        •
                     ke. They be hot in the 2. degrée, and dry in the 3. degrée. 
                        〈◊〉
                      to the ſtomacke very commodious, taken in a little quantitie.
               
               
                  Nutmegges.
                  With their ſwéet odour comfort & diſſolue, & ſometime comforteth the power of the ſight, and alſo the braine in cold diſeaſes, and is hot and drie in the ſecond degrée.
               
            
            
               Of Bread. CAP. 11.
               BRead of fine flower of wheate, hauing no leauen, is ſlow of digeſtion, and maketh flimie humours, but it nouriſheth much: if it be leauened, it digeſteth ſooner.
               Bread hauing much branne, filleth the bellie with excrements,

and nouriſheth little or nothing, but ſhortly deſcendeth from the ſtomacke. The meane betwéene both, ſufficiently leauened, well moulded, and moderatly baked, is the moſt holeſome to euery age. The greateſt loaues doe nouriſh moſt faſt, for as much as the fire hath not exhauſted the moyſture of them. Hot bread ſlowly paſſeth. Barley bread clenſeth the bodie, & doth not nouriſh ſo much as wheat, and maketh cold iuyce in the bodie.
            
            
               Of Fleſh. CAP. 12.
               BEefe of England to Engliſhmen, which are in health, bringeth ſtrong nouriſhing: but it maketh groſſe bloud, and ingendreth melancholy: but being of young Oxen, not exceeding the age of foure yeare, to them which haue cholerike ſtomackes, it is more conuenient then chickens, and other like fine meates.
               
                  Swines fleſh.
                  Aboue all kinds of fleſh in nouriſhing the body, Galen moſt commendeth Porke, not being of an olde Swine, and that it be well digeſted of him that eateth it. For it maketh beſt iuyce, it is moſt conuenient for young perſons, and them which haue ſuſtained much labour, and there with are fatigate, and become weake. Young pigs are not co
                        〈…〉
                     fiended, before that they be one moneth old, for they doe bréed much ſuperfluous humours.
               
               
                  Lambe.
                  Is very moyſt and fle
                        ••
                     atike, wherefore it is not conuenient for aged men, except that it be very dry roſted, nor yet for them which haue in their ſtomackes much fleume.
               
               
                  Mutton.
                  
                     Galen doth not commend it, notwithſtanding experience Galen de ali. men. 2. proueth here in this Realme, that if it be young, it is a right temperate meate, and maketh good iuyce: and therefore it is vſed more then any other meate in all

diſeaſes. And yet it is not like good in all places, nor the ſhéepe which beareth fineſt wooll, is not the ſwéeteſt in eating, nor the moſt tender. But I haue found in ſome countries Mutton, which in whitenes, tendernes, and ſwéetnes of the fleſh, might bee well nigh compared to Kid, and in digeſtion haue proued as holeſome.
               
               
                  Kid and Veale.
                  Of Galen is commended next vnto Porke: but ſome men doe ſuppoſe, that in health & ſickneſſe they be much better then porke, the iuyce of thē both being more pure. And here it is to be noted, that of all beaſts, which be dry Hippo. de ratione victus. lib. 2. cap. 19. Plin. 28. of their nature, the youngeſt be moſt holeſome: of them that are moyſt, the eldeſt are leaſt hurtfull.
               
               
                  Hare, and Cony.
                  Maketh groſſe bloud, it drieth and ſtoppeth, but yet it prouoketh a man to piſſe. Cony maketh better and more pure nouriſhment, and is ſooner digeſted then Hare. It is well proued, that there is no meate more holeſome, or that more cleane firmly, and temperatly nouriſheth then Rabbets.
               
               
                  Deere red and fallowe.
                  
                     Hypocrates affirmeth, that the fleſh of Harts & Hinds to be ill iuyce, hard of digeſtion and dry, but yet moueth vrine. Of fallow déere, he nor any other old writer doth ſpeake of, as I remember. I ſuppoſe, becauſe there be not in all the world, ſo many as bee in England, where they conſume a good part of the beſt paſture in the Realme, and are in nothing profitable, ſauing that of the ſkinnes of them is made better leather then is of Calues, the hū
                     ting of them being not ſo pleaſant, as the hūting of other venery or vermine, the fleſh much more vnholeſome and vnpleaſant then of a red Déere, ingendring melancholy, and making many fearefull dreames, and diſpoſeth the bodie to a feuer, if it bee much eaten: notwithſtanding the fat thereof (as ſome learned men haue ſuppoſed) is better to be digeſted then the leane.
               
               
                  
                  Of Birds.
                  The fleſh of all birds is much lighter, than the fleſh of beaſts, in cōpariſon moſt eſpecially of thoſe foules which truſt moſt to their woings, & do breed in high countries.
               
               
                  Capons, Hennes and Chickens.
                  The Capon is aboue all other fowles praiſed: for as much as it is eaſily digeſted, and maketh little ordure, and much good nouriſhment. It is commodious to the breaſt and ſtomack. Hennes in winter are almoſt equal vnto the Capon, but they do not make ſo ſtrōg nouriſhment. Auicen ſayth, if they be roſted in the belly of a Kid or Lambe, they will be the better. Chickens in ſummer, ſpecially if they bee cockrels, are very conuenient for a weake ſtomacke, and nouriſheth a little. The fleſh of a Cocke is hard of digeſtion, but the broth wherein it is boyled, looſeth the belly: & hauing ſoddē in it Coleworts, Polipodium, or Cartamus, it purgeth ill humours, and is medicinable againſt gowtes, ioynt-ach, and feuers, which come by courſes.
               
               
                  Feſaut.
                  Excéedeth all fowles in ſwéetneſſed and wholeſomnes, and is equall to a Capon in nouriſhing: but he is ſomewhat drier, and is of ſome men put in compariſon, meane betweene a Henne and a Partrich.
               
               
                  Partrich.
                  Of all fowles is moſt ſooneſt digeſted, and hath in him much nutriment, comforteth the braine, and maketh ſeede of generation, and reuiueth luſt, which is abated.
               
               
                  Quailes.
                  Although they bee of ſome men commended, yet experience proueth them to encreaſe melancholie, and are of ſmall nouriſhing.
               
               
                  Larkes.
                  Be as well the fleſh as the broth very wholeſome: eaten roſted, they doe much helpe againſt the colicke, as Dioſcorides ſayth.
               
               
                  
                  A Plouer.
                  Is ſlow of digeſtion, nouriſheth little, increaſeth melancholy.
               
               
                  Blacke birdes or ouſyls.
                  Among wildfoule haue the chiefe praiſe, for lightnes of digeſtion, and that they make good nouriſhment, and little ordure.
               
               
                  Sparrowes.
                  Be hard to digeſt, and are very hot, and ſtirreth vp Venus, and ſpecially the braines of them.
               
               
                  Woodcockes.
                  Are of a good tēperance, and méetly light in digeſtion.
               
               
                  Pygeons.
                  Be eaſily digeſted, and are very holſome to them, which are fleumaticke, and pure melancholy.
               
               
                  Gooſe.
                  Is hard of digeſtion, but being yong and fat, the wings bee eaſie to digeſt in a whole ſtomacke, and nouriſheth competently.
               
               
                  Ducke.
                  Is hotter then gooſe, and hard to digeſt, and maketh worſe iuyce, ſauing the brawnes on the breaſt bone, and the necke, is better then the remnant.
               
               
                  Crane and Buſtarde.
                  Crane is harde of digeſtion, and maketh ill iuyce, but being hanged vp long in the ayre hee is the leſſe vnholeſome. Buſtard being fat, and kept without meate a day or two afore yt he be killed, to expulſe his ordure, and then drawen and hanged as the Crane is, being roſted or bakē, is a good meat, & nouriſheth wel, if he be wel digeſted.
               
               
                  Hearon, Byttour, Shouelar.
                  Being young and fatte, bee lightlier digeſted then the Crane, and the Bittour ſooner then the Hearon. And the Shouelar ſooner then any of them, but all thoſe fowles muſt bee eaten with much Ginger or Pepper, and haue good old wine drunk after them, and ſo ſhall they be more

eaſily digeſted, & the iuice cōming of them be ye leſſe noiful.
               
            
            
               The partes and members of birdes and beaſtes. CAP. 13.
               THe wings, brawnes, and neck of géeſe, capons, hens, feſant, partrich, and ſmall birdes being fat, are better then the legs in digeſtion, & lighter in nouriſhment. Of wildfoule & pigeons, being fatte, the legs are better then the winges, the brawnes of ducke, teale and wigeon except, which is better to digeſt then the reſidue.
               
                  The gyſard or ſtomacke.
                  Of a gooſe or hen, being fat with bran and milke, being well ſodden or made in powder, is good for the ſtomack, in makingit ſtrong to digeſt, and nouriſheth competētly.
               
               
                  The liuer.
                  Of a capon, hen, feſaunt, or gooſe being made fat with milke mixt with their meate is not onely eaſie to digeſt, but alſo maketh good iuyce, and nouriſheth excellently. But the liuers of beaſtes bee ill to digeſt, paſſeth ſlowly and maketh groſſe bloud, but it is ſtrong in nouriſhing.
               
               
                  The inward of beaſts, as tripes and chitterlings.
                  The fleſh of them is more hard to digeſt: and therefore although they bee well digeſted, yet make they not iuyce naturally ſanguine or cleane, but rawe iuyce, and colde, and it requireth a long time to be conuerted into bloud.
               
               
                  The lunges or lightes.
                  Are more eaſie to digeſt then the liuer, and leſſe nouriſheth, but the nouriſhment that it maketh, is fleumaticke. Albeit the lunges of a foxe, is medicinable for them, which haue ſickenes of the lunges.
               
               
                  The Spleene or Mylt.
                  Is of ill iuyce, for it is the chamber of melancholy.
               
               
                  The heart.
                  Is of hard fleſh, and therfore is not ſoone digeſted, nor paſſeth ſhortly, but where it is well digeſted, the iuyce that it maketh is not to be diſprayſed.
               
               
                  
                  The braine.
                  Is fleumaticke, of groſſe iuyce, ſlow in digeſting, noyous to the ſtomacke, but where it is wel digeſted, it nouriſheth much.
               
               
                  Marow.
                  Is more delectable then the braine, it is ill for the ſtomacke, but where it is well digeſted, it nouriſheth much.
               
               
                  The ſtones and Vdders.
                  Being wel digeſted, do nouriſh much, but ye ſtones are hotter with their moiſtnes, the vdders cold & fleumatick: they both doe increaſe ſéede of generation, but the bloud made of the vdder, is better then that which commeth of the ſtones, except it be of calues & lambs. Alſo the ſtones of cockes, maketh commendable nouriſhment.
               
               
                  The head.
                  The fleſh therof nouriſheth much, & augmenteth ſéede, but it is ſlow of digeſtion, & noyeth the ſtomacke, but to them which vſe much exerciſe, it is commendable.
               
               
                  Tongue.
                  Is of a ſpungy and ſanguine ſubſtance, but the kernels and griſtle which are in the rootes, if they bee well digeſted they make good nouriſhment, if they bee not well digeſted they make fleume.
               
               
                  The feete.
                  Being well boyled and tender, in a hole ſtomacke digeſteth well and maketh good iuyce and paſſeth forth eaſily. Galen commendeth the féete of ſwine, but I haue proued, that the féete of a yong bullocke tenderly ſodden and laid in ſowſe two dayes or thrée, and eaten cold in the euening, haue brought a cholericke ſtomacke into a good digeſtion and ſléepe: and therewith hath alſo expulſed ſalt fleume and choler: and this haue I found in my ſelfe by often experience, alway foreſéene that it may be eaten before anie other meate without drinking immediatelie after it.
               
            
            
               
               Of fiſh generally. CAP. 14.
               THe beſt fiſh after the opinion of Galen, is that which ſwimmeth in a pure ſea, and is toſſed and lift vp with windes and ſourges. The more calme that the water is, the worſe is the fiſh.
               They which are in muddie waters, doe make much fleume and ordure, taken in fennes and ditches be worſt, being in riuers and ſwift, bee ſometime commendable: Albeit generally all kinds of fiſhe maketh more thinner bloud than fleſh, ſo that it doth much nouriſh, and it doth the ſooner paſſe ouer by vapours: to a hot cholericke ſtomacke, or in feuers, ſometime they bee holeſome, being new, freſh, and not very hard in ſubſtance or ſlimy, hard fiſh is hard of digeſtion: but the nouriſhment thereof is more firme, then that which is ſoft: thoſe which haue much groſſe humors in them, are beſt powdred.
            
            
               Of Butter. CAP. 15.
               BUtter is alſo nouriſhing, and profiteth in them which haue humors ſuperfluous, in the breaſt or lunges, and lacketh riping and clenſing of them, ſpecially if it bee eaten with ſugar or hony. If it bee well ſalted, it heateth and clenſeth the more.
            
            
               Of Cheeſe. CAP. 16.
               CHeeſe by the whole ſentence of al auncient writers, letteth digeſtion, and is an enemie vnto the ſtomack. Alſo it ingendreth ill humors, and breedeth the ſtone: the theeſe which doth leaſt harme is ſoft cheeſe reaſonablie ſalted, which ſome men doe ſuppoſe, nouriſheth much.
            
            
               Of Egges. CAP. 17.
               EGges of Feſants, hennes, and partriches, he of all other meates moſt agreeable vnto nature, ſpecially if they bee new laide: if they bee reere, they doe clenſe the

throate and the breaſt. If they bée harde, they be ſlow in digeſtion: but being once digeſted, they do nouriſh much. Meane betweene reere and hard, they digeſt conueniently, and nouriſh quickly. Egges well poched, are better then roſted. If they be fryed hard, they be of ill nouriſhment, and doe make ſtinking fumes in the ſtomacke, and do corrupt other meates, with whom they be mingled.
               They be moſt holſome, when they be poched, and moſt vnholeſome, when they be fryed. Dioſcorides ſayth. If they beſu
                     〈…〉
                  d warme, before any other meate, they doo heale the grietes of the bladder & raynes made with grauell. Alſo ſorenes of the chéekes and throate, and ſpitting of bloud: and they bee good againſt catarres or ſtilling out of the head into the ſtomacke.
               
                  Of drinks, and firſt of water.
                  VNdoubtedly water hath preheminence aboue all other licours, not only becauſe it is an element, that is to ſay, a pure matter, whereof al other licours haue their original ſubſtance, but alſo for as much as it was the very naturall and firſt drinke to all manner of creatures.
                  Wherefore the ſaying of Pindarus the Poet was euer well allowed, which ſayth, water is beſt. And one thing is to bee well conſidered, that from the creation of the world, vntill the vniuerſal deluge or floud, during which time men liued 8. or 9. hundred yeares, there was none other drink vſed nor knowē, but water. Alſo the true followers of Pythagoras doctrine, dranke onley water, and yet liued, as Appollonius, & other: and in the ſearching out of ſecret and miſticall things, their wits excelled. Moreouer wee haue ſéene men and women of great age, and ſtrong of bodie, which neuer or very ſeldome dranke other drinke then pure water. As by example in Cornewall, although that the countrey be in a very cold quarter, which proueth that if men from their infancie were accuſtomed to none other drink but to water only moderatly vſed, it ſhuld be ſufficient to kéep natural moiſture,

& to cauſe the meat that is eaten, to pierce and deſcend into the places of digeſtion, which are the purpoſes that drinke ſerueth for.
                  But now to the qualities of water after the ſētence of ancient philoſophers and phiſitions. The rain water after the opinion of moſt men, if it bee receiued pure and cleane, is moſt ſubtill and penetratiue, of any other waters: the next is that, which iſſueth out of a ſpring in the eaſt, and paſſeth ſwiftly amōg great ſtones or rocks: the third is of a cleane riuer, which runneth on great harde ſtones or peples. There hee diuers meanes to trye out which is the beſt water▪ for yt which is lighteſt in poiſe or weight, is beſt. Alſo that whereof commeth leaſt ſkim or froth when it doth boyle, alſo that which will ſooneſt bee hot: Moreouer dip linnen clothes into ſundry waters and after lay them to drie, and that which is ſooneſt drie, the water wherein it was dipped is moſt ſubtill. After a great ſurfet, ſpecially taken with ſuperfluous eating of banquetting meats, cold water dronken is a generall remedy. Hyppo. affirmeth yt in ſharpe and feruent diſeaſes, none other remedy is to be required then water. And Galen will not that children ſhould bee let from drinking of De ratione victus in morb. acutis. lib. 3. water, but that when they ſéele themſelues very hot after meales, and doe deſire to drinke water, ſpecially of a cleane fountain they ſhould be ſuffered, alſo Hippo ſaith: in ſuch ſicknes whereas thou feareſt, leſt the head ſhould be vehemently grieued, or the mind periſhed, there muſt thou giue either water or white wine allaied with much water. Not withſtanding there be in water cauſes of diuers diſeaſes, as of ſwelling of the ſpléene and the liuer, it alſo flitteth and ſwimmeth, and it is long or it pierceth, in as much as it is cold and ſlowe in decoction, it looſeth not the belly nor prouoketh vrine. Alſo in this it is vicious, that of his proper nature it maketh no ordure. Finally alway reſpect muſt be had to the perſon that drinketh it, for to yongmen and them that bee hot of complexion, it

doth leſſe harme, and ſometime it profiteth, but to them that are féeble, olde, fleumaticke, melancholie, it is not conuenient.
               
            
            
               Of Wine. CAP. 19.
               
                  PLato the wiſeſt of all Philoſophers, doth affirme, that wine moderately drunke, nouriſheth and comforteth as wel al the bodie as the ſpirites of man. And therefore God did ordaine it for mankind, as a remedie againſt the incommodities of age, that thereby they ſhould ſeeme to returne vnto youth and forget heauineſſe. Undoubtedly wine heateth, and moyſteth the bodie, which qualities chiefly conſerueth nature. And Galen of all wines commendeth that which is yellow and cleere, ſaying: that it is the hotteſt, and white wine leaſt hot.
               And the colour meane betwéen both, of ſemblable temperature. The yellow wine which is the proper colour of very hot wines, to old men doth bring theſe commodities. Firſt it heateth all their members, alſo it purgeth by vrine the watrie ſubſtance of the bloud. Moreouer, the wines which be pale or yellow, and full of ſubſtance doe increaſe bloud, and nouriſhe the bodie, but for the more parte, olde men haue néede of ſuch wines which doe prouoke vrine: for as much as in them doe abound watrie excrementes, or ſuperfluities, and they which do tarry long in the belly be not apt for aged men. Black or déepe red wines and thicke, do bind and congeale that which they doe finde in the bodie, and although ſome of them doe not long abide in the belly, yet they moue not vrine, but rather withdraweth: but yet they do harme to old men, for as much as they do ſtop the conduites of the ſpléene, the liuer and the raines: alſo groſſe wines be beſt for them which deſire to be fat, but it maketh opilations: old wine and cléere is better for them that be fleumatick. Galen alſo prohibiteth children to drink any wine, for as Galen de tuen▪ ſani. lib. 1. much as they be of a hot and moiſt tēperature, and ſo is

wine: and therfore it heateth and moiſteth too much their bodies, and filleth their heads with vapours. Moreouer he would, that yong men ſhould drinke little wine, for it ſhall make them prone to furie, and leachery, & that part of the ſoule which is called rationable, it ſhal make troublous and dull: not withſtanding yet it is ſometime profitable to mitigate or expell ordure made of choler or melācholy. Alſo it profiteth againſt drith, which happeneth in the ſubſtance of the bodie, either by too much labor, or by ye proper temperature of age: for wine moiſteth & nouriſheth that, which is too drye, alſo mitigateth and diſſolueth the ſharpnes of choler, and purgeth it alſo by vrine & ſweate. Finally as Theognes ſayth, much drinking of wineis ill, but moderate drinking of wine is not onely not ill, but alſo commodious and profitable, which ſentence is confirmed by Ieſus Syrac, in the booke named Eccleſiaſticus, ſaying: Wine moderately drunke reioyceth both the body & ſoule. Wherefore to conclude this chapter, there is neither meate nor drinke, in the vſe whereof ought to bee a more diſcreete moderation, then in wine, conſidering that being good and dronke in due time and meaſure, it not only conſerueth naturall & radicall moyſture, whereby life indureth, but alſo it helpeth the principal members which belong to digeſtion, to do their office: on the other part being ill or corrupt, or taken out of order and meaſure, it doth contrary to all the premiſſes, beſides that it tranſformeth a man or woman, making thē beaſtly. More of the qualittes of wine ſhall bee touched hereafter in the order of dyet.
            
            
               Of Milke. CAP. 20.
               MIlke is compact of thrée ſubſtances, creame, whay, and cruddes. The moſt excellent milke is of a woman, the milke of a cow is thickeſt, the milke of a camell is moſt ſubtil, the milke of a goate is betwéene cow milk & camel milke. Ewes milke is betwéen cow milk & aſſes

milke. Alſo the milke of beaſts féeding in large paſtures, and out of Fennes and Mariſhes, is better then of them which bee fed in little cloſes or in watrie grounds. In ſpring time milke is moſt ſubtile, and milke of young beaſts is bolſomer then of olde. To children, olde men, and to them which be oppreſſed with melācholy, or haue the fleſh cōſumed with a feuer, thick milke is conueniēt. And generally to al them which do not féele the milk riſe in their ſtomackes after that they haue eaten it, and in thoſe perſons it doth eaſily purge that, which is in ye belly ſuperfluous. And afterward it entreth into the veines & bringeth good nouriſhment: whoſoeuer hath an appetite to eate or drink milke, to the intent that it ſhall not ariſe or obrayd in the ſtomacke, let him put into a veſſell, out of the which he will receiue it, a fewe leaues of mint, ſugar, or pure honey, and into the veſſell cauſe the beaſt to be milked, and ſo drinke it warme from the vdder, or els let him doe as Paulus Aegineta teacheth, that is to ſay, boyle firſt the milke with an eaſte fire, and ſeeth it after in hotter fire, and ſkim it cleane, and with a ſpunge dipped in cold water, take the cleane away, which would be burned to the veſſell, then put into the milke ſalt and ſugar, Orbaſitus, de conuictione cibornm lib. 3. and ſtirre it often. Moreouer, milke taken to purge melonchaly, would be drunke in the morning abundantly, new milked, as is before written. And he that drinketh, ſhould abſtaine from meate and exerciſe vntill the milke be digeſted, and haue ſome what purged the bellie. For which labour it becommeth ſowre: and therefore it requireth reſt and watch, or to walk very ſoftly. Finally, where men and women be vſed from their childhood, for the more part, to milke, and to eate none or little other meate but milke and butter, they appeare to bee of good complexion and faſhion of body, and not ſo much vexed with ſickneſſe as they which drinke wine or ale: not withſtanding, much vſe of milke in men ſanguine or cholerike, doth ingender the ſtone.
            
            
               
               Of Ale, Beere, Cider, and Whay. CAP. 21.
               I Can neither heare nor reade, that Ale is made and vſed for a common drinke in any other countrie then England, Scotland, Ireland, and Pole. The Latine word Ceruiſia is indifferent as well to Ale as to Béere. If the corne be good, the water holeſome and cleane, and the Ale or Béere well & perfectly brewed and clenſed, and by the ſpace of ſixe daies and more, ſetled and defecate, it muſt néeds be a neceſſary & conuenient drinke as well in ſicknes as in health: conſidering the barly corne, whereof it is made, is commended & vſed in medicine in all parts of the world, & accounted to bee of a ſingular efficacie in reducing the bodie into good temper, ſpecially which is in diſtemperature of heate. For what ancient Phiſition is there that in his workes cōmendeth not Ptiſane? which is none other but pure barly brayd in a morter, & ſodden in water, the ſame thing is ſmall and cleane ale or béere, ſauing that perchaunce the drying of the malt is cauſe of more drith to be in the ale then in Ptiſane. And the hops in Béere maketh it colder in operation. But to ſay as I thinke, I ſuppoſe that neither Ale nor Béere is to be cō
                  pared to Wine, conſidering that in them doe lacke the heate and moyſture which is in Wine. For that being moderately vſed, is moſt like to the naturall heat & moyſture of mans bodie. And alſo the licour of Ale or Béere being more groſſe, do ingender more groſſe vapours and corrupt humours then Wine doth, being dronk in like exceſſe of quantitie.
               As for Cider may not bee good in any condition, conſidering as I ſayd, that al fruits do ingender ill humours, and doe coole too much naturall heate: but to them which haue abundance of red choler, moderately vſed, it ſomewhat profiteth in mitigation of exceſſiue heat. But who that will diligently marke in the countries where Cider is vſed for a common drinke, the men and women haue

the colour of their viſage palled, and the ſkinne of the viſage riueled, although that they be young.
               Whay, if it bee left of the butter, being well ordered, and not dronke vntill it haue a thicke curd of milke ouer it, like to a hat, is a right temperate drinke, for as much as by the vnctuoſitie of the butter, whereof the whay retaineth ſome portion, it is both moyſt & nouriſhing, and clenſeth the breaſt, & by the ſubtilnes of it ſelfe, it deſcendeth ſoone from the ſtomack, and is ſhortly digeſted. Alſo by reaſon of the affinitie which it hath with milke, it is cōuertible into bloud and fleſh, ſpecially in thoſe perſons which doe inhabit in the North parts, in whom naturall heat is conglutinate, and therefore is of more puiſſance and vertue in the office of concoction. Alſo cuſtome from childhood, doth eleuate the power of meates & drinkes in their diſpoſition, notwithſtanding that the 4. humours, ſanguine, choler, fleume, & melancholy, muſt alſo be conſidered, as it ſhall appeare in diuers places hereafter.
            
            
               Of Hony. CAP. 22.
               HOny as well in meat as in drink, is of incomparable efficacie: for it not only clenſeth, altereth, and nouriſheth, but alſo it long time preſerueth that vncorrupted, which is put into it, in ſo much, as Pliny ſaith: ſuch is the Plin. lib. 22. nature of hony, yt it ſuffereth not the bodies to putrifie: and he affirmeth that he did ſee an Hippocentaure, which is a beaſt halfe a man & halfe a horſe, brought in hony to Claudius the Emperour, out of Egypt to Rome. And he telleth alſo of Pollio Romulus, who was aboue a hundred yeares old, of whom Auguſtus the Emperour demanded by what meanes he liued ſo long, and retained ſtill the vigour or liuelines of bodie and minde. Pollio anſwered, that he did it inward with Meade, which is drinke made with honey and water: outward, with oyle. Which ſaying agréeth with the ſentence of Democritus the great Philoſopher, who being demaunded, how a man

might liue long in health: he anſwered. If he wet him within with honey, without with oyle. The ſame Philoſopher when he was an hundred yeares old and nine, prolonged his life certaine daies with the euaporation of hony, as Ariſtoxinus writeth. Of this excellent matter, moſt wonderfully wrought and gathered by a little Bée, as well of the pure dewe of heauen as of the moſt ſubtile humour of ſwéet and vertuous herbes & flowers, bee made licours commodious to mankinde, as Meade, Metheglin, and Oximel. Meade which is made with one part of honey, and foure times ſo much of pure water, & boyled vntill no ſkim doe remaine, is much commended of Galen, drunke in ſummer for preſeruing of health. Lib. 4. de tuenda ſanitate.
               
               The ſame author alway commendeth the vſing of hony, either rawe eaten with fine bread ſomewhat leauened, or ſodden, and receiued as drinke. Alſo Meade perfectly made, clenſeth the breaſt and lungs, cauſeth a mā to ſpit eaſily and piſſe abundantly, and purgeth the belly moderatly. Metheglin, which is moſt vſed in Wales, by reaſon of hot hearbs boyled with honey, is hotter then Meade, and more comforteth a cold ſtomack, if it be perfectly made, and not new or very 
                     ••
                  ale. Oximel, is where to one part of vineger is put double ſo much of honey, foure times as much of water, and thē being boyled vnto the thirdpart, and cleane ſkimmed with a feather, is vſed to be takē where in the ſtomack is much fleume or matter vndigeſted, ſo that it be not red choler. Looke the vſe thereof in Alexandro Tralliano. Many other good qualities of honey I omit to write of, vntill ſome other occaſion ſhall happen to remember them particularly, where they ſhall ſeeme to be profitable.
            
            
               Sugar. CAP. 23.
               OF Sugar I do finde none ancient author of Gréekes and Latines to write by name, but onely Paulus Aegineta, who ſayth in this wiſe, after that he hath treated

of hony. Moreouer, ſugar which they call hony, that is brought to vs from Arabia, called Felix, is not ſo ſwéete as our hony, but is equall in vertue, and doth not annoy the ſtomacke, nor cauſeth thirſt. Theſe be the words of Paulus. It is now in daily experiēce, that ſugar is a thing very temperat and nouriſhing, and where there is choler in the ſtomacke, or that the ſtomack abhorreth hony, it may be vſed for hony in all things, wherein honey is required to be. With ſugar and vineger is made ſyrupe acetoſe.
            
            
               Of time. CAP. 24.
               IN the conſideration of time, for taking of meates and Wint
                        •
                     r. drinkes, it is to be remembred, that in Winter meates ought to be taken in great abundance, & of a more groſſe ſubſtance then in Summer, for as much as the exteriour ayre which compaſſeth the bodie being colde, cauſeth the heate to withdraw into the inner parts, where being incloſed and gathered nigh together in the ſtomack and intrailes, it is of more force to boyle and digeſt that which is receiued into it. Alſo meates roſted are then better then ſodden, and fleſh & fiſh powdred, is then better then in Summer: herbes be not then commendable, ſpecially raw, neither fruites, except Quinces roſted or baked: drink ſhould be then taken in little quantitie. Moreouer, wines ſhal néede no water or very little, & that to cholerike perſons: red wines, & they which be thick and ſwéet, may be then moſt ſurely taken of thē which haue no opilations or ye ſtone: alway remēber that in winter 
                     ••
                  eume increaſeth by reaſon of raine and moyſtures of the ſeaſon, alſo the length of nights and much reſt. And therefore Gal in comment. in apho. z. lib. 3. in that time cholerike perſons are beſt at eaſe, ſemblably are yong mē, but to old men winter is an enemy. It beginneth the 8. day of Nouember, and endureth vntill the 8. day of February.
               The Spring time doth participate the firſt part with Spring time. Winter, the latter part with Summer. Wherefore if

the firſt part be cold, then ſhall the diet bee according to Hippocra. de natura humana. Winter. If the end be hot, then ſhall the diet be of Summer. If both parts be temperate, then ſhould there bee alſo a temperance in diet: alway conſidering that fleume yet remaineth, and bloud then increaſeth. And meate would bée leſſe in quantitie then in Winter, and drinke Galen com. aph. 18. lib. 1. ſomewhat more.
               Spring time beginneth the 8. of February, & continueth Summer. vnto the 8. day of May. In Summer the inward heat is but little, and the ſtomack doth not digeſt ſo ſtrongly nor quickly, as in winter: wherefore in ye ſeaſon, eating often, and a little at once, is moſt conuenient. And Damaſcenus ſayth, that faſting in ſummer drieth the bodie, maketh the colour ſalow, ingendreth melancholy, & hurteth the ſight: alſo boyled meate, bread ſtéeped in white broth, with ſodden lettiſe or cicorie, are then good to bée Hippo. de humoribus. vſed: alſo varietie in meates, but not at one meale: potages made with cold hearbes, drinke in more abundance, wine alaid with water to hot complexions much, to cold natures leſſe. In this ſeaſon bloud increaſeth, & toward the end thereof, choler. And therefore they which be cold of nature and moyſt, are then beſt at eaſe, hot natures & dry worſt. Moreouer▪ children and very young men in Galen in comment in apho. the beginning of ſummer, are holeſt, old folke in ye latter end, and in Harueſt. Summer beginneth the 8. day of May, & continueth vntill the 8. day of Auguſt. Autumne beginneth the 8. day of Auguſt, and endeth the 8. day of Nouember, that ſeaſon of the yere is variable, & the ayre changeable, by occaſiō wherof happen ſundry ſickneſſes, bloud decreaſeth, & melancholy aboundeth: wherfore all ſummer fruites would then be eſchewed, for as much as they make ill iuyce & winds in ye body. In this time meat would be more abundant the in ſummer, but ſomewhat drier: drink muſt be leſſe in quantitie: but leſſe mixt with water. This time is dāgerous to al ages, al natures, & al countries, but ye natures hot & moiſt be leaſt in damage.
               
                  
                  Diet concerning ſundry times of the yeare, written by the old Phiſition Diocles, to King Antigonus.
                  FRom the 12. day of December, at the which time the day is at the ſhorteſt vntil the 9. day of March, which doe continue 90. dayes, rheumes and moyſtures doe encreaſe, then meates and drinkes naturally very hot, would bee moderatly vſed. Alſo to drinke abundantly Wine without alay, or with little water, and to vſe hilaritie: the companie of a woman is not vnholeſome to the bodie.
                  From the ninth day of March, at which time in Equinoctium vexnum vnto the 25. day of Aprill, ſwéet fleume and bloud doe increaſe: therefore vſe thou things hauing much iuyce and ſharpe, exerciſe the body diligently, then may ye vſe ſafely the companie of a woman.
                  From the 20. day of Aprill, to the 14. day of June, choler increaſeth, then vſe all things that are ſwéete, and doe make the belly ſoluble, forbeare carnall companie with women.
                  From the 14. day of June, at which time ye day is at ye longeſt, vnto the 12. day of September, doth melancholy raine, forbeare carnal company, or vſe it moderatly.
                  From the 12. day of September, vnto the 17. day of October, do abound fleume & thin humours, then would all fluxes and diſtillations bee prohibited, then all ſharpe meates and drinkes and of good iuyce, are to be vſed, and carnall occupations ſhould then be eſchewed.
                  From the 17. day of October, to the 12. day of December, increaſeth groſſe fleume, vſe therefore all bitter meates, ſwéet wines, fat meate, and much exerciſe.
               
            
            
               Of Ages. CAP. 25.
               CHildren would be nouriſhed with meats and drinks, Children. which are moderatly hot and moyſt, notwithſtanding

                  Galen doth prohibite them vſe of Wine, becauſe it Galen de tuen. 
                        •
                     anit. lib. 1. moyſtneth and heateth too much the body, and filleth the heads of them, which are hot and moyſt, with vapours. Alſo he permitteth them in hot weather to drinke cléere water of the fountaine. A child growing faſt in his mē
                  bers toward a man, ſo that he ſéemeth well fed in the bodie, is then to be feared of fulnes of humours, and if it be Orba
                        •
                     itus, de 
                        •
                     ute ſimp. lib. 1 perceiued that he is replete, then muſt be withdrawne & miniſhed ſome part of that nutrimēt, and according vnto his age, ſome euacuation would be deuiſed, otherwhile by exerciſe, walking vp and downe faſting, and before that they eate any meate, let them exerciſe themſelues with their owne labours, & doe their owne accuſtomed buſineſſe, and eate the meates whereunto they bée moſt vſed, ſo that it be ſuch that may not hurt them. And thus néed they not to know of Phiſitions, but by experience and diligent ſearch by their ſtoole, their nurſes ſhall perceiue what digeſteth well, and what doth not. But if it appeare that by exceſſiue féeding, the belly of the child is fuller and greater thē it was wont to be, and that which paſſeth by the belly is corrupted, or his ſweate ſtinketh, theſe things knowne, if they eate ſtrong meates, giue them not one kind of meate, but diuers, that the noueltie of the meate may helpe, that they may goe the more eaſily to the ſtoole. For if any haue an vnreaſonable appetite, he is ſooner recouered, if he bee purged by a boyle or impoſtume, comen foorth & broken, before that the meat be corrupted, & after that let him eate fine meats, & being once whole, returne by little & little to his old cuſtome.
               Young men, excéeding the age of 14. yeares, ſhall eate meate more groſſe of ſubſtance, colder and moyſter, alſo Young men. Salades of cold hearbes, and to drinke ſeldome Wine, except it be alayd with water. Albeit, all theſe things muſt be tempered according to their complexions, exerciſe, and quietnes in liuing, wherof ye ſhal reade in their proper places hereafter.
               
                  
Olde men, in whome naturall heate and ſtrength ſéemeth Olde men. to decaye, ſhould vſe alwaye meates, which are of qualitie hot and moyſt, and there withall eaſie to bee digeſted, and abſtaine vtterly from all meates and drinks which will ingender thicke iuyce and ſlymy, ſemblablie from wine, which is thicke, ſwéete, and darke red wines, and rather vſe them which will make thinne humours, and will purge well the bloud by vrine, therefore white or yellowe wines, and perchance french claret wines, are for them very cōmendable. Alſo wine prepared with Paul. A Eginer. lib. 1. cap. 23. pure hony clarified, wherein rootes of parſley, or fenell be ſtéeped, ſpecially if they ſuſpect any thing of the ſtone, or gout. And if they more deſire to clenſe their raines and bladder, then it is good to vſe ſmall white wine, as racked reniſh wine, or other like to it. And ſometime to ſtéepe ouer night therein a parſley root flit and ſomwhat bruſed, and a little licorice. Finally, let them beware of all meates that will ſtop the pores, and make obſtructions Opilations, what they are. or opilations, that is to ſaye, with clammy matter ſtop the places where the naturall humors are wrought and digeſted, the which meates I haue before ſet in a table. But if it chaunce then to eate any ſuch meate in aboundance, let them take ſhortly ſuch things, as do reſiſt Opilations, or reſolue them. As white pepper, bruſed and mixt with their meates or drinks, garlike alſo or onyons, if they abhorre them not. Alway remember that aged men ſhould eate often, and but little at euery time, for it fareth by them, as it doth by a lamp, the light wherof is almoſt extinct, which by pouring in of oyle little and little is long kept burning: and with much oyle poured in at once, it is cleane put out. Alſo they muſt forbeare all things which doe ingender melancholy, whereof yée ſhall reade in the table before: and bread cleane without eauen, is not then vnholeſome.
            
            
               
               Moderation in dier, hauing reſpect to the ſtrength or weakenes of the perſon CAP. 26.
               NOw here it muſt be cōſidered, that although I haue written a generall dyet for euery age, yet neuertheleſſe it muſt be remembred, that ſome children and young men, either by debilitie of nature, or by ſome accidentall cauſe, as ſickenes or much ſtudy, happen to gather humours fleumaticke or melancholy in the places of digeſtion, ſo that concoction or digeſtion is as weak in them, as in thoſe which are aged.
               Semblably ſome old men find nature ſo beneficial vnto them, that their ſtomackes and liuers are more ſtrong to digeſt then the ſaide young men: ſome perchance haue much choler remayning in them. In theſe caſes the ſaide young men muſt vſe the dyet of olde men, or nigh vnto it, vntill the diſcraſie bée remooued, hauing alway reſpect to their vniuerſal complexions, as they which are naturally cholericke to vſe hot things in a more temperance, then they which be fleumaticke or melanch
                     •
                  licke by nature. The ſame obſeruation ſhall bee to olde men, ſauing that age of his owne propertie is colde and drie, therefore the old man that is cholericke, ſhall haue more regard to moiſture in meates then the young man being of the ſame complexion. Foreſéene alway that where nature is offended or grieued, ſhe is cured by that, which is Hippoc. aphor. Galen in comment. contrarie to that, which offendeth or grieueth, as colde by heate, heate by colde, drith by moiſture, moiſture by drith. In that whereby nature ſhould bee nouriſhed in a whole and temperate body, things muſt be taken which are like to the mans nature in qualitie and degrée. As where one hath his bodie in a good temper, things of the ſame temperance doth nouriſh him: but where he is out of temper, in heate, cold, moyſture or dryth, temperate meates or drinkes nothing doe profite him. For being out of the meane and perfect temperature, nature requireth

to bée thereto reduced by contraries, remembring not only, that contraries are remedie vnto their contraries, but alſo in euery contrarie, conſideration muſt bée had of the proportion in quantitie.
            
            
               Times in the day concerning meales. CAP. 27.
               BEſides the times of the yeare, and ages, there bée alſo other times of eating and drinking to bée remembred, as the ſundrye times in the daye, which wee call meales, which are in number and diſtance, according to the temperature of the countrey and perſon. As where the countrey is cold, and the perſon luſtie, and of a ſtrong nature, there maye more meales bee vſed, or the leſſe diſtance of time between them. Contrariwiſe in contrarie countries and perſonages, the cauſe is afore rehearſed, where I haue ſpoken of the dyet of the times of the yeare, notwithſtanding, here muſt bee alſo conſideration of exerciſe and reſt, which do augment or aſpyre the naturall diſpoſition of bodies, as ſhall bee more declared hereafter in the chapter of exerciſe. But concerning the generall vſage of countries, and admitting the bodies to the perfect ſtate of health, I ſuppoſe that in Englande young men, vntil they come to the age of xl. yeres, may well eate three meales in one day, as at breakefaſt, dinner, and ſupper, ſo that betwéene breakefaſt and dinner, bée the ſpace of 4. houres, at the leaſt betwéene dinner and ſupper 6. houres, and the breakfaſt leſſe then the dinner, & the dinner moderate, that is to ſay, leſſe then ſacietie of fulnes of bellie, and the drinke thereunto meaſurable, according to the drines or moiſtnes of the meate. For much aboundance of drinke at meale, drowneth the meate eaten, and not only letteth conuenient concoction in the ſtomacke, but alſo cauſeth it to paſſe farther then nature requireth, and therfore ingendreth much fleum, & conſequently rewmes, & crudenes in the veines, debility and ſlippernes of the ſtomacke continue fluxe, and manie

other inconueniences to the body and members. But to returne to meales, I thinke breakfaſts neceſſary in this realme, aſwell for the cauſes before rehearſed, as alſo for Breakefaſt. as much as choler being feruent in the ſtomacke, ſendeth vp fumoſities into the braine, and cauſeth headache, and ſometime becommeth adult, and ſmauldreth in the ſtomacke, whereby hapneth perilous ſicknes, and ſomtime ſodaine death, if the heate incloſed in the ſtomacke haue not other conuenient matter to worke on: this dayly experience proueth, and naturall reaſon confirmeth, therefore men and women not aged, hauing their ſtomackes cleane without putrified matter, ſléeping moderatly and ſoundly in the night, and féeling themſelues light in the morning and ſwéete breathed, let them on Gods name breake their faſt, cholericke men with groſſe meat, men of other complexion with lighter meate, foreſéene that they labour ſome what before, ſemblably their dinner and ſupper, as I haue before written, ſo that they ſléepe not incontinent after their meales: and here I will not recite the ſentences of authors, which had neuer experience of Engliſh mens natures, or of the iuſt temperature of this realme of England, onely this connſaile of Hippocrates ſhall be ſufficient. We ought to grant ſomwhat to time, Hippo. hor. 18. lib. 1 Gal. de tuenda ſanitate. to age, and to cuſtome: notwithſtanding where great warmenes or dryth greeueth the bodie, there ought the dinner to be leſſe, and the longer diſtance betwéene dinner, and ſupper. Alſo much reſt, except a little ſoft walking, that by an vpright mouing, the meat being ſtirred may deſcend. This is alway to be remēbred, that where one feeleth himſelfe full and grieued with his dinner, or the ſauour of his meate by eructation aſcendeth, or that his ſtomack is weak by late ſicknes or much ſtudy, then it is moſt conuenient to abſtain from ſupper, and rather prouoke himſelfe to ſleepe much, then to eate or drinke any thing. Alſo to drinke betweene meales is not laudable, except very great thirſt conſtraineth: for it interrupteth

the office of the ſtomacke in concoction, and cauſeth the meate to paſſe faſter then it ſhould doe, and the drink being colde, it rebuketh naturall heate that is working, and the meate remayning rawe, it corrupteth digeſtion and maketh crudeneſſe in the veines. Wherefore he that is thirſtie, let him conſider the occaſion. If it bee of ſalt fleume, let him walke fayre and ſoftly and onely waſhe his mouth and his throate with barly water, or ſmal ale, or lye downe and ſleepe a little, and ſo the thirſt wil paſſe away or at the leaſt be well aſſwaged.
               If it happen by extreame heate of the aire, or by a pure choler, or eating of hot Spices, let him drink a little Julep made with cleane water and ſugar, or a little ſmall béere or ale, ſo that he drinke not a great glut, but in a little quantity, let it ſtil down ſoftly into his ſtomack as he ſitteth, & then let him moue ſodainly. If ye thirſt be in yt euening by eating too much, and drinking of wine, then after the opinion of the moſt learned phiſitions, and as I my ſelfe haue oftē experienced the beſt remedy is, if there be no feuer, to drinke a good draught of colde water immediately, or els if it be not painfull for him to vomit, to prouoke him thereto with a little warme water, and after to waſh his mouth with vineger and water, and ſléep long and ſoundly if he can.
               And if in the morning hee féele any fumoſities riſing, then to drinke Julep of violets, or for lacke therof a good draught of very ſmall ale, or béere ſomewhat warmed, without eating any thing after it.
            
            
               Of diuerſities of meates eaten, whereby health is appayred. CAP. 28.
               NOw let this bee a generall rule, that ſundry meates, being diuers in ſubſtance and qualitie, eaten all at one meale, is the greateſt enemie to health that may be, and that ingendreth moſt ſickneſſes, for ſome meates being groſſe and harde to digeſt, ſome fine and eaſie to digeſt,

doe require diuers operations of nature, and diuers temperatures of the ſtomacke, that is to ſay, much heate and temperate heate, which maye not be together at one time.
               Therefore when the fine meate is ſufficiently boyled in the ſtomacke, the groſſe meate is raw, ſo both iuyces, the one good and perfect, the other groſſe and crude, at one time digeſted, and ſent into the veynes and bodie, needes muſt health decay, and ſickneſſes bee ingendred. Likewiſe in diuers meates being of diuers qualities, as where ſome are hot and moiſt, ſome cold and moiſt, ſome hot and dry, ſome cold and drie, according thereunto ſhal the iuyce bee diuers which they make in the body. And like as betwéen the ſaid qualities is contrariety, ſo therby ſhall bee in the bodie an vnequall temperature, for as much as it is not poſſible for a man to eſtéem ſo iuſt a proportion, of the qualities of that which he receiueth, that the one ſhall not exceede the other in quantitie.
               Wherefore of the ſaid vnequall mixture, needes muſt enſue corruption and conſequently ſicknes, and therfore to a hole man, it were better to féed at one meale competently on very groſſe meat only, ſo that it be ſwéete, and his nature doe not abhor it, then on diuers fine meates of ſundry ſubſtance and qualities. I haue known and ſéene olde men and olde women which eating onelie béefe, baken, chéeſe, and curdes, haue continued in good healthe, whome I haue proued, that when they haue eaten ſundrie fine meates at one meale, haue ſoone after felt themſelues greeued with frettings, and headache, and after that they haue béene hole againe, there hath béene giuen to them one kinde of light meate, they haue done as well therwith as they were wont to do wt groſſe meats, whē they eate it alone, which proueth to be true that which I haue rehearſed. And it is good reaſon, for after the generall opinion of Philoſophers and Phiſitions, the nature of mankind is beſt content with things moſt ſimple

and vnmixte, all thinges tending to vnitie, wherein is the onely perfection. Alſo it is a generall rule of phiſick, that where a ſickneſſe may bee cured with ſimples, that is to ſay, with one onely thing that is medicinable, there ſhould the Phiſition giue no compound medicine mixte with many things.
               Theſe things conſidered, it may ſeeme to all men that haue reaſon, what abuſe is heere in this realme in the continuall gourmandiſe and dailye féeding on ſundrie meats at one meale, the ſpirit of gluttony triumphing among vs, in his glorious chariot called welfare, driuing vs from him, as his priſoners into his dungeon of ſurfet, where we are tormented with catars, feuers, gouts, plureſies, fretting of the guttes, and many other ſickneſſes, and finally put to death by them, oftentimes in youth, or in the moſt pleaſant time of our life, when we would moſt gladlie liue, for the remedie whereof howe many times haue there beene deuiſed ordinances, and actes of counſaile, although perchaunce bodily health was not the chiefe occaſion thereof, but rather prouiſion againſt vaine and ſumptuous expenſes of the meane people. For the nobilitie was exempted and had libertie to abide ſtill in the dungeon if they woulde, and to liue leſſe while then other men. But when, where, and how long were the ſaide good deuiſes put in due execution, for all that, that thereof ſhould ſuccéede double profite, that is to ſay, health of body, and increaſe of ſubſtance, by eſchewing of ſuperfluous expēces in ſundry diſhes. Alas how long will men fantaſie lawes and good ordinances, and neuer determine them. Fantaſie proceedeth of wit, determination of wiſedome, witte is in the deuiſing and ſpeaking, but wiſedome is in the perfourmance, which reſteth onely in execution. Héere haue I almoſt forgotten, that my purpoſe was to write of the order of dyet, and not of lawes: but the feruent loue that I haue to the publike weale of my countrie, conſtrained mee to

digreſſe ſome what from my matter, but now will I proceede forth to write of order which in taking of meates and drinkes is not the leaſt part of dyet.
            
            
               Of order of receiuing of meates, and drinke. CAP. 29.
               HEarbs as well ſodden as vnſodden, alſo fruits which doe mollifie and looſe the bellie, ought to be eaten before any other meate, except that ſomtime for the repreſſing of fumoſities riſing in the head by much drinking of wine, rawe lettice, or a cold apple, or the iuyce of Orenges or Lymons, may bée taken after meales in a little quantitie.
               Moreouer all breathes, milke, réere egges and meates which are purpoſely taken to make the bellie ſoluble, would firſt be eaten. Al fruits and other meates that are ſtiptike or binding, would bee eaten laſt after all other. Fruites confectionate ſpeciallie with honie, are not to bee eaten with other meates. But here is to bée diligently noted, that where the ſtomack is cholerick and ſtrong, groſſe meates would be firſt eaten, where the ſtomacke is colde or weake, there would fine meates be firſt eaten: for in a hot ſtomacke fine meates are burned, while the groſſe meate is digeſting. Contrariwiſe in a colde ſtomacke, the little heate is ſuffocate with groſſe meate, and the fine meates left rawe, for lacke of concoction, where if the fine meate be firſt taken moderately, it ſtirreth vp and comforteth naturall heate, and maketh it more able to concoct groſſe meates, if they bee eaten afterward, ſo that it be but in ſmal quantitie, notwithſtanding, as I lately affirmed one manner of meate is moſt ſure to euery complexion, foreſéene that it be alway moſt commonly in conformity of qualities with the perſon ye eateth. Moreouer take héede that ſlipper meates bee not firſt eaten, leaſt it draw with it too haſtily other meates, ere they be digeſted, nor yt ſtiptike or reſtraining meates,

be taken at the beginning, as Quinces, Peares, & Medlers, leſt they may let other meats that they deſcend not into the bottome of the ſtomacke where they ſhould bée digeſted, notwithſtanding the confection made with the iuyce of Quinces, called Diacitonites, taken two houres afore dinner or ſupper, is commended of Galen and other for reſtoring appetite and making good concoction. Alſo concerning drinke at meales, it would not be afore that Drinke at meales. ſomewhat were eaten, and at the beginning the drinke would be ſtrongeſt, and ſo toward the end more ſmall, if it be ale or béere, and if it be wine more and more alayd with water: and after the better opinion of Phiſitions, the drinke would rather be mixt with the meate by ſundrie little draughts, thē with one great draught at the ende of the meale: for the mixture tempereth well the meate without annoyance, a great draught with much drinke drowneth the meate, rebuketh natural heat that then worketh in cōcoction, and with his waight driueth downe the meate too haſtily. Hot wines and ſwéete, or confectioned with ſpices, or very ſtrong ale, or béere, are not conuenient at meales: for the meate is by them rather corrupted then digeſted, and they make hot & ſtinking vapours aſcend vp to the braines. Albeit if the ſtomacke be very windie, or ſo cold and féeble, that it cannot concoct ſuch a quantitie of meate as is required to the ſufficient nouriſhment of the bodie of him that eateth, or hath eaten rawe hearbes or fruites, whereby he féeleth ſome annoyance, then may he drinke incontinent after his meale, a little quantitie of ſecke, or good Aqua vitae, in ſmall ale: but if he haue much choler in his ſtomacke, or a head full of vapours, it were much better that he did neither drinke the one nor the other, but rather eate a little coliander ſéede prepared, or a péece of a Quince roſted, or in Marmelade, and after reſt to amend the lacke of nature with ſléepe, moderate exerciſe, & plaiſters prouiding for comforting of the ſtomacke. And here will I

leaue to write any more of the diet of eating & drinking, ſauing that I would, that the readers ſhould haue in remembrance theſe two counſailes. Firſt, that to an hole man, to practiſe a rule is not conuenient in diet, and that the diſeaſes which doe happen by too much abſtinence, are worſe to be cured, then they which come by repletiō. And Cornelius Celſus ſayth, a man that is hole and well at eaſe, and at his libertie, ought not to binde himſelfe to rules or néed a Phiſition: but yet where the ſtomacke is féeble, as is of more part of the citizens, and welnigh all they that bee ſtudious in learning or waightie affayres, there ought to bee more circumſpection, that the meate may bee ſuch as yt either in qualitie or quantitie, nature being but féeble, be not rebuked or too much oppreſſed.
            
            
               Of ſleepe and watch. CAP. 30.
               THe commoditie of moderate ſléepe appeareth by this, that naturall heat which is occupied about that matter, wherof proceedeth nouriſhment, is comforted in the places of digeſtion, and ſo digeſtion is made better or more perfect by ſléepe, the body fatter, the minde more quiet and cléere, the humours temperate, and by much watch all things happen contrary.
               The moderation of ſléepe muſt be meaſured by health and ſickneſſe, by age, by time, by emptines or fulnes of the bodie, and by naturall complexions. Firſt to a hole man, hauing no debilitie of nature, and digeſting perfectly the meat that he eateth, a little ſléepe is ſufficient: but to them which haue weake ſtomackes, and do digeſt ſlowly, it requireth that ſleepe bee much longer, ſemblably temperance is required in youth and age: winter and ſummer, ye body being ful of ill humours, very little ſléep is ſufficient, except the humours be crude or raw, for thē is ſléepe neceſſarie, which digeſteth them better then labour, ſemblably where the body is long empty, by long ſickneſſe, or abſtinence, ſléepe comforteth nature as wel

in the principal members, as in all the other. Alſo regard muſt be had to the complexion, for they that are hot and doe eate little and digeſt quickly, a little ſléepe ſerueth, ſpecially to cholerike perſons, for in them much ſléepe augmenteth heate, more then is neceſſarie, whereby hot fumes & inflammations are often ingendred, & ſometime the naturall choler is aduſt or putrified, as experience teacheth. Fleumatike perſons are naturally inclined to ſléepe: & becauſe they ingender much humours, they require more ſléepe then ſanguine or cholerike. Perſons hauing natural melancholy, not procéeding of choler aduſt, do require very much ſléepe, which in them cōforteth the powers animal, vital & naturall, which ye may finde written in the tables preceding. Sléepe would be taken not immediatly after meales, & before that yt meat is deſcended frō the mouth of the ſtomack. For thereby is ingendred paines & noiſe in the belly, and digeſtion corrupted, & the ſléepe by ill vapours aſcending, made vnquiet & troublous. Moreouer, immoderate ſléepe maketh the bodie apt vnto palſies, apoplexies, falling ſicknes, rheumes and impoſtumes. Alſo it maketh the wits dull, & the bodie flow and vnapt to honeſt exerciſe. Semblably immoderate watch drieth too much the body, and doth debilitate the powers animall, letteth digeſtion, and maketh the body apt to conſumption. Wherefore in theſe two things, as well as all other, a diligent temperance is to bee vſed, the moderation is beſt coniected (for it is hard perfectly to know it) by the ſenſible lightnes of the bodie, ſpecially of the braine, the browes, and the eyes, the paſſage downe of the meate from the ſtomacke, the will to make vrine, and to go to the ſtoole: contrariwiſe, heauines in the body & eyes, and ſauour of the meate before eaten, ſignifieth that the ſléepe was not ſufficient. They that are hole, muſt ſléepe firſt on the right ſide, becauſe the meate may approch to the liuer, which is in the ſtomack as fire vnder the pot, and by him is digeſted.
               
                  
To them which haue féeble digeſtion, it is good to ſléepe proſtrate on their bellies, or to haue their bare hand on their ſtomackes. Lying vpright on the backe it is to be vtterly abhorred.
            
            
               The commoditie of exerciſe, and the time when it ſhould be vſed. CAP. 31.
               EUery mouing is not an exerciſe but onely that which is vehement, the end wherof is alteration of ye breath or winde of a man. Of exerciſe doe procéede two commodities, euacuation of excrements, and alſo good habite of the bodie: for exerciſe being a véhement motion, therof néedes muſt enſue hardnes of the members, whereby labour ſhall the leſſe grieue, and the bodie bee the more ſtrong to labour. Alſo thereof commeth augmentation of heat, wherby happeneth the more attraction of things to be digeſted, alſo more quicke alteration & better nouriſhing. Moreouer, that al and ſinguler parts of the bodie, be therewith ſomewhat humected. Whereby it happeneth, that things hard bee mollified, moyſt things are extenuate, and the pores of the bodie are more opened. And by the violence of the breath or wind, the pores are clenſed, and the filth in ye bodie naturally expelled. This thing is ſo neceſſarie to the preſeruation of health, that without it, no man may be long without ſicknes: which is affirmed by Cornelius Celſus, ſaying, that ſluggiſhnes dulleth the bodie, labour doth ſtrengthen it: the firſt bringeth the incommodities of age ſhortly, the laſt maketh a man long time luſtie. Notwithſtanding, in exerciſe ought to be foure things diligently conſidered, that is to ſay: the time, the things preceding, the qualitie, and quantitie of exerciſe. Firſt, as concerning the time conuenient for exerciſe, that it be, not when there is in the ſtomacke or bowels great quantitie of meate, not ſufficiently digeſted, or of humours, crude, or raw, leaſt

thereby perill might inſue by conueiance of them into al the members, before thoſe meates or humours be concoct or boyled ſufficiently. Galen ſayth, that the time moſt conuenient for exerciſe is, when both the firſt & ſecond digeſtion is complete, as well in the ſtomacke, as in the veines, & that the time approcheth to eate eftſoones. For if ye do exerciſe ſooner or later, ye ſhal either fill the body with crude humours, or els augment yellowe choler. The knowledge of this time is perceiued by the colour of the vrine: for that which reſembleth vnto cléere water, betokeneth that the iuyce which commeth from the ſtomacke, is crude in the veines: that which is well coloured, not too high or bace, betokeneth that the ſecond digeſtion is now perfect: where the colour is very high or red, it ſignifieth that the concoction is more then ſufficient. Wherefore when the vrine appeareth in a temperate colour, not red nor pale, but as it were gilt, then ſhould exerciſe haue his beginning.
            
            
               Of Fricaſies or rubbings preceding exerciſe. CAP. 32.
               AS touching things preceding exerciſe, as much as it is to be feared, leaſt by vehement exerciſe any of the excrements of the belly or bladder, ſhould haſtily be receiued into the habite of the body, by the violence of heat kindled by exerciſe, alſo leaſt ſome thing which is hole, be by heauines of excrements or violent motion, broken or pulled out of his place, or that the excrements by violence of the breath, ſhould ſtop the pores or conduites of the body, it ſhall be neceſſary little and little, by chaſing the body, firſt to mollifie the parts conſolidate, and to extenuate or make thin humours, and to looſe and open the pores, and then ſhall inſue to him that exerciſeth no perill of obſtruction or rupture. And to bring that to paſſe, it ſhall be expedient, after that the body is clenſed, to rub the body with a courſe linnen cloth, firſt ſoftly and eaſily,

and after to increaſe more and more to a hard & ſwift rubbing, vntill the fleſh doe ſwell, and be ſomewhat ruddie, and that not only downe right, but alſo ouerthwart and round. Some doe vſe fricaſies in this forme, in the morning after that they haue bin at the ſtoole, with their ſhirt ſléeues or bare hand, if their fleſh be tender, they deo firſt ſoftly, and afterward faſter rub their breaſt & ſides downward, & ouerthwart, not touching their ſtomacke or belly, and after cauſe their ſeruant ſemblably to rub ouerthwart their ſhoulders and backe, and beginning at their necke bone, and not touching the raines of their backe, except they doe féele there much colde and winde, and afterward their legges from the knées to the ankle: laſt, their armes from the elbow, to the hand-wreſt. And in this forme of fricaſie, I my ſelfe haue found an excellent commoditie. Old men, or they which bee very drie in their bodies, if they put to ſome ſwéete oyles, as Yrinum, Nardinum, Chamelinum, or other like mixt with a little ſwéete oyle of Roſes, I ſuppoſe they doe well. I will not here ſpeake of oyntments, vſed in olde time among the Romanes and Gréekes, in fricaſies or rubbings. For I ſuppoſe, that they were neuer here vſed, and in the ſayd places, they bee alſo left, vnleſſe it bee in palſies, or apoplexies, or agaynſt the rigour which happeneth in feuers onely. I will remember the ſaying of Hippocrates: Fricaſie hath power to looſe, to binde, to increaſe fleſh, and to miniſh it. For hard fricaſies do binde or conſolidate: ſoft rubbing doth looſe or mollifie, much doe miniſh fleſh, meane rubbing doth augment or increaſe it. He that will knowe more abundantly hereof, let him reade the booke of Galen, of the preſeruation of health, called in latin, Detuenda ſanitate, tranſlated moſt truely and eloquently out of Gréeke into Latin, by Doctor Linac
                        •
                     e, late Phiſition of moſt worthie memorie, to our ſoueraigne Lord King Henry the eight. The ſame matter is written more briefly of Paulus Aegineta, Oribaſius,

Aetius, and ſome other late writers, but vnto Galen not to be compared.
            
            
               The diuerſities of exerciſes. CAP. 33.
               THe qualitie of exerciſe, is the diuerſitie thereof, for as much as therein be many differences in mouing, and alſo ſome exerciſe moueth more one part of ye body, ſome an other. In difference of mouing ſome is ſlowe, or ſoft, ſome is ſwift or faſt, ſome is ſtrong or violent, ſome bée mixt with ſtrength or ſwiftnes. Strong or violent exerciſes be theſe, deluing, ſpecially in tough clay, and heauie, bearing or ſuſtaining of heauie burthens, climbing or walking againſt a ſtéepe vpright hill, holding a rope, and climbing vp thereby, hanging by the hands on any thing aboue a mans reach, that his féete touch not the ground, ſtanding and holding vp, & ſpreading the armes, with the hands faſt cloſed, and abiding ſo a long time. Alſo to holde the armes ſtedfaſt, cauſing an other man to aſſay to pull them out, and notwithſtanding hée kéepeth his arme ſtedfaſt, inforcing thereunto the ſine wes and muſcules. Wraſtling alſo with the armes and legs: if the perſons bee equall in ſtrength, it doth exerciſe the one and the other: if the one be ſtronger, then is it to the weaker a more violent exerciſe. All theſe kinds of exerciſes, and other like them, do augment ſtrength, & therefore they ſerue onely for young men, which bee inclined, or be apt to the warres. Swift exerciſe without violēce is running, playing with weapons, teniſe, or throwing of the ball, trotting a ſpace of ground forward, & backward, going on the toes, and holding vp the hands. Alſo ſtirring vp and downe his armes, without plummets. Uehement exerciſe is compound of violent exerciſe, and ſwift, when they are ioyned together at one time, as daunſing of Galiardes, throwing of the ball, and running after it. Football play maye bee in the number thereof, throwing of the long Dart, and

continuing it many times, running in harneſſe, and other like: the moderate exerciſe is long walking, or going a iourney.
               The parts of the body haue ſundrie exerciſes appropried vnto them, as running and going is moſt proper for the legges: mouing of the armes vp and downe, of ſtretching them out, and playing with weapōs, ſerueth moſt for the armes and ſhoulders, ſtooping and riſing oftentimes, as lifting great waights, taking vp plummets, or other like poyſes on the endes of the ſtaues, and in likewiſe lifting vp in euery hand a ſpeare or moreſpike by the ends, ſpecially croſſing the hands, and to lay them downe againe in their places: theſe doe exerciſe the backe and loynes. Of the bulke and lungs, the proper exerciſe is mouing of the breath in ſinging and crying. The entrailes which be vnderneath the middreffe, be exerciſed by blowing either by conſtraint, or playing on ſhaulmes or ſackbots, or other like inſtrumēts which doe require much winde.
               The muſcules are beſt exerciſed with holding ye breath in a long time, ſo that he which doth exerciſe, hath well digeſted his meate, and is not troubled with much wind in his bodie. Finally, lowd reading, counterfaite battaile, Cel. 2. teniſe, or throwing the ball, running, walking, and to ſhooting, which in mine opinion excéede all the other, doe exerciſe the body commodiouſly. Alway remember, that the ende of violent exerciſe is, difficultie in fetching of breath. Of moderate exerciſe, alteration of breath only, or the beginning of ſweat.
               Moreouer in Winter, running and wraſtling is conuenient. In Summer, wraſtling a little, but not running. In very cold weather, much walking, in hot weather, reſt is more expedient. They which ſeeme to haue moyſt bodies, and liue in idlenes, they haue néede of violent exerciſe. They which are leane and cholerike muſt walke ſoftly, and exerciſe themſelues very temperatly.

The Plummets called of Galen Alteres, which are now much vſed with great men, being of equall weight, and according to the ſtrength of him that exerciſeth, are very good to be vſed faſting, a little before breakfaſt or dinner, holding in euery hand a plummet, and lifting them down with much violence, and ſo he may make the exerciſe violent or moderate, after the poiſe of the plummets, heauier or lighter, & with much or little labouring with thē.
            
            
               Of geſtation, that is to ſay, where one is carried, and is of an other thing moued, and not of himſelfe. CAP. 34.
               THere is alſo an other kind of exerciſe, which is called Geſtation, and is mixt with mouing and reſt. For as much as the body ſitting or lying ſéemeth to reſt, and notwithſtanding it is moued by that which beareth it, as lying in a bed, hanging by cordes or chaines, or in a cradle, ſitting in a chayre which is caryed on mens ſhoulders with ſtaues, as was the vſe of the ancient Romains, or ſitting in a boate or barge, which is rowed, ryding on a horſe which aumbleth very eaſily, or goeth a very ſofte pace. The bed, cradle, and chayre caryed, ſerueth for thē that are in long and continuall ſicknes, or be lately recouered of a feuer. Alſo them which haue the frenſie or li
                  
                     •
                  harge, or haue a light tertiane feuer, or a quotidiane. This exerciſe ſwéetely aſſwageth troubles of the minde, and prouoketh ſléepe, as it appeareth in children, which are rocked. Alſo it is conuenient for them, which haue the palſey, the ſtone, or the gout. Geſtation in a chariot or wagon, hath in it a ſhaking of the body, but ſome vehement, and ſome more ſoſt, the ſofte ſerueth in diſeaſes of the head, and where any matter runneth downe into the ſtomacke and intrailes. But the vehement ſhaking is to be vſed in the griefes of the breaſt and the ſtomacke.
               Alſo in ſwelling of the body and legges, in dropſies, palſies, migrimes, and ſcoto
                     〈…〉
                  ies, which is an imagination

of darkenes: being returned at the ende of his iourney, he muſt ſit vp, and be eaſily moued. I haue known ſaith Aetius, many perſons in ſuch wiſe cured, we out anie other helpe. Nauigation or rowing nigh to the land in a calm water, is expedient for them that haue dropſies, lepries, palſies, called of the vulgar people takings & franſies: to be caried on a rough water it is a violent exerciſe, & induceth ſundry affections of the mind, ſomtime feare, ſometime hope, now cowarde heart, now hardines, one while pleaſure, an other while diſpleaſure. Theſe exerciſes, if they be wel tēpered, they may put out of ye the body al long during ſickneſſes: for yt which is mixt with reſt & moouing, if any thing els may, it moſt excellently cauſeth the body to be well nouriſhed. Celſus doth prohibite Geſtation, Celſus. 2. where the body féeleth paine, & in the beginning of feuers, but whē they ceaſe, he alloweth it. Riding moderatly and without griefe, doth corroborate the ſpirit & body aboue other exerciſes, ſpecially the ſtomack, it clenſeth the ſenſes and maketh them more quicke. Albeit to the breaſt it is very noyful, it ought to be remēbred, that as wel this, as all other kinds of exerciſe, would bee vſed in a whole countrie, and where the ayre is pure and vncorrupted. Foreſéen that he that will exerciſe, do go firſt to the ſtoole, for the cauſes rehearſed in the laſt chapter.
            
            
               Of Vociferation. CAP. 15.
               THe chiefe exerciſe of the breaſt and inſtrumentes of the voyce, is vociferation, which is ſinging, reading or crying, whereof is the propertie that it purgeth natural heate, and maketh it alſo ſubtill and ſtable, and maketh the members of the body ſubſtantiall and ſtrong, reſiſting diſeaſes. This exerciſe woulde bée vſed of perſons ſhorte winded, and them which cannot fetch their breath, but holding their necke ſtraight vpright. Alſo of them whoſe fleſh is conſumed, ſpecially about the breaſt and ſhoulders. Alſo which haue had apoſthumes broken

in their breaſtes. Moreouer of them that are hoarſe by the much moyſture, and to them which haue quartayn feuers, it is conuenient: It looſeth the humor that ſticketh in the breaſt, and drieth vp the moiſtnes of the ſtomack, which properly the courſe of the quartaine is wont to bring with them, it alſo profiteth them which haue féeble ſtomackes, or doe vomite continually, or doe breake vp ſowrenes out of the ſtomack. It is good alſo for griefs of the head. He that intendeth to attempt this exerciſe, after that he hath beene at the ſtoole, and ſoftly rubbed the lower partes, and waſhed his hands, let him ſpeak with as bace a voyce as he can, and walking, beginne to ſing lowder and lowder, but ſtill in a bace voyce, and to take no heede of ſwéete tunes or harmonie. For that nothing doth profite vnto health of body, but to inforce himſelfe to ſing great, for thereby much ayre drawen in by fetching of breath, thruſteth forth the breaſt and ſtomack, and openeth and inlargeth the pores. By high crying and lowde reading, are expelled ſuperfluous humors. Therfore men and women hauing their bodies feeble, & their fleſhe looſe, and not firme, muſt read oftentimes lowde, and in a bace voyce, extending out the windpipe, and other paſſages of the breath. But notwithſtanding this exerciſe is not vſed alway and of all perſons. For they in whome is aboundant of humours corrupted, or be much diſeaſed with cruditie in the ſtomacke and veines, thoſe doe I counſaile to abſtaine from the exerciſe of the voice, leaſt much corrupted iuyce or vapours, may thereby bée into all the body diſtributed.
               And here I conclude to ſpeake of exerciſes, which of them that deſire to remaine long in health is moſt diligently, and as I might ſay, moſt ſcrupulouſlie to bee obſerued.
            
         
         
            
            The third Booke of the Castell of Health.
            
            
               Of Repletion. CAP. 1.
               
                  REpletion is a ſuperfluous aboundance of humours in the body: and that is in two manner of wiſe, that is to ſay, in quantitie and in qualitie: in quantitie, as where all the foure humours are more in aboundance, then be equal in proportion to the body that containeth them, or where one humour much exceedeth the remnant in quantitie. In qualitie, as where the bloud or other humor, is hotter or colder, thicker or thinner, then is conuenient vnto the body.
               Firſt, where all the humours being ſuperfluouſly increaſed, filleth and extendeth the receptories of the body, as the ſtomacke, the veynes, and the bowels, and is moſt properly called fulnes, in Greeke Plethora, in Latine Plenitudo.
               
               The other is, where the body is infarſed either with choler, yellow or blacke, or with fleume, or with watrie humours, and is properly called in Greeke Cacothimia, in Latine Vitioſus ſuccus, in Engliſh it may be called corrupt iuyce. I will not here write, the ſubtil & aboundant definitions and deſcriptions of Galen in his books de plenitudine, and in his commentaries vpon the aqhoriſmes of Hippocrates. For it ſhall here ſuffice, to ſhewe the operations of repletion, good or ill, remitting them which bee curious, and deſire a more ample declaration to the moſt excellent works of Galen, where he may bee ſatiſfied, if hee bee not determined to repugne againſt reaſon. Hippocrates ſayth, where meate is receiued much aboue nature, that maketh ſicknes, Galen declaring that place Lib. 2. Aph. apho. 12. Vbi cibus praeter natutam plus ingeſtus eſt, hic morbum facit. ſayth: more meat then accordeth with natures meaſure, is named repletion. And afterward he expounded that word aboue nature, to ſignifie too much and ſuperfluoſly, as who ſayth, where the meat is ſuperfluouſly taken,

it maketh ſicknes. For meate but a little excéeding temperance, Galen. in comment. loco praedicto. may not forth with make ſicknes, but may yet kéepe the body within the latitude or bounds of health, for the meate that ſhal make ſicknes, muſt not a little excéede the exquiſite meaſure. The incommoditie which happeneth therby is, that moiſtnes is too much extended, and naturall heate is debilitate. Alſo naturall heate reſolueth ſome what of the ſuperfluous meate and drinke. And of that which is reſolued of meate vndigeſted, procéedeth fumoſity groſſe and vndigeſted, which aſcending vp into the head, and touching the rym wherin the brain is wrapped, cauſeth headach, trumbling of the members, duſkiſhneſſe of the ſight, and many other ſickneſſes, alſo by the ſharpnes thereof, it pricheth and annoyeth the ſinewes, which make ſenſibilitie, the rootes of whom are in the brayne, and from thence paſſeth through al the body. Finally the ſaid 
                     •••
                  moſity ingendred of repletion, piercing the innermoſt part of the ſaide ſinewes called ſenſible, grieuouſly annoyeth the power animall, there conſiſting, by the occaſion whereof, vnderſtanding and reaſon, as to the vſe of them are let and troubled.
               And alſo the tongue which is reaſons expoſitour, is depriued of his office, as it appeareth in them which are dronke, and them which haue grieuous paines in their head, proceeding of repletions. Signes of repletion bee theſe, loſſe of appetite, delite in nothing, ſlothfulnes, dulnes of the wit and ſenſes, more ſléepe then was accuſtomed to be, cramps in the body, ſterting or ſalcion of the Oribaſius euoriſton. lib. 1. members; fulnes of the veines, and thicknes of the pulſes, horrour or ſhroueling of the bodie mixte with heate. The remedies are abſtinence and all euacuation, whereof I will make mention in the next Chapter.
            
            
               Of Euacuation. CAP. 2.
               THe meates and drinkes receiued into the bodie: if the ſtomacke and liuer doe their naturall office, bee altered

by concoction and digeſtion in ſuch wiſe, that the beſt part thereof, goeth into the nouriſhmēt of the body. The worſt being ſeparate by the members officiall, from the reſidue, are made excrementes in ſundry formes and ſubſtances, which are like in qualitie to the natural humour, which then raigneth moſt in the body. Theſe excrements be none other, but matter ſuperfluous, and vnſauery, which by naturall powers may not be conuerted into fleſh, but remaining in the body, corrupt the members, and therefore nature abhorring them, deſireth to haue them expelled. Theſe excrements be thrée in number, ordure, vrine, humour ſuperfluous. Moreouer there be two ſortes of ordure, that is to ſay, one digeſted, which Ordure. paſſeth by ſiege, the other vndigeſted, which is expelled Digeſted. by vomite. Where I ſay digeſted, I meane that it is paſſed the ſtomacke, and turned vnto an other figure. Likewiſe I call that vndigeſted, which ſtill remayneth in the figure of meate.
               Uryne is the watrie ſubſtaunce of the bloud, like as Vrine. whay is of milke, which out of the meate that is altered, and concoct or boyled in the ſtomack, is ſtrayned in the veins called Miſaraice, which procéedeth from the holow part of the liuer, and ſent by the raynes into the bladder, paſſeth by the inſtrument, the which is ordayned aſwell to that purpoſe, as for generation.
               Humour ſuperfluous is in thrée ſortes, ether mixt with any of the foure humoures, called naturall, or els it Humour ſuperfluous. is gathered into the brayne, or it is betwéene the ſkinnes and the fleſhe, or lyeth among the ſinewes, Muſcules or ioynts. Of humors ſome are more groſſe, ſome are cold, ſubtill and hot, and are called vapours. Now for to expell the ſaid excrements, are 9. ſundry kinds of euacuation, that is to ſay, abſtinence, vomit, purgatiō by ſiege, letting of bloud, ſcarifying called cupping, ſweating, prouocation of vrine, ſpitting, bleeding at the noſe, or by hemerodes. And in womē their naturall purgations. Of theſe

euacuatiōs I will briefly declare, with the commodities, which by the diſcreet vſe of them do happen vnto ye body.
            
            
               Of abſtinence. CAP. 3.
               ABſtinence is a forbearing to receiue any meate or Cor. Cel. lib. 2. Hipp. 2. aphor. lib. 7. drinke. For if it bee but in part, it is rather then called temperance then abſtinence. It ought to be vſed only after repletion, as the proper remedie therefore. And thē if it be moderate, it conſumeth ſuperfluities, & in conſuming them, it clarifieth the humors, maketh the body Conſiderations in abſtinence. fayre coloured, and not onely kéepeth out ſicknes, but alſo where ſicknes is entred, nothing more helpeth it if it be vſed in ſeaſon. To them which haue very moiſt bodies hunger is right expedient, for it maketh them more drie, notwithſtanding there ought to be conſiderations in the meate before eaten, in the age of the perſon, in the time of the yeare, and in cuſtome. Firſt in the meat before eaten, if it be much in exceſſe, or very groſſe, or not much excéeding, or light of digeſtion, and according therunto would abſtinence more or leſſe bee proportioned. Concerning Aph. lib. 1. Gal. in comment. age, Hippocrates ſayth, old men may ſuſteyne faſting eaſily: next vnto them, men of middle age, young men may worſe beare it, children worſt of all, ſpecially they that be luſtie, notwithſtanding, here Galen correcteth Hippocrates ſaying: that he ſhould haue excepted men very old, who, as experience declareth, muſt eate often and little. As touching time, it muſt be remembred that in winter and ſpring time, the ſtomackes bee naturally very hot, and sléepe is long, and therefore in that time, meates would bée more aboundant, and although much bee eaten, it will bee ſooner digeſted. Wherefore abſtinence would not be thē ſo much as in ſommer, albeit, to abſtein much in Sommer, except it bee after repletion, Damaſcene 
                  Damaſcenus apho. ſaith, it dryeth the body, it maketh the colour ſalow, it ingendreth melancholy, and hurteth the ſight. Moreouer cuſtome may not be forgottē, for they which be vſed

from childhood, to eate ſundry meales in the day, would rather be reduced to fewer meales, and little meate, then to be cōpelled to abſtain vtterly, to the intēt that nature which is made by cuſtome, be not rebuked, and the power digeſtiue thereby debilitate. And note well, that by too much abſtinence, the moiſture of the body is withdrawē: and conſequently the body dryeth, and wareth leane, naturall heate, by withdrawing of moiſture is too much incended, and not finding humour to worke in, turneth his violence to ye radicall or ſubſtantiall moyſture of the bodie, and exhauſting that humour, bringeth the bodie into a conſumption. Wherefore Hippocra. ſaith, that too Apho lib. 2. ſcarce and exquiſite an order in meat and drink, is for the more part more dāgerous then that which is more aboū
                  dant. Contrariwiſe moderation in abſtinence according to the ſaid conſideration is to health a ſure bulwarke.
            
            
               Of Vomite. CAP. 4.
               THe meate or drinke ſuperfluous, or corrupted, in the ſtomacke, is beſt expelled by vomite, if it be not verie grieuous to him which is diſeaſed. Alſo the moderate vſe Aetius lib. 3. of it purgeth fleume, lighteth the head, cauſeth that the exceſſe of meates or drinks, ſhall not annoy or bring ſickneſſe. Moreouer it amendeth the affectes of the raynes, bladder and the fundament. It alſo helpeth againſt lepries, cankers, goutes, dropſies, and alſo diuers ſickneſſes proceeding of the ſtomacke. For if any griefe happeneth of the head, vomite is then vncommodious. It is better in winter & how in Sommer. Alſo good for them which are replete or very cholerick, if they haue not wel digeſted, but it is ill for them that bee lea
                     •
                  e, or haue weake ſtomacks. And therefore where one féeleth bitter vapors riſing 
                     〈◊〉
                  , with griefe and weightines in the ouer partes of his bodie, let him run forth to this remedie. It is alſo good for him that is heart burned, and hath much spit
                     〈…〉
                  , or his ſtomack wambleth, and

for him that remoueth into ſundrie places. Yet I counſaile, ſayth Celſus, him that will be in health, and would Cor. Cd. lib. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . not be ſo ſoone aged, that he vſe not this dayly. And I my ſelf haue knowne mē which daily vſing it, haue brought thereby their ſtomackes in ſuch cuſtome, that whatſoeuer they did eate, they could long retain it, wherby they ſhorten their liues. Wherefore it would not be vſed, but onely where great ſurfet, or abundance of fleume doe require it. He that will vomit after meate, let him drinke ſundrie drinks mixt together, and firſt of all, warme water: or if that be too eaſie, let him mixe there with ſalt, or hony. If he wil vomit faſting, let him drinke water and hony ſodden together, or Hyſope with it, or eate of a Radiſh roote, and drinke warme water vpon it. Alſo water wherein Radiſh is boyled, and afterward prouoke himſelfe to it. They that wil haue more violent purgations, I remit to Phiſitions learned. But yet I doe eftſoones warne them, that therein they bee circumſpect, and doe not much vſe it. Moreouer, in vomits, ye matter brought forth, would be conſidered, according to the rules of Hippocrates, in his ſecond booke of prognoſtications, that is Hippo. praeſag. 2. cap. 7. to ſay, if it be mixt with fleume and choler, it is moſt profitable, if it be not in very great quantitie, or thicke, the leſſe mixture it hath, the worſe it is. If it be greene like to leeke blades thin or blacke, it is to bee iudged ill. If it haue all colours, it is extreame perilous. If it be leadie coloured, and ſauoureth horrible, it ſignifieth a ſhort abolition, or diſſolution of nature. For as Galen affirmeth there in his comment, ſuch manner of vomit declareth Galen de loci
                        •
                      affectis lib. 1. corruption with extincting of nature. Alſo euery putrified and ſtinking ſauour in vomit is ill. Theſe things be right neceſſarie to bee looked for where one doth vomit without any difficultie: but to enforce one to vomit, which cannot, is very odious and to be abhorred.
            
            
               
               Of purgation by ſiege. CAP. 5.
               IF the head be heauie, or the eyes dimme, or if there bée paine felt of the colicke, or in the lower part of the belly, or in the hippes, or ſome cholerike matter or fleume in the ſtomacke. Alſo if the breath be hardly fetched, if the belly of himſelfe ſendeth foorth nothing, or if being coſtiue, one féeleth ill ſauour or bitternes in his mouth, Cel. lib. 1. Actius lib. 3. or that which he maketh hath an horrible ſauour, or if abſtinence doe not at the firſt put away the feuer, or if the ſtrength of the bodie may not ſuſtaine letting of bloud, or els the time therefore conuenient is paſt, or if one haue dronke much before his ſickneſſe, or if he which oftentimes vnconſtrained hath had great ſieges, be ſuddenly ſtopped. In all theſe caſes, and where it is painfull to vomit, and in gnawing or frettings of the ſtomacke: finally, in all repletions, where a man cannot or will not be let bloud or vomit, it is expedient to prouoke ſiege by purgations, which are to be receiued by two wayes: vpward at the fundament by ſuppoſitories or cliſters: downward at the mouth, by potions, electuaries, or pilles. Suppoſitories are vſed where ye patient is weak, and may not receiue any other purgations. Sometime foraſmuch as the ſtraite gut is ſtopped with excremēts, which are drie and hard: ſometime where there néedeth none other purgation, ſpecially in burning feuers, whereof the matter aſcendeth into the head, thē cliſters may doe harme, and by the benefit of ſuppoſitories, excrements are brought foorth without any annoyance. And oftentimes it bringeth foorth that which cliſters may not. Suppoſitories are made ſometime with hony onely, ſodden, rolled on a boord, and made round, ſmaller at one end then at the other, and of the length and greatnes, according to the quantitie of the bodie that taketh it. Sometime there is mixt with the hony, ſalt dried, or ſalt and pepper, or the powder of ſuch things as do either

purge the humour which offendeth, or diſſolueth groſſe windes, or other matter: they be ſometime made with roſme, pitch, waxe, or gummes: ſometime of rootes, or the leaues of gréene Mercury, very ſmall bruſed. Alſo with figges or raiſons, the ſtones taken out, or of white ſope made in the figure aforeſayd, and being made in the fourme aforeſayd, they muſt bée put in at the fundament to the great ende, and the patient muſt kéepe it there the ſpace of halfe an houre or more.
               Cliſters are made of licour ſometime ſimple, as water ſodden, milke, oyle, or wine: ſometime mixt, as water and oyle together, or decoctions, as where herbs, rootes, fruites, féedes, or gūmes, hauing propertie to make ſoft, diſſolue, draw foorth, or expell matter that grieueth, bée boyled, & the licour thereof ſometime warme, ſometime hot, is receiued at the fundament into ye body, by a little pipe of gold or ſiluer, iuory, or wood, therefore ordained and called a cliſter pipe. This is neceſſary where the ſtomack is weake, and may not ſuſtaine working of medicines receiued at the mouth: alſo in feuers, collickes, and other diſeaſes in the bowels, griefe in the raines of the backe, or huckle bone, dentoſities in the belly, inflammation or exulceration in the guttes or bladder. It is a conuenient and ſure medicine, and leaſt hurt doth enſue of it. The making and ordering thereof, I will omit to write in this place, partly that I would not that Phiſitions ſhould too much note in me preſumption, partly that another place may be more apt to that purpoſe.
            
            
               The particular commodities of euery purgation. CAP. 5.
               IN potions, electuaries, and pilles, ought to bee much more obſeruation, than in cliſters or ſuppoſitories, for as much as theſe doe enter no further then vnto the gut where the ordure lyeth, and by that place only bringeth foorth the matter which cauſeth diſeaſe. But the other

entring in that way, that meates and drinkes doe, commeth into the ſtomacke, and there is boyled, and ſent into the places of digeſtion, and afterward is mixt with the iuyce, whereof the ſubſtance of the bodie is made, and expelling the aduerſarie humors, ſomewhat thereof doubtleſſe remaineth in the body. Wherefore men haue néede to beware, what medicines they receiue, that in them be no venenoſitie, malice or corruption, leaſt for the expelling of a ſuperfluous humour, which perchance good diet or ſome broths made of good hearbes, or the ſayd euacuatiō, with ſuppoſitorie or 
                     •
                  iſter, might bring foorth at leiſure, by deſiring of too haſtie remedie, they receiue in medicine, that which ſhall ingender a venemous humour, and vneuitable deſtruction into all the bodie. And therefore happie is he which in ſickneſſe findeth a diſcréet and well learned Phiſitiō, and ſo true Apothecary, that hath alway drugs vncorrupted, and whom the Phiſition may ſurely trust to diſpenſe his things truely.
               But now to returne to the ſayd forme of purgation, I will now ſet foorth ſome coūſailes, concerning that matter which I haue collected out of the chiefe Authors of Phiſicke. Bodies hot and moyſt, may eaſily ſuſtaine purgation by the ſtoole. They which be leanie or thinne, hauing the members tender, may take harme by purgations. To men that are cholerike, & them that eat little, purgations are grieuous. In young children and olde men, it is daungerous to looſe much the belly. To them that are not wont to it, purgation is noyfull. He that liueth in a good order of diet, néedeth neither purgatiō nor vomit. After that the purgation hath wrought, thirſtines, and ſound ſléep, be ſignes that the bodie is ſufficiently purged. By daily 
                     〈◊〉
                   of medicines, Nature is corrupted. When ye will purge any thing, make firſt the matter flowing and ſoluble. Medicine to purge, ought not to be mingled with meats, but to be taken 4 houres at the leaſt before meales, or three houres after meales,

except certaine eaſie pils made to clenſe and comfort the ſtomack, which would be taken at the beginning of ſupper, or after ſupper, a little before that one goeth to bed, making a light ſupper or none. After purgation taken, the patient ſhould reſt, and not walke vntill the medicine hath wrought, nor eate nor drinke in the meane ſpace. Theſe things haue I remembred, becauſe I haue knowne right good Phiſitions, to haue forgotten to inſtruct thereof their patients. Now will I ſet foorth the table of ſuch things which of their propertie doe digeſt, or purge ſuperfluous humours particularly, which I haue gathered out of the bookes of Dioſcorides, Galen, Paulus Aegineta, Oribaſius and Aetius, and other late writers: notwithſtanding, I haue not written all, for as much as there be diuers things, whereunto we haue not yet found any names in Engliſh.
               
                  Digeſtiues of choler.
                  Endiue, Lettiſe, Cicorie, Scabioſe, Mayden haire.
                  Malowes, Mercury, The iuyce of pomgranades.
                  Purſlane, Popie, Barberies, Roſes.
                  Uiolets the leafe and flower, Sorell, Liuerwort.
                  Sorell de boiſe, Whay clarified.
                  The foure great colde séedes, that is to ſay, of Gourds, Cucumbers, Melons, and Citruls.
                  Pſilium, Uineger, Saunders, Barly water, Prunes, Tamarinds.
               
               
                  Purgers of choler.
                  Wild hops, Wormwood, Centorie, Fumitorie.
                  Whay of butter, Uidlets, Mercury, Prunes.
                  Juyce of Roſes, Eupatorie.
                  Tamarinds halfe an ounce in a decoction.
                  Manna 6. drammes at the leaſt, and ſo to 25. in the broth of a henne or capon.
                  Reubarbarum by it ſelfe from two drams vnto foure, infuſed or ſtéeped in licour, from foure drams vnto eight.
               
               
                  
                  Digeſtiues of fleume.
                  Fenell, Perſely the rootes, Smallage, Capers, Lawrell.
                  Senuie, Puly, Marioram, Peniroyall.
                  Wild parſnep ſéede, Mint, Pimpernell, Horemint.
                  Gladen, Agrimony, Calamint, Nep, Betany, Sage.
                  Radiſh, Mugwort, Juniper, Hyſope, Pyony, Baulme.
                  Hony, Ginger, Souilla, Alſtolochia, Cinamom.
                  Pepper, Cumine.
               
               
                  Purgers of fleume.
                  Centory, Nettle, Agrimony, Alder.
                  Polipodium of the oke.
                  Mirabolani kebuly, infuſed from halfe an ounce to an ounce, and two drams, in ſubſtance from two drams to halfe an ounce.
                  Agaricus, from a dram to two drams, infuſed from two drams to fiue.
                  Yreos, Maydenhaire, Sticados.
               
               
                  Purgers of melancholy.
                  The brath of Coleworts light boyled.
                  Baulme mint, Sticados, Time.
                  Sene boyled in white wine, or in the broth of a henne.
                  Laſed ſauery, Epithimus, Unwrought ſilke, Organum.
                  Calamint, Borage, Harts tung, Quickbeme.
                  Maidenhaire, With wind, Pulial mountaine.
                  Hony, Sugar.
               
               Melancholy for the thinnes and ſubtilnes of the humour, néedeth no digeſtiue.
               They that will take ſharpe purgations, or compound with diuers things, let them take the counſaile of an honeſt and perfect Phiſition, and not aduenture to mixe things together, without knowing the temperance of them in degrées, and that he can proportion them to the bodie that ſhall receiue them in ſimples, as they be written. And ſo he may vſe them without perill, againſt the humours whereunto they ſerue.
            
            
               
               Letting of bloud. CAP. 6.
               THe part of euacuation by letting of bloud, is inciſion, or cutting of the veine, wherby the bloud, which is cauſe of ſicknes or griefe to the hole body, or any particular part thereof doth moſt aptly paſſe.
               The commodities wherof being in a moderate quantitie, and in a due time taken, be theſe that follow: it clarifieth the wit, and maketh good memorie, it clenſeth the bladder, it drieth the braine, it warmeth the marow, being in ye bones, it openeth the hearing, it ſtoppeth teares, or droppings of the eyen, it taketh away lothſomnes, and confirmeth the ſtomacke, it nouriſheth that which is proper to nature, and the contrary expelleth. It is thought that thereby life is prolonged, and the matter making ſickneſſe, ſhortly conſumed. Wherefore letting of bloud is not onely expedient for them which are full of bloud, or haue abundance of ſtrength, but alſo for them, in whom without plenitude called fulnes, inflammations begin to be in their bodies, or by ſome outward ſtroake, the bloud being gathered within by collection thereof, doe féele griefe or diſeaſe.
               Alſo where there is much paine felt, or debilitie of ſome member, whereof is ſuppoſed to be ingendred ſome grieuous diſeaſe. Moreouer, they which vſe exceſſe of meates and drinkes, may bee cured by letting of bloud. But thoſe which be temperate, kéeping good diet, be holpen without letting of bloud: as by fricaſies, vſing of bathes, exerciſe, walking, and riding moderatly. Alſo vnctions with oyles and oyntments called Diaphoretice, which by euaporation, doe ſhortly euacuate the fulnes. Albeit, if the fulnes be of melancholy bloud, then alway néeds muſt be letting of bloud. Abundance of melancholy bloud is knowne by theſe ſignes. There is felt within ye entrales, or within ye bulke of a man or womā, a waightines with tenſion or thruſting outward, and al

that part which is aboue the nauell, is more heauie then it was wont to bee: alſo much vrine and fattie, the reſidence or bottome thicke, troublous, inflammation and much paine. Theſe muſt be ſhortly let bloud, and the melancholy humour purged by ſiege. They which haue crude or raw humours, muſt be warily let bloud, before that ſickneſſe engender, but hauing the feuer in no wiſe. Concerning letting of bloud, theſe things following would be had in continuall remembrance, and bee afore Aetius lib. 3. thought on. In the abundance of the bloud, the qualitie and quantitie, the greatnes of the ſickneſſe, & if it be preſent or looked for. Alſo the diet preceding, the age and ſtrength of the perſon, the naturall fourme of his bodie, the time of the yeare, the region or countrie, the preſent ſtate of the ayre, the diſuſe of accuſtomed exerciſe, the ceaſing of euacuations vſed before. In qualitie, conſider of what humour the fulnes procéedeth. In quantitie, the abundance of that which is to be purged. In ſickneſſe, if it be dāgerous or tolerable: if ye ſickneſſe be preſent, it requireth the more diligence: if it bee looked for, it may bee the better proportioned. In diet, the cuſtome in eating & drinking, muſt be ſpecially noted. In young men & women letting of bloud would be more liberall. In old men and yong children, it would be ſcarſer: ſtrong men muſt ſuſtain bléeding, they which are féeble may not indure it. Large bodies haue greater veſſels, then they which hée little. Leane men haue more bloud, corpulent men haue more fleſh. The time of the yeare muſt be ſpecially marked. For in the beginning of ſpring time it is beſt letting of bloud, as Oribaſius ſayth, and ſo doth cōtinue, after the opiniō of Arnold, vnto ye 8. 
                     •
                  alends of June. Aetius affirmeth, that in winter, or in a cold countrie, or where the perſon is of a very cold nature, ye veines ſhuld not be opened. And Damaſcene ſayth: They which in youth haue vſed to be much let bloud, after they be thréeſcore yeares olde, theyr nature wareth colde, if they were of a

cold complexion, but that is to bee vnderſtoode, where they that are in health, are often let bloud. For in the lapſe from health and in diuers diſeaſes, wherin the blood is corrupted, or where it ingendreth impoſtumes, or reſorteth to any place, where it ought not to bee, or paſſeth by any other conduite then nature ordayned, or where it is furious or inflamed, or by any other meanes, bréedeth grieuous diſeaſes, in all theſe caſes, it ought to be practiſed, yea ſomtime in aged perſons, women with child, and young infants. For in extreme neceſſitie, it were better experience ſome remedie, then to doe nothing. All other things concerning this matter, pertaine to the part curatiue, which treateth of healing of ſicknes, whereof I wil not now ſpeake, but remit the readers to the counſayle of diſcreet Phiſitions.
            
            
               Of ſcarifying called boxing or cupping. CAP. 7.
               FOr as much as it is not conuenient to be let bloud oftentimes in the yeare, becauſe much of the vitall ſpirit paſſeth foorth with the bloud, which being exhauſt, the body waxeth colde, and naturall operations become the more féeble I therefore doe counſaile (ſayt
                     •
                   
                  Galen) that the baſe partes of the body, as the legs be ſcarified, which is the moſt ſure remedie, as well in conſeruing health, as in repayring thereof being decayed. For it cureth the eyne, being annoyed with long diſtillations, it profiteth alſo the head and ouerpart of the body againſt ſundry diſeaſes, in what member the bloud is gathered, the bodie being purged firſt by ſcarificatiō, the greef may be cured.
               Alſo Oribaſius affirmeth the ſame, and alſo addeth therto that it helpeth ſquināces, or quinces in the throat, and diſſolueth the coſtipations or ſtoppinges made of all places, if the places be ſcarified, notwithſtanding application of boxes about the ſtomacke in hot feuers, where reaſon is troubled, are to bee eſchewed for feare of ſuffocation. Likewiſe put to the head vndiſcretly, it hurteth both

the head and the eyes. The late Authors do affirme, that ſcarifying is in the ſteed of letting bloud, wherefore age, debilitie, or time of the yeare, or other like conſideration, a man may not ſuſteyne bloud letting, and it bringeth forth the thinne bloud, which is next to the ſkinne.
            
            
               Of bloud ſuckers or leaches. CAP. 8.
               THere is alſo an other form of euacuation, by worms founde in waters, called bloud ſuckers or leaches, which being put into the bodye or member, doe draw out bloud.
               And their drawing is more conuenient for fulneſſe of bloud then ſcarifying is, for as much as they fetch bloud more déeper, and is more of the ſubſtance of bloude, yet the opinion of ſome men is, that they doe draw no bloud but that which is corrupted, and not proportionable vnto our bodie. And therefore in griefes which happen betweene the ſkinne and the fleſhe of bloud corrupted, theſe are more conuenient then ſcarifying. But therefore that they be put vnto any part of the body, they muſt be firſt kept all one day before, giuing vnto them a little bloud in freſh fleſh. And then put them in cleane water ſomwhat warme, and with a ſpung wipe away the ſlime which is about them, and then laye a little bloud on the place grieued, and put them then to it, and lay on them a ſpung, that when they bee full, they may fall away, or if ye will ſooner haue them off, put a horſe hayre betwéen their mouthes and the place, and drawe them awaye, or put to their mouthes ſalt, or aſhs, or vineger, and forthwith they ſhall fall, and then waſh the place with a ſpūg, and if there doe iſſue much bloud, laye on the place the poulder of a ſpung, and pitch burned, or linnen cloth burned, or gaules burned, or the hearbe called Burſa paſtoris bruiſed. And this ſufficeth concerning bloud ſuckers.
            
            
               
               Of Hemeroydes or piles. CAP. 9.
               HEmeroides bee veynes in the fundament of whome doe happen ſundry paſſions, ſomtime ſwelling without bléeding, ſometime ſuperfluous bloud by the puiſſance of nature is by them expelled, and then bée they very conuenient, for by thē a man ſhall eſcape many great ſickneſſes, which be ingendred of corrupted bloud, or of melancholie. Semblablie, if they bee haſtilie ſtopped from the courſe which they haue béene vſed to, thereby doe increaſe the ſaide ſickneſſes, which by them were expelled, as dropſies, conſumptions, madneſſe, frenſies, and diuers diſeaſes of the head, and other ſickneſſes: palenes of the viſage, griefe in the raines of the back, and thighes. And if they flow too much, there inſueth feeblenes, learing of the body, alteration of colour, great pains in the lower partes of the bodie. And if the fluxe be vnmoderate, it ingendreth miſchieuous diſeaſes. Wherefore it would be diligently taken heede, that they runne in meaſure, or elſe to vſe ſome things moderately, which may reſtrayne them. Concerning other euacuations, I doe purpoſely omit to write of them in this place, for aſmuch as in this realme it hath bin accounted not honeſt, to declare them in the vnlgar tongue, but only ſecretly.
            
            
               Of effectes of the mind. CAP. 10.
               THe laſt of thinges called not naturall, is not the leaſt part to be conſidered, the which is of affects and paſſions of the mind. For if they bee immoderate, they doe not only annoy the body and ſhortē the life, but alſo they doe appayre, and ſomtime looſe vtterly a mans eſtimation. And that much more is, they bring a man frō the vſe of reaſon, and ſometime in the diſpleaſure of Almightie God. Wherefore they doe not onely require the helpe of Phiſicke corporall, but alſo the connſaile of a man wiſe and well learned in morall Philoſophie.
               
                  
Wherefore after I haue recited what they be, I will briefly declare ſuch counſailes as I haue gathered. And as concerning remedy of phiſicke, ſauing a few ſimples, which do comfort the heart and ſpirits, the reſidue I will remit to the counſaile of Phiſitions, like as I haue done in euacuation. Affects of the mind whereby the body is annoyed, doe bring in ſickneſſe be theſe, Ire or wrath, heauines or ſorrow, gladiles or reioyſing.
            
            
               Of Ire. CAP. 11.
               IRe is kindled in the heart, inordinately chaſing the ſpirites there, and then is ſent foorth vnto the members, and dooth ſuperfluouſly heate them, and diſturbeth reaſon where the bodies be hot afore, where naturall heate is feeble, the heate may not be diſperſed vnto the extreme parts, and then doth the extreme members, that is to ſay, which is farre from the heart, remaine cold and trembling. Of this affect on commeth ſometime feuers, ſometime apoplexis, or priuation of ſenſes, trembling palſeis, madnes, frenſies, deformitie of viſage: and that worſe is, outragious ſwearing, blaſphemie, deſire of vengeance, loſſe of charitie, amitie, credence, alſo forgetfulnes of benefite proceeding, and of obedience, dutie and reuerence. Theſe alſo doe ſucceed, contention, chargeable ſuite, vnquietnes of mind, lacke of appetite, lacke of ſléepe, féeble digeſtion, ſcorire, diſdaine, and hatred of other, with perill of loſing of all good reputation. Theſe incommodities of Ire, perfectly had in remembrance, and at the firſt motion thereof on them thought on, may happen to bring in his fellowes, and thereby the flame may be quenched, or let him that is angrie, euen at the firſt, conſider one of theſe things, that like as he is a man, ſo is alſo the other, with whom hee is angrie, and therefore it is as lawfull for the other to bee angrie, as vnto him, and if hee ſo bee, then ſhall the anger bee to him diſpleaſant, and ſtirre him more to be angrie. Wherefore it appeareth that yre is to

him lothſome. If the other be patient, then let him abhorre that thing in himſelfe, the lacke whereof in the other contenteth him, and aſſwageth his malice. Moreouer let him before that occaſion of yre doth happen, accuſtome himſelf to beholde and marke well them that beeangrie, with the ſucceſſe of that anger, and ruminate it in his minde a good ſpace after. And in that time, let him remember, howe Chriſt, the ſonne of God, and God, who (as hee himſelfe ſayd) might haue had of God his father, if hee would haue aſked thē, legiōs of Angels, to haue defended him, yea with leſſe then a winke, might haue ſlayne all his aduerſaries, yet hee notwithſtanding rebuked, ſcorned, falſely accuſed, plucked hither, & thither, ſtripped, bounden with halters, whipped, ſpitte on, buffeted, crowned with ſharpe thorne, laded with a heauie piece of timber, his owne proper tournement, halen and driuen forth like a calfe to the ſlaughter houſe, eftſoones beaten, and ouerthrowen, retched forth with ropes, armes and legs laid on the Croſſe, and thereunto with long yron nayles through the handes and feete nailed, with many ſtroks of hāmers, with many prickings, or euer the nayles might pierce by his tēder and moſt bleſſed fleſh and ſinewes, quite through the harde tymber, vp to the heads of the nayles: and all this being done for the offence of mankind, & not his: yet with the men which did it, his moſt vnkind countrimen, his moſt vnnaturall kinſmen, whome hee firſt made of nothing preſerued by miracles, deliuered from perils, and cured of diſeaſes, in all his vexation and trouble, he was neuer ſéene or perceiued angrie. If one will ſay, that anger is natural, let him alſo cō
                  ſider that in Chriſtes manhood were all naturall powers. If he wil ſay, that yre is taken of courage, and in Chriſt it lacked not, whom both angels and deuilles trembled and feared. The premiſſes often reuolued, and born in ye mind, I will not ſay, ſhall vtterlie extinct all motions of wrath which is not poſſible, but it ſhall when it kindleth lightly repreſſe it, & let that it ſhall not grow into flame. And in ſpeaking here of wrath, I doe not meane that which good

men haue againſt vices: or wiſe and diſcreet gouernours & maſters, againſt the defaults or negligences of their ſubiects or ſeruants, vſed in rebuking them, or moderatly puniſhing them. For that is not properly yre, but rather to be called diſpleaſure, and is that whereof God ſpeaketh by his Prophet Dauid, ſaying, Be you angrie and do not ſin. And of that maner of anger hath bin diuers holy men, prophets and other. And it appeared in Chriſt, when he draue out them which made their market in the holy temple of God, where there ought to be nothing but prayer. And in likewiſe when he rebuked the hypocrites. But if none of theſe things may come ſo ſhortly to his remembrance, that is moued with anger, at the leaſt, let him thinke on the leſſon that Appollodorus the Philoſopher, taught to the Emperour Octanian, that before he ſpeake or doe any thing in anger, he doe recite in order, all the letters of the A. B. C, and remoue ſomewhat out of the place that he is in, & ſéeke occaſion to be otherwiſe occupied. This ſhall for this time ſuffice, for the remedies of yre: And hee that will knowe more of this matter, let him reade in my worke called the Gouernour, where I thereof do write more aboundantly.
            
            
               Of Dolour, or heauines of the mind. CAP. 12.
               THere is nothing more enemie to life, then ſorrow, called alſo heauineſſe: for it exhauſteth both naturall heate and moyſture of the bodie, and doth extenuate, or make the body leane, dulleth the wit, & darkneth the ſpirits, letteth the vſe and iudgment of reaſon, and oppreſſeth memory. And Salomon ſaith: that ſorrow drieth vp the hones. And alſo like as the moath in the garment, and the worme Prou. 17. & 25. Eccle. 25. & 38. in the tree, ſo doth heauineſſe annoye the heart of a man. Alſo in the booke called Eccleſiaſticus. Sorrow hath killed many, & in it ſelfe is found no commodity. Alſo by heauines death is haſtened, it hideth vertue or ſtrength, & heauines of hart boweth down the neck. This is ſo puiſſāt an enemie to nature, and bodilie health, that to reſiſt the malice and violence therof, are required remedies, aſwel of

the holeſome counſayles found in holy Scripture, and in the bookes of morall doctrine, as alſo of certaine hearbes, fruites, and ſpices, hauing the propertie to expell melancholicke humours, and to comfort and kéepe liuely the ſpirits, which haue their proper habitation in the hart of mā, and moderate nouriſhing of the naturall heate and humor called radicall, which is the bace or foundation, whereupon the life of man ſtandeth, and that fayling, life falleth into ruine, and the body is diſſolued. Now firſt I will declare ſome remedies againſt ſorrowfulnes of heart, concerning neceſſarie counſayle. Sometime this affect happeneth of ingratitude, either where for benefite, or ſpeciall loue emploied, one receiueth damage, or is abandoned in his neceſſitie, or is deceiued of him whom he truſted, or findeth him of whom he hath great expectation, forgetfull or negligent in his commodity, or perceiueth the perſon whom of long time he hath loued, to be eſtrāged from him, or to haue one of a later acquaintance in more eſtimation. This affection nippeth the heart, yea of moſt wiſe men, for they loue moſt hartilie, not prouoked by carnall affection, but rather by good opinion, ingendred by ſimilitude of honeſt ſtudies, and vertuous maners, of long time mutually experienced. And it is not onely vnto man grieuous, but alſo vnto God moſt diſpleaſant and odious, as it is aboundantly declared in ſcripture. Wherefore the perſon which féeleth himſelfe touched with this affect, before that it groweth into a paſſion, & waxeth a ſicknes, let him call to remembrance theſe articles following, or at the leaſt wiſe, ſome of them. For euery ech of them may eaſe him, though perchaunce they cannot forthwith perfectly cure him. Conſider, that 
                     Cōforts againſt ingratitude. Appianus in varia hiſtoria. the corruption of mans nature is not ſo much declared in any thing as in ingratitude, wherby a man is made worſe then diuers bruite beaſts. The little Ant or Emot helpeth vp his fellow, whom he ſéeeth ouerthrowen with burthen or by other other occaſion.
               Alſo when Elephants doe paſſe ouer any great water: the greateſt & moſt puiſſant of thē deuide themſelues, and

ſetting the weakeſt in the middle part, goe before trying the deepenes and perils, part come after, ſuccouring the weakeſt or leaſt with their long noſes, whē they ſée them in danger. The ſame beaſts haue béene ſéene not onely to bring men out of deſerts, which haue loſt their waies, but alſo renuing the diſpleaſures done to them, which gaue them meate, as one that ſlewe him, which had committed aduoutrie with his maſters wife.
               The terrible Lions and Panthers haue bin ſeen in their manner to render thankes to their benefactors, yea and to abiect their owne bodies and liues for their defence. The ſame we may daily behold in our owne dogges.
               Than in whom thou findeſt the deteſtable vice of ingratitude, reputing him among the worſt fortes of creatures, thinke not that thou haſt loſt a friend, but thinke that thou art deliuered from a monſter of nature, that denoured thy loue, and that thou art now at libertie, and haſt wonne experience to chuſe thee a better. But if this may not ſuffice, Sene. de benefi. 7. then eftſoones conſider that if thou looke wel on thy ſelfe, perchance thou mayſt finde the fault whereof thou complayneſt, within thine own boſome. Cal to thy remēbrāce if thou haſt alway rendred vnto euery man condign thāks or benefite, of whom thou haſt kindnes receiued, or if thou haſt alwaye remembred, euerie one of them, that haue done to thee any commoditie or pleaſure. Thou ſhalt well perceiue, that what thing yt thou receiuedſt in childhoode, thou forgatteſt or diddeſt little eſtéeme, when thou cameſt to the ſtate of a man. And what thou diddeſt remember in youth, in age thou diddeſt little thinke on, thy nurſes Pap, her rockings, watchings, thou haſt not alway remembred or equally recompenced. The Schoolemaſters ſtudie, his labour, his diligence in like degrée, thou haſt not requited. What greater frend haſt thou had of whom thou couldeſt receiue any greater benefites, thē the nouriſhing & preſeruing of thy life in thy moſt féeblenes, thine eruditiō, wherby thy nature was made more excellent? Remēbring this, leaue to be angry or ſorrowful, for ſo common a vice: yet if

it ceaſe not to grieue thée, confer the ingratitude that doth vex thée, with that in gratitude which was ſhewed by the Iſraelites, whom God choſe for his own people, deliuered from ſeruage, ſhewed for them wonders, preſerued them fortie yeares in ye deſert, deſtroied for them kings, gaue to them the countrie which flowed with milke and hony, defended them againſt all outward hoſtilitie, ſent vnto them ſuch abundance of riches, that ſiluer was in Jeruſalem, as ſtones in the ſtréet, and his tabernacle, and afterward his moſt holy temple among them, which he did daily viſite, with his diuine maieſtie, made their kings to raigne gloriouſly, and ſpake with their Prophets familiarly, & corrected their errors moſt gently, and yet for all this, they imbracing the Paynimes Idolatrie, they left ſo gracious and louing a Lord, and liuing God, & to his great deſpite, gaue diuine honours to calues of braſſe, and other monſtrous Images, and at the laſt, put to moſt cruell death, the onely ſonne of God, that had done ſo much for them. And if we Chriſtian men doe looke well on our ſelues, reuoluing the incōparable benefit, which we haue receiued by Chriſts paſſion, and conſider the circumſtance of his moſt excellent patience, and moſt ſeruent loue towards vs, with our forgetfulnes, and the daily breach of our promiſe, which we made at our Baptiſme, cōferring our mutuall vnkindnes thereunto, there ſhall appeare no ingratitude, that ſhould offend vs. Finally for a concluſion, behold well about thée, and thou ſhalt all day find the children ingrate to their parents, & wiues to their huſbands. And wilt thou looke that thy benefit or vaine expectation, ſhould make thée more frée from ingratitude of thy frend, whom chance hath ſent thée, then nature may the parents to their children, or the coniunction of bodies by lawfull mariage, take vnkindnes from the wiues toward the huſbands? The vice therefore of ingratitude, being ſo commō a chance, make no worldly friendſhip ſo precious, that life or death therefore ſhould be ſpent or conſumed, I haue béen the longer in this place, becauſe I haue had in this

griefe ſufficient experience.
               If death of children becauſe of thy heauines, call to thy Death of children. remembrance ſome children, of whom there is no little number, whoſe liues, either for vncorrigible vices, or infortunate chaunces, haue béen more grieuous vnto their parents, then the death of thy children ought to bée vnto thée: conſidering that death is a diſcharger of all griefes and miſeries, and to them that dye well, the firſt entrie into life euerlaſting.
               The loſſe of goods or authoritie, doe grieue none but fooles, which do not marke diligently, that like as neither Loſſe of goods. the one nor the other doth alway happen to them that are worthie, ſo we haue in daily experience, that they fal from him ſuddenly, who in increaſing or kéeping them, ſeemeth moſt buſie. Oftentimes the repulſe from promotion is cauſe of diſcomfort. But then conſider whether in the opinion Lacke of promotion. of good men, thou art déemed worthie to haue ſuch aduancement, or in thine owne expectation and fantaſie. If good men ſo iudge thée, thanke thou God of that felicitie, and laugh at the blindnes of them, that ſo haue refuſed thee. If it procéed of thine owne folly, abhorre al arrogancie, and inforce thy ſelfe to bee aduanced in mens eſtimations, before thou canſt finde thy ſelfe worthie in thy proper opinion. All other chances of fortune eſtéeme as nothing, Channces of fortune. and that long before they doe happen. The oft recording of miſerie, prepareth the mind to féele leſſe aduerſitie. And the contempt of fortune is ſure quietnes, & muſt perfect felicitie. This now ſhall ſuffice concerning remedies of morall Philoſophy. Now will I write ſomewhat touching counſaile of Phiſicke, as in relieuing the bodie, which either by the ſayd occaſions, or by the humour of melancholy is brought out of temper.
               The firſt counſaile is, that during the time of that paſſion, eſchew to be angry, ſtudious, or ſolitarie, and reioyce thée with melodie, or els bee alway in ſuch companie, as beſt may content thée.
               Auoyd all things that be noyous in ſight, ſmelling and

hearing, and imbrace all things that is delectable.
               Flée darknes, much watch, and buſineſſe of mind, much companying with women, the vſe of things very hot and drie, often purgations, immoderate exerciſe, thirſt, much abſtinence, dry winds and cold.
               Abſtaine from daily eating of much olde béefe, or olde mutton, hard chéeſe, hares fleſh, bores fleſh, veniſon, ſalt fiſh, coleworts, beanes, and peaſon, very courſe bread, great fiſhes of the ſea, as thurlepole, or porpiſe, and ſtourgion, and other of like natures, wines red & thick, meates being very ſalt or ſowre, old, burned, or fried, garlicke, onions, and léekes.
               Uſe meates which are temperatly hot, and therewith ſomewhat moyſt, boyled rather then roſted, light of digeſtion, and ingendring bloud cléere and fine. As milke hot from the vdder, or at the leaſt new milked, euen theſe, ſwéete Ruen chéeſe, Almonds, the yolkes of reare egges, little birds of the buſhes, chickens and hennes, white wine or claret, cléere and fragrant. Swéet ſauors in winter hot, in ſummer cold, in the meane time temperate.
               
                  Comfortatiues of the heart hot.
                  Bourage the flower or leafe, Bugloſſe, Baulme mint.
                  Elicampane, Cloues, Cardamomum, Roſemary.
                  Lignum aloes, Muſke, Ambergriſe, Saffron.
                  The bone of the Hart of a red déere.
                  Mints, The rind of Citron, Beane, Cubebes, Baſill.
               
               
                  Comfortatiues of the heart cold.
                  Uiolets, Pearles, Corall, The Unicornes horne.
                  Old apples which be good, Roſes, Sarnders.
                  The Oliphants tooth, Water lillies, Coriander prepared.
               
               
                  Comfortatiues temperate.
                  Jacinct, Saphire, Emeraulds.
                  Mirabolanes called Kebuli, Bugloſſe, Gold, Siluer.
               
               
                  Of Hope.
                  I Oye, or gladneſſe of heart doth prolong the life, it fatteth the bodie that is leane with troubles, byting the

humours to an equall temperance, and drawing naturall heat outward. But if it be ſudden & feruent, it oftentimes ſlayeth, for as much as it draweth too ſuddenly and exceſſiuely naturall heate outward. And therefore diuers men and women haue béen ſéene to fall in a ſwoune, when they haue ſuddenly beheld the perſons whom they feruently loued. A woman in Rome hearing firſt that her ſonne T. Liuius. was ſlaine in battaile: after when he came to her, ſhe ſeeing him aliue, imbracing each other, ſhe died in his armes. This well conſidered againſt ſuch inordinate gladneſſe, the beſt preſeruatiue is to remēber, that the extreme parts of mundaine ioy, is ſorow and heauines: and that nothing of this world may ſo much reioyce vs, but occaſion may cauſe it to be diſpleaſant vnto vs.
               
            
            
               The dominion of ſundrie complexions. CAP. 13.
               IT ſeemeth to me not inconuenient, that I doe declare as well the counſailes of ancient and approued authors, as alſo mine owne opinion, gathered by diligent marking in daily experience, concerning as well the neceſſary diet of euery complexion, age, and declination of health, as alſo the meane to reſiſt the diſcralies of the body, before ſicknes be therein cōfirmed, leauing the reſidue vnto the ſubſtantiall learning, and circumſpect practiſe of good Phi
                     •
                  itions, which ſhall the more eaſily cure their patients, if their patients doe not diſdaine to beare away and followe my counſaile.
               And firſt it ought to be conſidered, that none of the foure complexions; haue ſolely ſuch dominion in any mā or womans body, that no part of any other complexion is therewith mixt. For when we call a man ſanguine, cholerike, fleumatike, or melancholike, we doe not meane yt he hath bloud onely without any of the other humours, or choler without bloud, or fleume without bloud or melancholy or melancholy without bloud or choler. And therefore the man which is ſanguine, the more that he draweth vnto

age, whereby naturall moyſture decayeth, the more is he cholerike, by reaſon that heate ſurmounting moyſture, néedes muſt remaine heat and drith. Semblably ye cholerike man, the more that he waxeth into age, the more naturall heate in him is abated, and drith ſurmounting naturall moyſture, he becommeth melancholike: but ſome ſanguine man hath in the proportiō of temperatures, a greater mixture with choler then another hath. Likewiſe the cholerike or fleumatike man, with the humour of ſanguin or melancholy. And therfore late practiſers of Phiſick are wont to call men, according to the mixture of their complexions, as ſanguine cholerike, fleumatike ſanguine, &c. Moreouer, beſide the natural complexions which man receiueth in his generation, the humours whereof the ſame complexions do conſiſt, being augmented ſuperfluouſly in the bodie or members by any of the ſayd things, called not naturall, euery of them doe ſemblably augment the complexion which is proper vnto him, and bringeth vnequall temperature vnto the body. And for theſe cauſes the ſanguine or fleumatike man or woman, feeling any diſcraſie by choler happened to them, by the ſaid things called not naturall, they ſhall vſe the diet deſcribed hereafter to him which is naturally cholerike. Semblably, the cholerike or melancholike man or woman hauing any diſcraſie by fleume, to vſe the diet of him which is naturally fleumatike, alway remembring, that ſanguine and fleumatike mē haue more reſpect vnto drith, cholerike and melancholy vnto moyſture, and that alway as the accidentall complexion decaye
                     ••
                  , to reſort by little and little to the diet pertaining to his naturall complexion.
            
            
               The times appropried to euery naturall humour. CAP. 14.
               BUt firſt it muſt be conſidered, that where the foure humours bee alway in man, and in ſome man commonly one humor is more abundant then another naturally, that is to ſay, from his generation: The ſayd humors haue alſo

peculiar times aſſigned to euery one of them, wherein each of them is in his moſt power and force, as after inſueth, after the deſcriptiō of Soranus. Fleume hath moſt puiſſance in winter, from the 8. Jous of Nouember, vnto the 8. Idus of February, whereby are ingendred Catarres, or rheumes, the vuula, the cough, and the ſtitch. This humour is part in the head, part in the ſtomacke. It hath dominion from the third houre of night, vntill the ninth houre of the ſame night. Bloud increaſeth inſpring time from the 8. Idus of February, vnto the 8. Idus of May, whereof are ingendred feuers, and swéet humours, which doe ſhortly putrifie: the power of this humour is about the heart, and hath dominion frō the ninth houre of night, vntill the third houre of the morning.
               Red choler hath power in Summer, from the 8. Idus of May, vntill the 8. Idus of Auguſt, whereby are ingendred hot and ſharpe feuers: this humour is ſpecially in the liuer, and hath dominion from the third houre of the day, vntill the ninth houre of the ſame day.
               Yellow choler, whereof is ingendred the fleume of the ſtomacke, is nouriſhed in Autumne, which beginneth the 8. Idus of Auguſt, and during vnto the 8. day of Nouember, maketh ſhaking feuers and ſharpe: the blacke choler then increaſeth, and then followeth thicknes of the bloud in the veines. Blacke choler or melancholy moſt raineth in the ſpléene, and it raineth from the ninth houre of the day, vntill the third houre of night.
               
                  Peculiar remedies againſt the diſtemperance of euery humour.
                  IF the diſtemperance bee of bloud, helpe it with things Soranus in arte medendi. cold, ſharpe and drie: for bloud is moyſt, hot, and ſwéete. If it be of red choler, giue things cold, moyſt, and ſwéete: for red choler is bitter and firie. If it bee of blacke choler, giue things hot, moyſt, and ſwéete: for blacke choler is ſharp and cold. If the diſeaſe be of ſalt fleume, giue things ſwéete, hot, and drie: thus ſayth Soranus. Notwithſtanding,

where there is abundance of colde fleume not mixt with choler, there things very ſharp and hot be moſt connenient, as tart vineger with hot Roſes, and ſéedes, or wines, ſtrong and rough honey being ſodden in the one and the other: or where choler is mixt with fleume, ſyrupe acetoſe made with vineger and ſugar boyled, ſometime with hearbes, rootes, or ſéedes, which may diſſolue fleume, and digeſt it.
               
            
            
               Diet of them which are of ſanguine complexion. CAP. 15.
               FOraſmuch as in the ſanguine men, bloud moſt raineth, which is ſoone corrupted, it ſhall be neceſſarie for them which are of that complexion, to bee circumſpect in eating meate, that ſhortly will receiue putrification, as the more part of fruites, ſpecially not being perfectly ripe: alſo meats that be of ill iuice, as fleſh of beaſts, too old or yong, vdders of beaſts, braines, except of capons and chickens, marowe of the backe bone, much vſe of Onyong, Léekes, Garlike, much vſe of old figges, much vſe of raw hearbes, and all things wherein is exceſſe of heate, cold, or moyſture, meates that be ſtale, fiſhes of fennes, or muddie waters, and too much ſléepe, as experience ſheweth.
            
            
               Diet of cholerike perſons. CAP. 16.
               TO them which bee cholerike, being in their naturall temperature, and hauing not from their youth vſed the contrary, groſſe meates moderatly taken, be more conuenient then the meates that bee fine, and better ſhall they digeſt a péece of good béefe, then a chickens legge. Choler of his propertie rather burning, thē well digeſting meats of light ſubſtance: notwithſtanding, ſome Gentlemen which bee nicely brought vp in their infancie, may not ſo well ſuſtaine that diet, as poore men, being the more part vſed to groſſe meates, wherefore their diet muſt bee in a temperance, as yong béefe, olde veale, mutton, and veniſon powdred, yong géeſe, and ſuch like, concerning theyr

complexion with meates, like thereunto in qualitie & degrée, according to the counſaile of Hippocrates. And as he perceiueth choler to abound, ſo to enterlace meates which bee colde, in a moderate quantitie, and to alay their wine more or leſſe with water, eſchewing hot ſpices, hot wines, and exceſſiue labour, whereby the body may be much chaſed. Alſo he may eate oftner in the day thē any other: foreſeene, that there be ſuch diſtance betwéene his meales, as the meate before eaten be fully digeſted, which in ſome perſon is more, in ſome leſſe, according to the heate & ſtrength of his ſtomacke, noting alway that the cholerike perſon digeſteth more meate then his appetite deſireth: the melancholike perſon deſireth by falſe appetite more then his ſtomacke may digeſt. And to a cholerike perſon it is right daungerous, to vſe long abſtinence: for choler finding nothing in the ſtomacke to conco
                     •
                  t, it fareth then as where a little pottage or milk, being in a veſſell ouer a great fire, it is burned to the veſſell, and vnſauery fumes & vapours doe iſſue out thereof. Likewiſe in a cholerike ſtomacke by abſtinence, theſe inconueniences doe happen, humours aduſt, conſuming of naturall moyſture, fumoſities and ſtinking vapours, aſcending vp to the head, whereof is ingendred duſking of the eyes, head-aches, hot and thinne rheumes after euery little ſurfet, and many other incōueniences. Wherfore, beſide ye opinion of ye beſt learned mē, mine owne painfull experience alſo moueth me to exhort them, which bee of this complexion, to eſchew much abſtinence. And although they bee ſtudious, and vſe little exerciſe, yet in the morning to eate ſomewhat in a little quā
                  titie, and not to ſtudie immediatly, but firſt to ſit a while, and after to ſtand or walke ſoftly, which vſing theſe two yeares, I, and alſo other, that haue long knowne me, haue perceiued in my bodie a great alteration, that is to ſay, frō ill eſtate to better. Alway remember, that if any other humour do abound in ye cholerike perſon, as fleume, or melā
                  choly, then vntill that humour be expelled, the diet muſt be correctiue of that humour, and therfore more hot and fine,

thē the natural dyet before rehearſed: but yet there would be alway reſpect had to the naturall complexion, ſometime offering the perſon to eate or drinke that, which nature working he feruently deſireth.
            
            
               Diet of Fleumaticke perſons. CAP. 17.
               IT is to bee remembred, that pure fleume is properly cold and moyſt, and lacketh taſte. Salt fleume is mixte with choler, and therefore hath not in him ſo much cold or humiditie, as pure fleume hath, and therefore it requireth a temperance in things hot and drie, whereby fleume is digeſted or expulſed. To fleumaticke perſons all meates are noyful, which are very colde, viſcous or ſlimie fat, or ſoone putrified, eating much and often, ſpecially meates ingendring fleume, which be remembred in the table preceding. All thinges bee good which are hot and drie, alſo meates and drinkes which be ſowre: Onions alſo and Garlike moderately vſed, be very commendable: in pure fleame not mixt with choler, much vſing of ſalte, ſpecially dryed. Pepper groſſe beaten, and eaten with meate, ought to bee with all fleumaticke perſons familiar, alſo Ginger is right conuenient, but not
                     •
                  o bee ſo frequently vſed as pepper, for as much as the nature of pepper is, that being eaten, it paſſeth through the body, heating and comforting the ſtomacke, not entring into the veynes, or annoying the liuer, which vertue is not in Ginger, Ginger condite the which we do call gréene Ginger, ſpecially condite with ſugar, if it may be gotten, and alſo Mirabolanes called 
                     •
                  ebuly condite in Judea, be moſt excellent remedies againſt fleame, alſo the hearbes, which are remembred afore in the tables of digeſtiues of fleame, and the rootes of Parſley, Fenell, Preos, Elicampane, and carrotes be very commendable. Exerciſe twiſe in a daye, the ſtomacke being almoſt emptie, ſo that ſweate begin to appeare, is very expedient, clenſing of the body from all filthineſſe with rubbing and wiping oftentimes, with waſhing, ſpecially the head and partes there about, moderate ſweating, in hot bathes or ſtoues, be to this

complexion neceſſary, ſpecially when they haue eaten and dronken exceſſiuely. The head and feete to bee kept from colde, and to dwell high and farre from moores, and mariſhes, is a rule right neceſſary: alſo to abſtain from eating hearbes and rootes not boyled, and generally from all meates which will not be eaſily digeſted.
            
            
               The diuiſion of melancholy, and the diet of perſons melancholicke. CAP. 18.
               MElancholie is of two ſorts, the one is called naturall, which is onely cold and drie, the other is called aduſt or burned: naturall melancholy is, as Galen ſayth, the reſidence or dregges of the bloud: and therefore is colder and thicker then the bloud. Melancholy aduſt is in foure kinds, either it is of naturall melancholy aduſt, or of the more pure part of the bloud aduſt, or of choler aduſt, or of ſalt fleum aduſt. But of al other that melancholy is worſt, which is ingendred of choler, finally all aduſt melancholy annoieth the wit and iudgement of man: For when that humor is het, it maketh men mad, and when it is extinct, it maketh men fooles, forgetfull and dull. The natural melancholy kept in his temperance, profiteth much to true iudgemēt of ye wit, but yet if it be too thick, it darkneth the ſpirits, maketh one timorous, and the wit dull: if it be mixt with fleame, it mortifieth the bloode with too much colde, wherefore it may not bee ſo little, that the bloud and ſpirites in their feruentneſſe, be as it were vnbridled, whereof doe happen vnſtableneſſe of witte, and ſlipper remembrance, nor yet ſo much that by the waight thereof (for it is heauie approching night to the earth) that wée ſéeme to be alwaye in ſleepe, and neede a ſpurre to pricke vs forward. Wherefore it is right expedient to keepe that humour as thinne as nature will ſuffer it, and not to haue too much of it. But now to the dyet pertaining to them, whom this humoure annoyeth. The knowledge that melancholie raineth is oftentimes heauines of minde, or feare without cauſe, ſléepines in the members, many cramps without repletion

or emptines, ſodaine furie, ſodaine incontinency of the tongue, much ſolicitude of light things, we plainnes of the viſage, and fearefull dreames of terrible viſions, dreaming of darkeneſſe, déepe pittes, death of friendes, or acquaintance, and of all things that is blacke. The meates conuenient are they, which bee temperately in heate, but ſpecially they that be moyſt meats ſoon digeſted, and they rather boyled then roſted, temperatly mixt with ſpice, milk hot from the vdder, or latemilked, is very conuenient for that complexion, ſweet almonds blanched, & almond milk, the yolke of reere egges, and finally all things which ingender pure bloude, and all that is written in the chapter of age, all theſe bee ill for them: wine thicke or troublous, ſpecially red wine, meates hard, dry, very ſalt, or ſowre, burned meate, fryed meat, much béefe, beares fleſh, beans, rocket, colewortes, muſtard, radiſh, garlike, except there be much wind in the body, for then it is very holſome, onyons, léekes, finally all things which heateth too much, killeth too much, or drieth too much, alſo wrath, feare, compaſſion, ſorrow, much ſtudy, or care, much idlenes or reſt, all thing that is grieuous to ſée, to ſmell or to heare, but moſt ſpecially darkenes.
               Moreouer much drying of the bodye, either with long watch, or with much care and toſſing of the minde, or with much lecherie, or much eating and drinking of thinges that bée hot and drie, or immoderate euacuation, laboure, abſtinence, thirſt, going in the ayre vntemperately hotte, colde, or drie, all theſe thinges doe annoye them that bee grieued with any melancholy. It is to be diligently conſidered, that where melancholy happeneth of choler aduſt, there meates which bee hot in working would bee wiſely tempered, and drinking of hot wines would be eſchewed, ſemblably cautele would bee in ſauours, notwithſtanding moderate vſe of ſmall wines cléere and well verdured, is herein very commendable, the humor thereby being clarified, and the ſpirites clenſed, but the abuſe or exceſſe thereof, doth as much domage.
               
                  
Alſo it is right expedient, to put into wine or ale, a gad of ſiluer or golde, glowing hot out of the fire, to temper hot meate with roſes, violets, ſaunders, roſe water, borage, bugloſſe, baulme, called in Latine Meliſſa, or the water of all three, dronken with good wine white or claret, or made in a iulep with ſugar, is wonderfull holſom, chewing of lyc
                     •
                  
                  riſe, or rayſon or corance, is right expedient, but moſt of al other things, myrth, good companie, gladnes, moderate exerciſe, with moderate feeding. And thus I leaue to ſpeake of dyets, aptly belonging to the foure complexions.
            
         
         
            The fourth Booke of the Castell of Health.
            
            
               What cruditie is, and remedies therefore. CAP. 1.
               I Will ſome what write of two diſcraſies of the bodye, which doe happen by the exceſſe or lacke of thinges called not naturall, whereof I haue ſpoken before: the one is called cruditie, the other laſſitude, which although they bee wordes made of Latine, hauing no apt engliſh worde therefore, yet by the definition and more ample declaration of them, they ſhall be vnderſtoode ſufficiently, and from henceforth vſed for engliſh. But firſt it ſhall be neceſſary to conſider, that concoction is an alteratiō in the ſtomacke Concoction what it is. of meates and drinks, according to their qualities, whereby they are made like to the ſubſtance of the body. Crudity is a vicious concoction of thinges receiued, they not being Cruditie what it is. The cauſe of cruditie. wholly or perfectly altered: the cauſe thereof is ſometime the diſtemperature of the ſtomacke, ſometime inflannnations, ſometime matter congealed, or impoſtumes in the ſtomacke, other while ingurgitation of meate and drinke: or for the vicious qualitie of the ſame meates or drinkes, or the receiuing of them out of order, or lacke of exerciſe, or of conuenient euacuation. Galen ſayth, that in cruditie or vicious concoction, it muſt be conſidered, as wel if the 
                     •
                  uke be vtterly corrupted, and may not bee ſufficiently concoct,

as alſo if it be in the way of concoction: for if it be corrupted it muſt be expelled by ſweator vrine, if it be half cōcoct, then muſt ſuch things be miniſtred, as may helpe to profit concoction, hauing regard to the qualitie and temperance of the iuyce, that is to ſay, whether it be thick or thin, fleumaticke or cholericke: which ſhalbe perceiued by the dyet preceding, and alſo by other thinges named not naturall, for fleumaticke meates eaten in great quantitie or often, maketh fleumaticke iuyce.
               Likewiſe doth lacke of conuenient exerciſe, too much reſt or idlenes, as cholericke meats, and dehement labors, do make cholerick iuice in ſommer, and melancholick iuice in Autumne, ſpecially where laboures bée continuall or long during. Alſo where laboure is with much ſweate, there is the vrine more groſſe: where it is without ſweat, there it is thinner. Moreouer the colour and ſubſtance of the vrine declareth the temperance of the iuyce, which ſhall be here after declared in the table vrines.
               Semblably the colour of the body declareth the iuice that is in it, for being whiter then it was wont to be, it ſignifieth aboundance of fleume: being more pale or yelow, it betokeneth exceſſe of choler: if it be blacker, it ſignifieth melancholy, if the ill iuice be much in quantitie, and the bloud little, the ill iuyce would bee digeſted, and expelled with ſuch thinges as doe ſerue for that temperature, but if the bloud bee much, and the ill iuyce little in quantitie, there would the vaine be opened, and after ſufficient bléeding a conuenient purgation giuen, hauing regard as well of the quantitie of the iuyce, as of the kind thereof: in caſe that either for age or for timorouſnes, a man will not bee let bloud, then muſt he be purged by ſiege in more abundance. But if hee in whom is little good bloud and much ill iuice, and feeleth a lattitude or wearineſſe in all his bodie, hee ſhould neither he let bloud, nor receiue purgation, nor yet laboure or walke much: but abide in much quiet, and aſſay to ſleep much, and receiue ſuch meats, drinks and medicines, which do extenuate or make thin, cut, & digeſt groſſe

humors, without vehement heate, whereof it is written in the table of digeſtiues: in the number of whom is oximel, being well made, or Acetoſus ſimplex, where the iuyce is much cholerick or melancholick. Semblably, capers with oyle and vineger be praiſed of Galen. When there appeareth in the vrine a reſidence light and white, then wine white or claret moderately taken, helpeth to concoction, maketh a good iuyce, and prouoketh vrine, then increaſe frications and exerciſe by little and little, & then let him returne to his natural diet. In whom is aboundance of raw iuice, & outwardly féeleth a laſſitude, to them Galen counſayleth, the ſecond or third day to giue meate, wherein Jſope is boyled and afterward to vomite.
               The meane to eſcape cruditie, is to be diligent in obſeruation of the counſels before written concerning ye things called not naturall, not much vſing meates that be verie hard to concoct, alſo fat meate, and meates long kept, alſo corrupted, ſtrinking, ſwéete fruits, and banquetting diſhes, haſtie féeding witho
                     •
                   good chewing, alſo much or very oft drinking at meales, very much heate, or very much colde, after meate.
               Furthermore it muſt bée conſidered, that all thinges which bringeth griefe to the bodie, is ingendred either of too much aboundance of iuyce, or of the vicious qualitie thereof. Hee that is ſicke of aboundance, the diet of him wholly conſiſteth in reducing the iuice to a cōueniēt quantitie. Hee that is grieued with the vicious qualitie of the iuices, his order reſteth in making the iuices equal in temperature. Moreouer, where that which paſſeth out of the body, is leſſe thē that which is receiued into the body: there happeneth ſickneſſe which commeth of aboundance, in the which caſe it ought to be diligently foreſéene, that there be obſerued a conuenient meane of meates and drinks, in reſpect of that which is expelled out of the body, which may be done, if the quantitie of each of them be wiſely conſidered. And where aboundance is, there the quantitie, or qualitie, or both be tempred.
               
                  
Alway remember that of crude iuyce bee diuers kindes, ſome be colde and fleumaticke, ſome be hot and cholerick, other be more thinne and watrie, ſome of blacke choler, or melancholicke. They which doe abound in any of them, muſt abſtaine from ſuch meats & drinks, which doe ingender ſuch iuice, as doth annoy them: thoſe meats and drinks be declared in the tables preceding. Aetius alſo would that Aetius ſerm. 9. he ſhould drinke a draught of colde water, affirming that thereby the ſtomack being corroborate, driueth out of him downe into the belly, that which cleaueth faſt to it. I my ſelfe vſing to drinke faſting, very ſmal béere or ale, when I haue beene in that caſe, haue found eaſe by it. Paulus Aegineta willeth that at the beginning, the legs & armes ſhould bee rubbed with a courſe linnen cloth, the legges downeward to the feet, the armes to the tops of the fingers, and when they be well chafed, then to rub thē again with ſome oyle, that doth open the pores & diſcuſſe the vapors as oyle of Camomile, oile of a neate, & other like, he praiſeth much mulſe, or the water of hony, ſpecially if ſome Iſope be boiled in it. Galen and all other do agrée, that in this caſe pepper bruſed & eaten with meat, is very expediēt. And where there is much wind in the ſtomacke, then to eate all times of the day, of the medicine made of the thrée kindes of pepper, time, anniſe ſeede, and hony clarified, which is called Diatrion piperion, or that which is called Diaſpoliticon, or Diapiganon, which is made of Cummine, ſtéeped one day and a night, or longer in tart vineger, and after fryed or laide on a burning hot ſtone, and made in pouder, alſo pepper and rue dried ſomwhat, and made into pouder al in equal portions, and mixt with clarified hony, Galen addeth thereto ſalt peter called in latine nitrum. The confection made with the iuyce of quinces, and is called Diacidonion, is very excellent. But it is to be diligently noted, that where cruditie is in a cholericke perſon, there would the ſaid medicines be temperatly vſed, & the ſaid Diacidoniō to haue little or no ſpices in it. And for my part, being of a cholericke humour mixt with fleume, manie yeares continuallie

in cruditie. I neuer found any thing better then fine Rewbar be chewed wt raiſons of corents, which I took by the counſell of the worthiefull and well learned Phiſition, maiſter Doctour Auguſtine, who in his manners declareth the gentleneſſe of his ancient bloud, which medicine I doe not leaue to vſe dayly faſting when I féele ſome cruditie to begin. Alſo ſyrope acetoſe, that is to ſay, ſugar ſodden in pure vineger, and a little water, vntil it be thicke as a ſyrupe, is ſometime conuenient, and that as well to cholericke perſons as vnto fleumatick, & if fleum be abundant, then with rootes and ſéedes of fenel & parcely ſodden with it. Alſo in that caſe oximell, that is to ſaye, honye and water ſodden together with the ſaid rootes and ſéedes, and a quantity of vineger put therto in the boyling is very commendable. If the parient be very coſtiue, then ye medicine of Galen called Hierapicra, from halfe an ounce to an oūce taken in water of hony or ale, or taken in pilles, the weight of a greate, and a halfe, or two groates, if the ſtuffe bee good, will purge the bodie ſufficiently, without making the bodie weaker. Alſo that medicine by clenſing the ſtomacke and bodie, deliuereth a man and woman from anie perilous ſickneſſes. If the humours in the ſtomacke bee not putrified, but that it is greeued with aboundance of falt 
                     〈◊〉
                  , I haue found that milke new milked, wherein is put a quantitie of good hony or ſugar, and thrée leaues of good ſpeare mintes, and a little boyled, ſo being dronke warme faſting, the quantity of a pinte, and reſting on it without eating or drinking any other thing the ſpace of 3. houres after, haue aboundantly purged and comforted the ſtomacke, but where there is no fleum but onely choler, it is not ſo holeſome, but rather hurteth, making fumoſities in the head, whereof comnieth headach.
            
            
               Of diſtillations called commonly rheumes, and of ſome remedies againſt them right neceſſary. CAP. 2.
               FOr as much as at this preſent time in this Realme of Englande, there is not any one more annoyance to the

health of mans bodie, then diſtillations from the head called rheumes, I will not let to write ſome what of them, wherby men may take benefit if they will, although ſome Phiſitions more conſidering their market, then their duetie to God and their countrie, will be neuer ſo much offended with mine honeſt enterpriſe.
               Diſtillation is a dropping downe of a liquid matter out of the head, and falling either into the mouth, or into the noſethrils, or into the eyes, and ſometime into the chéekes and eares: that which falleth into the mouth is receiued of the throte, into that part which is the inſtrument of the voyce, which at the firſt maketh hoarſenes, & in proceſſe of time maketh the voyce little, and vnneth to be heard. And if the rheume be ſharpe, it raiſeth the inward ſkinne of the throte, & ſometime in doth exulcerate the lungs. If it doth fall into the ſtomacke, the rheume being a cold, it altereth the bodie into a cold diſtemperance: if he be hot, it maketh a hot diſtemperature, & doth ſome what exulcerate in proceſſe of time, and at the beginning abateth appetite, & maketh feeble concoction. The cold rheume maketh concoction ſlow, and alſo cruditie, and ingendreth foure fumes in the mouth. If it be corrupted, it turneth alſo nouriſhment vnto corruption, which maketh vpbrayding fumiſh or ſharpe, or of ſome ill qualitie, which cannot be expreſſed: if the matter do deſcend lower, it tormenteth the guts called ieiunium, and colon, & toucheth other veſſels from whence procéedeth digeſtion: in this diſcraſie two things are to be prouided for: firſt to let that the rheume doe not diſtill into the ſayd places: or if it hath done, that it be ſhortly expelled from them. Firſt, to let that it ſhall not diſtill, it ſhalbe neceſſary to eate ſome meate the ſooner in the morning, if there hath not preceded repletion. Where the temperature of all the bodie is cholerike, and the ſtomack is weak, the ſtomack would be made ſtrong with ſuch things as of their property do comfort the ſtomack: foreſéene that they be moderatly cold and moyſt. And that which is alreadie fallen into the ſtomacke, muſt be expelled with vomite or

ſiege, prouoked with wormewood, ſtéeped all one day and a night in a little ſmall white wine, or ſmall ale or ſtale, which haue vertue onely to wipe away the filth from the ſtomacke: but if it be ſucked déep into the filmes of the ſtomacke, then is it better to take the medicine called Hierapicra, either in powder with drink warmed, or els in pils, to the number of 
                     •
                  iue or moe, in the morning ſixe houres before any other meate or drinke taken, afterward to annoynt the mouth of the ſtomack with oyle of Maſticke, or Nardinum temperatly warme, alway if a hot rheume doe fall into a hot ſtomack, then meates and drinkes which be cold in vertue, would onely be vſed, where the ſtomack is diſtempered with heate, and the rheume diſtilleth into a cold head, there is the diſcraſie hard to be cured. And they which be ſo affect or diſeaſed, muſt take ſuch things as may diſſolue the fleume, and clenſe the ſtomacke without heating thereof, of the which vertue we know Oximel to bee of. If the ſtomacke and head bee both diſtempered with cold, then muſt bee vſed meates, drinkes and oyntments, which onely be hot, and vtterly to forbeare all that is cold. By theſe diſtillations or rheumes, happeneth many other grienous diſeaſes, beſides thoſe whereof I haue ſpoken, as in the head whirlings, called in Latin Vertigines, ſudden ſwoundings, falling ſickneſſe, poſes, ſtinking of the noſe, called Polipus, ſores in the mouth, toothach, pin and webbe in the eyes, dulnes in hearing, ſquinces, fretting of the bowels, with flixes, ſhortnes of breath, griefe in the heart, palſies, ach in the muſcules and ioynts: wherefore it is not be neglected. And I doe much maruaile that our Phiſitions doe not more ſtudiouſly prouide therefore remedies. I my ſelfe was by the ſpace of foure yeares continually in this diſcraſie, and was counſailed by diuers Phiſitions to kéepe my head warme, and to vſe Diatrion piperion, and ſuch other hot things, as I haue rehearſed: at the laſt, féeling my ſelfe very féeble, and lacking appetite and ſléepe, as I happened to reade the booke of Galen, De temperamentis, which treateth De inequali temperatura,
                  
and afterward the ſixt booke, De tuenda ſanitate, I perceiued that I had béen long in an errour. Wherefore firſt I did throw away my quilted cap, & my other cloſe bonets, and onely did lye in thinne coyfe, which I haue euer ſince vſed both winter and ſummer, and ware a light bonet of veluet onely, then made I Oximell after the doctrine of Galen, ſauing that I boyled in vineger rootes of parſly and Fenell, with Endiue, Cicorie, and Betany, and after that I had taken it 3. daies continually, euery day 3. ſpoonefuls in the morning warme: then tooke I of the ſame Oximell, wherein I had infuſed and ſtéeped one dramme of Agarike, & halfe a dramme of fine Reubarbe, the ſpace of thrée daies and thrée nights, which I receiued in the morning, eating no meat ſixe houres after, and that but a little broth of a boyled henne, whereof inſued eight ſtooles abundant of choler and fleume: ſoone after I ſlept ſoundly, and had good appetite to eate. After ſupper I would either eate a few Coriander ſeedes prepared, or ſwallow downe a little fine Maſtix, and forbare wine, and dranke onely ale, and that but little, ſtale and alſo warmed. And ſometime in the morning would take a perfume of Storax calamita, and now and then I would put into my noſethrilles either a leafe of gréene Lawrell, or Betany, or water of Marier
                     •
                   bruſed, which cauſed the humor to diſtill by my noſethrils. And if I lacked Storax, I tooke for a perfume the rindes of old Roſemary, and burned them, and held my mouth ouer the fume, cloſing mine eyes: afterward to comfort my ſtomacke and make it ſtrong, ſometime I would eate with my meate a little white pepper groſſe bruſed, ſometime Galens electuary made of the iuyce of Quinces, called Diacidonion, ſometime marmalade of quinces, or a quince roſted. And by this diet, I thank almightie God, vnto whō onely be giuen all glorie, I was reduced into a better ſtate in my ſtomacke and head, then I was ſixtéene yeares before, as it may appeare vnto thē which haue long knowne mée. And this haue I not written for vaine glorie, or of preſumption, but to the intent that they which haue

their bodies in like tēpexature as mine was, that is to ſay, being cholerike of complexiō, and hauing rheumes falling out of a hot head, may if they liſt aſſay mine experience, or in the ſtéed of my ſayd infuſion, take Hierapicra, with ale or water to purge them, whereof ſhall not inſue ſo much peril, as of corrupted ſyrupes, and other confections called Magiſtrates, made with old rottendrugs, though the Phiſitions be neuer ſo well learned. In bodies of other temperature, I would not that mine experience ſhould be practiſed but with diſcretion, tempering the medicine, as ye qualities of the ſtomack and head doe require, remembring alway that hot rheumes be thin & ſubtil, cold rheumes be for the moſt part thick. And that they which be thin, would be made thicke, that they pierce not ſo faſt. And yt they which be thicke, would be made thin, that they may the ſooner be purged. Finally, this dare I affirme, that the rheumes, which of late time haue béen more frequent in this realme, then they were wont to be fortie yeares paſſed, haue happened of none occaſion more ſhē of banquetings after ſupper, and drinking much, ſpecially wine a little after ſléepe. Another thing is the kéeping the head too hot or too lōg couered, whereby the braine, which is naturally colde, is diſtempered with hot vapours aſcending from the ſtomack, thoſe ſame vapours being let to euaporate, or paſſe foorth out of the head, and therefore be concreate or gathered into a humor ſuperfluous, which ſtilleth downeſtſoones out of the head into the places before rehearſed. Yet now a daies if a boy of 7. yeares of age, or a young man of 20. yeares, haue not two caps on his head, he & his friends will think that he may not continue in health. And if the inner cap be not of veluet, or 
                     〈◊〉
                  , a feruing man feareth to looſe his credence. A Parſon, Ui
                     •
                  ar, or pariſh prieſt, by vſing their veluet caps imbrodred with laces, doe make ſome men thinke that they be aſhamed of their crownes, that late token of the order of Prieſthood, the which notable abuſe, I much maruaile that the Biſhops wil ſuffer, ſpecially they which haue had leiſure to reade the workes of S. Ciprian,
                  
S. Hierom, Chriſoſtomus, S. Ambroſe, and ſundrie decrées made by the old Fathers concerning the honeſt veſture of prieſts, which although it ſeeme a light matter to ſome men, yet it augmēteth or miniſheth not a little in prieſts the eſtimation of their conditions. Salomon confirming the ſame, ſaying: The garment, the gate, and laughter of a man declareth what he is. But this matter will I leaue to another place, where I intend to ſpeake more abundātly of it, if it be not the ſooner amended. Now to conclude, as long as the ſaid occaūons cōtinue, ſo long men ſhal not be without rheumes, although they were all perfect Phiſitions.
               
                  By what tokens one may know whether the ſtomack and head be hot or cold.
                  NOw to returne to the remedies againſt the ſayd annoyance, whereof happeneth ſo many great ſickneſſes, I will be bold to write a little out of the workes of the moſt famous and expert Phiſitions. Firſt, the cauſe of the rheume muſt be digeſted, after expulſed, thirdly diuerted, that is to ſay, turned from the eyen or throte into the noſe, from whence it may bee more eaſily purged. Fourthly, it may be ſtopped that it ſhall not diſtill. In hot diſtillations the head is very hot, in féeling the rheume being in the mouth, he is thin and warme, the tongue or chéekes within bliſtered, the face ſometime redder then it is accuſtomed to be, ſomtime a burning within the noſe. To them which haue this hot rheume, may be giuen the ſeed of white Popie, Diacodion made of the heads of white Popie & raine water. Amylum with milke, if there be no feuer, penides, mallowes, orage, gourdes, and ſpinage, boyled and eaten with oyle of Almonds, ſyrupe of violets, nenuphar, or the wine of ſwéete pomegranates, the water of a great Cucumber, boyled with a little ſugar being dronke, doth mitigate choler, ſtoppeth the rheume, and eaſily looſeth the belly: the ſeedes of Millons brayed in a morter with water, & ſtrained with ſoft bread, hauing ſugar put to it, maketh an excellent good meate againſt the hot rheumes:

plaiſters made of barly bruſed, violets, popie and Camomill boyled in water, wherein ſpunges or linnen clothes be dipt, ſhould bee layed on the head, and the genitories or legges therewith waſhed. If the ſicke man cannot ſléepe, then the ſayd parts with the belly and fundament ſhall be annoynted with the oyles of Uiolets and Nenuphar, the ſauour of Camphar in Roſewater with violets, is good in that caſe. Galen exhorteth, and I haue proued, that in a very hot rheume, which hath ſtilled faſt, the powring of cold water vpon ones head, had ſtinted the rheume. He that is therin diſeaſed, muſt eſchew going in the ſunne, or to come nigh a great fire, or to ſtand, or be lōg couered, or to weare much on his head, he muſt reſt much, and prouoke himſelfe to ſléepe a night, but not very long, and to lye on the one ſide on a hard bed, hauing his head high: alſo rubbing of his legges before meales, is very holeſome. Cold rheumes bee perceiued by coldneſſe of the humour and head, with palenes of the viſage, all cold things increaſing ye rheume. Theſe things are good againſt it, the detection of Cicer with hony and raiſins, filberd nuttes toſted, and eaten after meales: nothing is more holeſome then abſtinence, ſpecially in the euening: they which haue it, muſt beware of Northerne windes, the Mooneſhine by night, waſhing in cold water, and to bee long bareheaded. The ſeedes of Nigella a little toſted, and put into a péece of thin Sarcenet, and ſmelled vnto, ſtoppeth the rheumes.
                  Néefing in the beginning of rheume, is diſpraiſed of Galen, but after that the matter is digeſted, it is very holeſome: that may bée made with leaues of Lawrell, or Betonie put into the noſethrils, the iuyce of Coleworts, the rootes of red Béetes, water of Marioram. A pretie medicine for that purpoſe proued. The iuyce of young Béetes and Marioram, of each one ounce, good white wine eight ounces, Saffron the weight of two pence, that being het and taken in the mouth, ſhall be drawne vp with breath to the place, whereby the diſtillations falleth out of the noſe into the mouth. And if the rheume do diſtill into ye cheekes

and téeth, I haue proued, that the iuyce of groūd Juy, and that hearbe which wee call Mouſe-eare, taken within a quill into the noſethrils, oftentimes purgeth excéedingly the rheumes, and taketh away the ach of the téeth.
                  Gargariſing, if it bee not diſcréetly vſed, may doe more harme then good, bring downe much abundance of matter vndigeſted: but taken in order with water, hony and pepper, or with Hyſope and figges boyled in white wine, and taken very hot in a gargariſe is right conuenient.
                  For compaſſion which I haue of them that bee vexed with toothach cauſed of rheumes, I will by the leaue of Phiſitions, conclude this chapter with an excellent medicine againſt the ſayd paſſion, which is written of an honorable Phiſition of late yeres, which medicine alſo maketh the téeth faſt which be looſe, and alſo ſtoppeth the ſuperfluous bléeding of the gummes, where with ye breath is made vnſauery. Take the rindes of Caper rootes, the rootes of brambles, which doe beare blacke berries, the flowers of Pomegrants called balauſtia, of euery of them the waight of two duckets, Pelitorie of Spame one ducket, ſeede of white Henbane, the rinds of Mandrage, of euery of them one ducket and a halfe, Spourge of the garden one handfull, Alome of the rock two duckets: boyle al theſe in white wine or claret, which is very rough in taſte, and ſtraine it therewith, and let the patient oftētimes waſh his mouth. Albeit I will counſaile them which will take this medicine or any other, firſt to purge the cauſe of the rheumes, as before is rehearſed, or in any other wiſe, as they ſhall be counſailed by well learned and diſcréet Phiſitions.
               
            
            
               Of Laſſitude. CAP. 3.
               LAſſitude is a diſpoſition toward ſickneſſe, wherein a man féeleth a ſorenes, a ſwelling, or an inflammation. Sorenes happeneth of humours ſharpe and gnawing, as after great exerciſe and labours, which laſſitude happeneth Actius lib. 3. to them, whoſe bodies are full of ill iuyce and excrements. Alſo after cruditie in thē which are not exerciſed,

or doe abide long in the heate of the ſunne. It may alſo bée in the bodie wherin is good iuyce, if he be fatigate with immoderate exerciſe. In them which doe féele this laſſitude, Galen detuen. ſanit. lib. 3. the ſkinne appeareth thicke and rough, and there is felt a griefe ſometime in the ſkinne onely, ſometime alſo in the fleſh, as it were of a ſore. The cure thereof is by much and pleaſant rubbing with swéete oyles, which haue not the vertue to reſtraine or cloſe, and that with many hands, & afterward to exerciſe moderatly, and to bee bained in water ſwéet and temperate in heate: alſo then muſt be giuen meates of good iuyce, pottage but ſeldome, wine is not to be forbidden: for vnto wine vnneth any thing may be compared, that ſo well digeſteth crude humours: it alſo prouoketh ſweate and vrine, and maketh one to ſléepe ſoundly. But if this laſſitude doe abide the night and day following, or waxeth more and more, then if the patient be of good ſtrength and young, and hath abundance of bloud, let him be let bloud, or prouoke the hemerhoydes or piles to bléede if they do appeare. But if it procéed of the malice of any humour without abundance of bloud, then reſort to purgations apt for the humour that grieueth. The tokens whereof ſhall appeare as well by the colour of the ſkin & diet preceding, as by vrine, ordure, ſweat, thirſt, appetite, as it is rehearſed before in the complexiōs. If the ill bloud be little in quantitie, and the crude humours abundant, thē ſhall he not bee let bloud, nor vehemently purged, neither ſhal exerciſe or moue himſelfe, or be bained. For al exerciſe carrieth humours throughout all the bodie, and ſtoppeth the powers: wherefore theſe manner of perſons ſhould be kept in reſt, & ſuch meates, drinkes, & medicines, ſhould be giuen to them which ſhould attenuate or diſſolue the groſnes of the humours without notable heate, as Oximell, barly water, & mulſe, if the patient abhorre not hony. And foraſmuch as in ye ſayd perſons cōmonly there is abundāce of wind about the ſtomack, therfore pepper, ſpecially long pepper or white is very conuenient to be vſed, and the medicine before written, called Diaſpoliticum. When the

humoures are diſſolued, then it is good to drinke white wine, or ſmall claret wine moderately.
            
            
               Laſſitude extenſiue. CAP. 4.
               WHen one thinketh that hee doth ſéele a ſwelling or boyling of the body, where indeed there doth not appeare in ſight or touching any ſmelling, that is called laſſitude extenſiue, if it happeneth without exerciſe, or vehement mouing: this doth happen of exceſſiue multitude of humours, which doe extend the muſcules or filles. In this no ſorenes is felt, but onely an heauines with extention or thruſting out of the body. And becauſe that there is aboundance of bloud in the body, beſt remedie is to bee let bloud about the elbow or ancle, after to be purged, then to vſe ſoft frycaſies with oyles afore rehearſed, afterward much reſt and temperate bathes, and meates lacking ſharpenes and being abſterſiue.
            
            
               Laſſitude, with the feeling of inflamation. CAP. 5.
               IF without any mouing, the muſcules and fleſh ariſe vpon the bodie as it ſmelleth with great paines and exceeding heate, then ſoone after followeth moſt hotteſt feuers, except it be preuented by letting of bloud, & that in aboundance, and almoſt to ſowning: but it were more ſure to bee let bloud twiſe in one day, the firſt time without ſowning, at the next time ſowning is not to be feared. If the greefe be in the necke or head, the bloud muſt bee let of the veyne called Cephalea, or the ſhoulder veine. If it be in the bulke or vppermoſt part of the body, then muſt the veine be cut, which is called Baſilica, or the innermoſt veine. If all the body be grieued, then cut the veine which is called Mediana, or the middle veine. If a feuer remaine after blood letting, then order him with the diet of them that haue feuers, which ye ſhall find written hereafter. If no feuer remaine, then vſe moderate fricaſies and little eating, and that of meates hauing good iuyce, increaſing by little and little to the naturall dyet.
            
            
               
               Diet of them that are ready to fall into ſicknes. CAP. 6.
               NOw to returne eftſoones to ſpeake of dyet, it is to be remembred, that they which are readie to fall into diſeaſes, they are prepared thereunto either by repletion or ſuperfluous humours or elſe by cruditie, or malice of humours which are in them. As touching the firſt, the generall dyet muſt bée ſuch, as thereby the humours may bée attenuate, and by conuenient euacuation, brought to a moderate quantitie.
               As for the ſecond muſt bee corrected with meates and drinkes of contrary qualities, hauing alway reſpect to the age of the perſon, time of the yeare, place of habitation, and moſt ſpecially the vniuerſall complexion. For choler offending in an old man, in winter time in a cold country, or the perſon being of his naturall complexion, fleumatick or melancholy, would not bee ſo aboundantly expulſed or ſubdued, as if it bee in one young and luſtie, in the hotte ſommer, in the countries where the Sunne feruently burneth, or the perſon of his proper nature is very cholericke.
               And in likewiſe contrary. Wherfore euery man knowing his owne naturall complexion, with the qualitie of the humour that offendeth, let him make temperance his chief cooke, and remembring that which I haue before declared, ordaine to himſelfe ſuch dyet, as may reforme the offence with none or little annoyance to his vniuerſall complexion. And if he can ſo doe, hee ſhall happily eſcape, not onely diuers ſickneſſes, but alſo the moſt pernicious daunger, proceeding of corrupted drugges or ſpyces, whereof ſome couetous apothecaries do make medicines, maugre the heads of good and well learned Phiſitions.
            
            
               Sickenes moſt common to peculiar times of the yeare and ages. CAP. 7.
               ALthough I doe not intend to write of the cure of egritudes or ſickneſſes confirmed, as well becauſe it might bée reputed in me a great preſumption, as alſo for aſmuch

as it were very perilous, to diuulgate that noble ſcience to common people, not learned in liberall ſciences and Philoſophie, which bee required to be ſufficiently in a Phiſition. And moreouer many bookes of Hippocrates and Galen ought to bee reade, before that one doe take vpon him the generall cure of mens bodies, yet not withſtanding I truſt I may without anie note of arrogancie write, what diſcaſes doe moſt happen in ſundrie times of the yeare, and ages of men and women, with ſome ſignifications, whereby the diſcraſie or diſtemperature of the body is perceiued, to the intent that the Phiſition being farre off, may be truly enformed, conſidering that vrines farre caried do often deceiue them, and likewiſe lacke of the ſight of the pacient, and inquiſition of thinges which doe precede or follow the ſickenes. And with this I truſt none honeſt and charitable Phiſition will bee offended, but rather giue to mee thankes for my diligence, in the aduancing of their eſtimation, which by lacke of perfect inſtruction hath béene appayred.
               
                  Sickneſſes of ſpring time.
                  Diſeaſes proceeding of melancholy, as madnes, falling ſickneſſe, bléedings, ſquinces, poſes, hoarſenes, coughes, lepries, ſcabbes, ach in the ioynts.
               
               
                  Sickneſſes of Sommer.
                  Many of the ſaid diſeaſes, alſo feuers, continuall hot feuers, feuers tertiane, quartaine, vomites, flires, watering of eyes, paines of the eares, bliſters and ſores of the mouth and ſweatings.
               
               
                  Sickneſſes of autumne.
                  Diuers of ſommer ſickneſſes, & opilations of the ſpléene, dropſies, conſumptions, ſtranguilions, coſtiuenes, ach in the huckle bones, ſhortnes of winde, fretting of the bowels, falling ſickneſſe, and melancholicke diſeaſes.
               
               
                  Sickneſſes of Winter.
                  Stiches and griefs in the ſides, inflamation of the lungs, rheumes, coughes, paines in the breaſt, ſides, and loynes, headache, and palſies.
               
               
                  
                  Sickneſſes happening to children.
                  When they be n
                        〈…〉
                      borne, there do happen to them ſores in the mouth called Aphte, vamiting, coughes, watching, fearefulneſſe, inflamations of the nauell, moiſture of the eares. When they breede téeth, itching of the gummes, feuers, crampes, and laſkes.
                  When they waxe elder, then be they grieued with kernels, opennes of the mould of the head, ſhortnes of winde, the ſtone of the bladder, worms in the belly, waters, ſwelling vnder the chin, and in England commonly purpilles, meaſiles, and ſmall pockes.
               
               
                  Sickneſſes happening to yong men from 14. yeares of age.
                  Feuers quotidiane, tertiane, quartaine, hot feuers, ſpitting or vomiting of bloud, plureſies, diſeaſes of the ſides, inflamation of the lunges, lethargies, frenſie, hot ſickneſſes, cholericke paſſions, coſtiuenes of vehement laſkes.
               
               
                  Sickneſſes of age.
                  Difficultie of breath, rheumes with coughes, ſtranguilion, and difficultie in piſſing, ach in the ioyntes, diſeaſes in the raines, ſwimmings in the head, palſies, itching of al the bodie, lacke of ſleepe, moyſture in the eyes and eares, dulneſſe of ſight, hardnes of hearing, tiſſicknes or ſhortnes of breath.
                  Although many of the ſaid ſickneſſes doe happen in euery time and age, yet becauſe they be moſt frequented in the ſaid times and ages, I haue written them to the intent that in the ages and times moſt inclined vnto thē, ſuch thinges might bee then eſchewed, which are apte to ingender the ſayd diſeaſes.
               
            
            
               The generall ſignifications and tokens of ſicknes. CAP. 8.
               IF the body be hotter, colder, moyſter, dryer, leaner, fuller, the colour more pale or ſwart, the eyes more hollow than is accuſtomed to bee, it ſignifieth that the bodie is diſpoſed to ſicknes, or already ſicke.

                     
                     The braine ſicke.
                     
                        
                           Rauing.
                           Forgetfulneſſe.
                           Fantaſie.
                           Humours comming from the roofe of the mouth, the eyes, the noſe, or the eares.
                           Watch.
                           Sléepe.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     The heart ſicke.
                     
                        
                           Difficultie of breath.
                           Trembling of the heart.
                           Beating of the pulſe.
                           Feuers.
                           Cold.
                           Diuerſitie of colours.
                           Griefe about the heart.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     The liuer ſicke.
                     
                        
                           Lacke or abundance of humours.
                           The fourme of the bodie altered.
                           Palenes.
                           Concoction.
                           Digeſtion.
                           Alteration of excrements accuſtomed.
                           Paine in the place of the liuer.
                           Swelling.
                           Difficultie of breath.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     The ſtomack ſicke.
                     
                        
                           Concoction flow or quick.
                           Appetite of moyſt or dry, dull or quicke.
                           Separation of excrements moyſt, or hard with their colours.
                           Yexing.
                           Belching.
                           Uomiting with paine & difficultie of breath.
                           Urine much or little with the colour & ſubſtrāce too red, or too pale, too thick, or too thin.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     The breaſt ſicke.
                     
                        
                           Difficultie of breath.
                           Cough.
                           Spitting.
                           Paine in the breaſt.
                        
                     
                  
               
               
                  
This haue I written not to giue iudgement thereby, but onely for the patient to haue in a readines, to the intent that whatſoeuer he féeleth, or perceiueth in euery of the ſayd things, thereof to inſtruct his Phiſition whereunto he may adapt his counſaile and remedies.
            
            
               Of vrines. CAP. 9.
               FOraſmuch as now a daies the moſt common iudgemēt in ſickneſſe is by vrines, which being farre carried, or much moued, or ſtanding long, after that it is made, the forme therof is ſo altered, that the Phiſition ſhall not perfectly perceiue the naturall colour nor contents, although it be neuer ſo wel chafed at the fire, as Actuarius and other great learned men doe affirme. I will therefore ſomewhat ſpeake of vrines, not ſo much as a Phiſition knoweth, but as much as is neceſſarie to euery man for to perceiue the place and cauſe of his griefe, wherby he may the better inſtruct the Phiſition.
               Firſt in vrine foure things are to be conſidered, that is to ſay, the ſubſtance, the colour, the regions or parts of the vrine, and the contents or things therein contained.
               Alſo foraſmuch as in the body of man be foure qualities, heate, cold, moyſture, and drith, two of them heate & cold, are cauſes of the colour, drith and moyſture, are cauſes of the ſubſtance. Moreouer in vrine, being in a veſſell apt thereunto to be ſeene are thrée regions. The loweſt regiō in the bottome of the vrinall, containing the ſpaces of two fingers or little more. The middle region, from whence the loweſt ended vnto the circle. The higheſt region is the circle. The highnes of the colour ſignifieth heate: the pale, blacke, or gréene, ſignifieth cold. Alſo the groſſenes or thicknes of the vrine, ſignifieth moyſture, the cléerenes or thinnes, ſignifieth drith.
               
                  The colours of the vrines.
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              
                                 Colour of bright gold.
                                 Colour of gilt.
                              
                           
                           Perfect digeſtion.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                     
                        
                           
                              
                                 Red as a red apple or cherrie.
                                 Baſe red, like to Bole armoniake, or Saffron drie.
                                 Red glowing like fire.
                              
                           
                           Exceſſe of digeſtion.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              
                                 Colour of a beaſts liuer.
                                 Colour of darke red wine.
                                 Gréene like to celeworts.
                              
                           
                           Aduſtion of humours.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              
                                 Leadie colour.
                                 Blacke as inke.
                                 Blacke as horne.
                              
                           
                           Féeblenes or mortification of nature, except it be in purging of melācholy.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              
                                 White cléere as water.
                                 Gray as a horne.
                                 White as whay.
                                 Colour of a Camels haire.
                              
                           
                           Lacke of digeſtion.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              
                                 Pale like to broth of fleſh ſodden.
                              
                           
                           The beginning of digeſtion.
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        
                           
                              
                                 Citrine colour or yellowe.
                                 Subcitrine or paler.
                              
                           
                           The middle of digeſtion.
                        
                     
                  
                  White and thinne betokeneth melancholy to haue dominion.
                  White and thicke, ſignifieth fleume.
                  Red and thicke, betokeneth ſanguine.
                  Redde and thinne betokeneth choler to haue the ſoueraigntie.
               
            
            
               The ſubſtance of the vrine. CAP. 10.
               AT the firſt piſſing all vrines well nigh do appeare thin, as long as they doe abide warme: for naturall heate, during the time that it preuaileth, ſuffreth not that the licour, which is the ſubſtance of the vrine, to congeale or be thicke for any occaſion, but after that heate is gone, ſome vrines ſhortly, ſorne a longer time after waxe thick. Likewiſe ſometime ſome are piſſed thicker, & after waxe cléere, ſome remaine ſtil as they were made, ſome be méetly thick as they were troubled, ſome very thick & groſſe. They that waxe cléere, ſoone do gather that which is thick into the botome of ye vrinall, ſome remaine troubled, yt groſſenes notwithſtanding

gathered in the bottome. Semblably the diuerſitie of thinne or ſubtill vrines muſt be perceiued, that is to ſay, that ſome are very ſubtill, as water, ſome leſſe ſubtill, ſome in a meane betwéene thicke and thinne.
               Of thinges contayned in the vrine, ſome doe deſcende down to the bottome, and 
                     •
                  ee called in a gréeke word Hypoſtaſis, in engliſh ſome call it the groundes, ſome the reſidence, which if it be white, light riſing vp from the bottom of the vrinall, like a peare, it ſignifieth health, if it bée of any other figure or colour, it betokeneth ſome annoyance. If like things bée ſéene in the middle of the vrinall, they be called ſublations, if they approch vnto the higheſt region of the vrine, they bée named cloudes, in latine Nebulae. The groundes or reſidences not perfect, ſome is like little red vetches, and is called in latine Orobea, ſome is like to bran of wheate ground, and ſeuered from the meale, and is called brannie reſidence, in latine Furfurea, ſome be like vnto plates hauing bredth and length without thickeneſſe, and may bee named plat reſidence, in latine Laminea, ſome is like to meale, wheate, or barly, and may be named mealy reſidence, in latine Similacea.
               
               There is alſo ſéene in the vrine like to white hayres, ſome longer, ſome ſhorter, ſometime like to ragges ſomewhat red. There is alſo ſeene in the vttermoſt part of the vrine, ſomtime a 
                     •
                  ome of froth, ſomtimes bels or bubbles, ſometime there ſwimmeth in the vrine, a thing like a cobweb, otherwhile there is about the circle, as it were the renting of cloth, ſometime there is in like vrine the motes of the ſunne, ſometime like the matter of a ſore, otherwiſe like the ſéed of a mā, alſo grauel or ſand. And in theſe things may bée diuers coloures, ſome white, ſome red, ſome betweene both, ſome yelow, ſome gray, and 
                     〈◊〉
                   blacke. All this muſt be diligently marked, and thereof ſeparately to aduertiſe the phiſition, vnto whom I refer the iudgement of the ſicknes for the cauſe afore rehearſed, and for aſ
                     〈…〉
                   as the iudgement of them is very ſubtill.
               Semblably of ordure whether it be very thinne or very

thicke, what other matter iſſueth out with it, what colour it is of, the ſauour very great, little or none if it were eaſily expulſed, or painefully, how oft or how ſeldome.
               Moreouer of ſweat what colour it is of, and of what ſauour, if in taſting it be ſalt, ſowre, bitter, or vnſauerie.
               Alſo the vomit if it be of one colour or many, if it do ſmel horribly, of what humor it had moſt abundance, if it were faſting, or after meales, if it were painfull or eaſie.
               Likewiſe ſpittle whether it be thicke or thinne, or mixt with bloud, or matter corrupt, accordingly of the humour iſſuing out at the noſe, and if that be bloud, then whether it be red, watrie or blacke.
               Moreouer, it may not be forgotten, to aduertiſe the Phiſition of the dyet vſed by the pacient, as wel afore the ſicknes, as in the time of the ſickneſſe, his age, the ſtrength of his body, his exerciſe and place, where he longeſt abode in his youth, whether it were high or low, watrie or drie, hot or colde.
               This I truſt ſhall be ſufficient to inſtruct a phiſition, he that deſireth to knowe more particularly hereof, let him reade the bookes of Hippocrates, Galen, Cornelius Celſus, Actuarius, Paulus, and diuers other late writers, for this little treatiſe may not receiue it.
            
            
               The precepts of the ancient phiſition Diocles to King Antigonus. CAP. 11.
               WE will now deuide the body of man into foure parts, the head, the bulke called in Latine Thorax, which contayneth the breaſt, the ſides, the ſtomack and intrailes. The belly, called in latine Venter, containeth the paunch and bowels. Alſo the bladder called in latine Veſica, in the which name, is alſo contayned the conduits by the which vrine paſſeth. When any diſeaſe approcheth to the head, theſe tokens do commonly precede, ſwimming in the head, headache, heauines of the browes, ſounding in the eares, pricking in the temples, the eies in the morning doe water or waxe dim, the ſmelling is dull, the gummes doe ſwell.

When thou féeleſt ſuch tokens, forthwith purge the head with ſomewhat, not with vehement medicines, but taking Iſope or organum, & the crops of them boyle with white or claret wine halfe a pint, and therewith gargariſe your mouth faſting, vntil the fleum be purged out of your head: this is the eaſieſt medicine in diſeaſes of the head.
               It is alſo very holeſome to gargariſe the mouth & breaſt with hony water, whereunto muſtard is put and mingled, but firſt the head muſt be rubbed with a warme cloth, that the fleum may eaſily come out of the head. And if theſe tokens be neglected, theſe maner of ſickneſſes do follow ſoon after, bleared eies and humours letting the ſight, cleftes in the eares, ſwellinges in the necke full of matter called the kings euill, corruption of the braines, poſes or rheumes, heauines of the head, and toothache. When the bulke is like to ſuffer any ſicknes, it is perceiued by theſe tokens, all the bodie is in a ſweat, the ſpittle is either ſalt or bitter, or cholerick, the ſides and ſhoulders doe ake without any occaſion, the pacient gapeth often, alſo there doth happen much waking, ſuffocations or lacke of breath, thirſt after ſléepe, the mind is vexed with heauines, alſo the breaſt and armes are very cold, and the hands doe tremble. Againſt theſe things, thie remedy may be prouided. After a modederate ſupper aſſay to vomite without any medicine, vomite is alſo profitable, which meate doth follow. He that in ſuch wiſe wil vomit, let him eat haſtily ſmal radiſh roots, townkerſes, roket, ſenuy, or purſlaine, and drinke after it a great quantity of warme water, and prouoke himſelfe to vomit. He that ſetteth little by the ſaid tokens, let him fear theſe ſickeneſſes following, the plureſie, the ſicknes of the lungs, melancholie or madnes, ſharp feuers, the lethargie, inflamation with yexing. If any ſickeneſſe bee towarde the belly, they may be eſpied by theſe tokens, ye belly is firſt wrapped together, and in it ſelfe is troubled, all meates and drinkes doe ſéeme bitter in taſte, he féeleth heauines in his knéees, a ſtifnes in his loynes, and wearines in all his body, without any occaſion, a ſléepines in his legs, with a

little feuer: when thou feeleſt theſe tokens, mollify the belly, not with medicine, but with good order of diet, for it is beſt and moſt ſure, to vſe thoſe things, wherof lightly may enſue none annoyance, in the number of them are beetes boyled in water of honie, Garlicke ſodden, Malowes, Sorell, Mercurie, and all thinges condite in honie. All theſe doe expell the ordure of the bellie: but if anie of the ſayd ſignes, doe more and more increaſe, the licour wherein the ſéed of Carthamus called alſo Cnicus is boyled, is a pleaſant ſure medicine, ſmall cole wortes boyled in a good quantitie of water, the licoure thereof in meaſure two pintes, ſauing the third part of a pint with honie and ſalte being dronken, ſhall profite much. Cicer & the pulſe called in latine Eruum, in engliſh (I ſuppoſe) chits in water, drūk faſting hath ye ſame effect. To thē which ſet little by ye ſaid tokens, theſe diſeaſes do ſuddenly happen. Fluxe of the bellye, bloudie fluxe, ſlippernes of the bowels, paines in the guttes, ach in the huckle bones, the feuer tertian, the gout, the apoplexy or palſley in the lims. Hemerhoydes, aking of ioynts. When the bladder is towarde any ſickeneſſe, it is perceiued by theſe tokens, fulnes felt after little meat, breaking winde downewarde and vpwarde, paleneſſe of colour in all the body, heauie or troublous ſleepes, the vrine pale and paſſing foorth painefully, ſwelling about the coddes, & priuy members. When theſe tokens appeare, thē it is expedient to haue remedye of odoriferous thinges, which doe expell vrine, which ſhall bée done without any perill, with the rootes of fenell and parcely ſtéeped one or two daies in good white wine, and to drinke thereof faſting euery morning thrée oūces and two drams, with the water of wilde Carets or Elicampane, which of theſe is nexte at hande, euery of them haue like effect. Alſo water wherein the peaſon called in latine Ciceres are ſtéeped, being drunke with wine is like commodious. Hee that neglecteth the ſaid tokens, let him looke for theſe ſickneſſes following, the dropſie, the greatnes of the ſpléen, griefe in the liuer, ye ſtone, ach of back, or pains in the raines, ye difficulty

of vrine, fulnes of the belly. In all theſe things that wee haue ſpoken of, wee ſhall giue to children maſt eaſie medicines, to men thoſe that bee ſtronger in working. This diet of Diocles, although at this time it ſeemeth not moſt pleaſant, nor according to the practiſe now vſed, yet being tempred with that which I haue before remembred, ſome thing may be found in it, which being experienced, may be as commodious for the health of mans bodie, as the dyet which is more curious or pleaſan̄t.
            
            
               Of them in whoſe ſtomacke meate is corrupted. CAP. 12.
               THey in whom cuſtomably meate is corrupted, let them afore that they eate any meat, aſſay to vomit, drinking ſwéete wine, abſtaine drinking ſwéet wine, abſtaine from meats that ingender botches, inflammations, and fumous ructuations or vapors, & take ſuch as nouriſh good iuyce, and chuſe them out which doe mollifie the belly, and at ſundrie times take them. It is alſo good to take temperatly that which looſeth the belly, as the medicine called Picra, and to abſtaine from ſuch things whereby ill iuyce is gathered, and doe ingender ſickneſſes, hard to be cured or neuer, as gowtes, bone-ach, paine of the raines, &c.
            
            
               Of the vertue of meates. CAP. 13.
               HE that is ſtudious about the conſeruation of health, he néédeth to know the vertue of meats. The meat which hath ver
                     •
                  ue to extenuate, or make humours ſubtile, it openeth the pores, and bringeth foorth that which is faſt in the fleſh, it maketh that which is clammy ſubtile, and doth extenuateor relent that which is fat, it bringeth forth that which abideth long in the belly: but that which is eaten, is a ſuperfluitie, watrie, and cholerike, and at length maketh melancholike bloud: wherefore much vſing of them is prohibited, ſpecially to them that are cholerike, and only ſerueth for them that are repleate with fleume, crude or vndigeſted humours, clammie or fat. The diet of fatting

things, doth nouriſh abundantly, ſo that the ſtomack and liuer do digeſt well, meat of good iuyce maketh good bloud, but yet ſtoppeth the liuer and ſpléene. Theſe doe they, which make fat humours onely, as the pulſe called Lenticula, and they that are ſlimy like mallowes: ſome do make hot humours and be alſo ſlimie, as fiſhes with hard ſhels. Finally, the diet which doth extenuate and make leane, is more ſure for kéeping of health, then that which fatteth much. Nouriſhing meates would be therefore moderatly vſed, when a man perceiueth himſelfe to haue néede thereof, it may be moſt ſurely vſed of them that be exerciſed temperatly, and can ſléepe when they liſt. They that cannot ſléepe by reaſon of exerciſe, let them eſchew fatting meats, let none idle perſon attempt to vſe them. In the preſeruation of health, ſluggardie is the greateſt miſchiefe. Like as temperate mouing is good, ſo is the meate which betwéene thicke and thinne, vnto mans health moſt conuenient, which ingendreth bloud, according to the competent conſtitution of mans bodie, and therefore it is to bée chiefly vſed. Meate of ill iuyce is alway noyfull, wherfore it ought to bee eſchewed. Likewiſe the varietie of meates is to be obſerued diligently, for it is a great thing to couple well together things of contrary vertues: for if they bée not well digeſted, that which is receiued may bring diſpleaſure.
            
            
               A Diet preſeruatiue in the time of peſtilence. CAP. 14.
               THe bodies moſt apt to bee infected, are ſpecially ſanguine, next cholerike, then flengmatike, laſt melancholike: for in them the humour being cold and drie, is moſt vnapt to receiue putrifaction, hauing alſo ſtrait paſſages by which the venim muſt paſſe. The diet conuenient for that time, is to abſtaine from meates inflaming and opening the pores: alſo from heate of the ſunne, frō too much heate or fire, or garments, from euery hot hearbe, & much vſe of tart things, except Onyons and Cicorie, or Radiſh

with vineger, for they doe reſiſt againſt venim: from wine very fumiſh, exerciſe incontinent after meales, from ſweating, from all things that will cauſe opilation, and putrification: from things hot and moyſt, where moyſture hath the dominion in a degrée, ſpecially being not ſufficiently boyled: alſo from milke, except it bee in a little quantitie, and that with a little ſugar. Fruites and hearbes cold and drie, and therewith ſowre or ſomewhat bitter, are not prohibited. If ye eate figges, grapes, or ſwéete cherries, eate after them of an Orenge with ſalt. If ye eate things cold and moyſt, as Cucumbers, Melons, fiſh ſoft and freſh, or Damſens, eate by and by after ſome Fenell and Orenge with ſalt, drinking therewith a draught of good wine. Beware of Muſhromes, much Purſlane, Gourds, and all other things, which will ſoone putrifie: notwithſtanding, I will not forbid eating of Lettiſe with a fewe Mints, or mixt with Cinamom. All things ſo wre are commended as well in diet conſeruatiue, as in that which is curatiue or healthie, except where there is ſtraitnes of the breaſt, or weakenes of the ſtomacke, then ought they to be tempered with ſugar, ſalt, Almond milke, Cinamom, pepper, ſenell, ſaffren, egs, and ſome thing that is fat and vnctuous. Capers are good to be vſed with vineger. Chéeſe very fat and ſalt is not commended, no more is Coleworts or any kind of pulſe, except chittes, great peaſon, rapes, nor ſpinage is good. Alſo there be forbidden roket & muſtard, much wine and egges, except they be eaten with ſorell ſauſe, vineger, or iuyce of Orenges, parſly, and parſnips be good. New wines be noyfull, let the meate bee ſomewhat more then drinke, but yet ſuſtaine not too much hunger, nor thirſt, beware of lecherie, of clowdie weather and cloſe, eſchew much reſort or throng of people, winds cōming from fens or moores, from sléepe at noone, vſe with your meate this powder, ſaunders red halfe an ounce, Cinamom 3. drams & a halfe, ſaffron halfe a dram. After your meat eate a little of coriander ſéed wel prepared. In ye morning at a ſēperate fire, kembe your head backward, clenſe your bodie & head

of all ſuperſtuities, vſe alſo moderate fricaſies with ſwéet perfumes and odours, waſh oftentimes your face & hands with pure vineger mixt with roſe water. In cold weather mixe it with mints, Baulme, Rue, or Myrtes, and ſometimes with cloues: in hot ſommer with roſes or violets. Aboue all things vſe to make white wine, good white vineger roſet, water of roſes, in equall portions, put thereunto a little ſetwal, or of the rind of a Cytron, and drinke therof a little, and oftentimes waſh therwith your hands, and viſage. Medicines preſeruatiue againſt the peſtilence, which be alway moſt readie, are theſe, a fig with rue, and a walnut eaten faſting, alſo triacle, or mithridate, to olde men a dram weight, to young halfe a dram, or a ſcruple diſſolued into vineger and roſe water, and in water of tormentill, ſcabioſe, or baulme, if the plague bee in Sommer: if it be in winter, put to the waters ſome white wine. Alſo the pilles called cōmonly Pillulae raſis (but in déed they were inuented by Rufus) are very excellent, ſpecially if the aloe, which is in it bee waſhed, and thereunto added a little Bolus amenus & Terra ſagillata. And if the perſon bée of hot complexion, a quantitie of ſorell ſeede, and red coral, this confectionated with ſyrope of cytrons in colde complexions, or to olde men with white wine, vſe them euery third daye, one pill at a time, three houres or foure afore dinner or ſupper. If ye take 
                     •
                  riacle or mythridate, abſtain from meate at the leaſt ſixe houres after. A piece of the roote of a ſettuall, borne in the mouth, preſerueth from infection. In like wiſe doth ſorell chewed faſting, and the iuyce ſucked downe. To poore men, Marcilius was wonte to giue a toſte of bread ſtéeped in vineger, with a piece of an Onion, or Rue. All thinges which bee cordiall, that is to ſay, which do in any wiſe comfort the heart, doe reſiſt peſtilence, vehement anger, or heauines be very pernicious.
               Other more exquiſite and coſtly preſeruations, I purpoſely paſſe ouer, which Marcilius and other phiſitions do write ſo aboundantly, for as much I deſire to bee in this worke compendious. One thing I had almoſt forgotten,

that there is no better preſeruatiue, then ſo
                     ••
                  ie from the place corrupted betime and farre off, and to let none approch you, that hath made their abode where the plague is feruent. Moreouer receiue not into your houſe any ſtuffe, that commeth out of a houſe wherein any perſon hath bin infected. For it hath béene ſéene, that ſuch ſtuffe lying in a coffer faſt ſhut by the ſpace of two yeares, after that coffer hath beene opened, they which haue ſtoode nigh to it haue beene infected, and ſome after haue dyed. But here I alway except the power of God, which is wonderfull, and alſo mercifull, aboue mans reaſon, or counſaile, preſeruing or ſtriking whome, when, and where it ſhall like his maieſtie: to whom be glory and praiſe euerlaſting. Amen.
               Thus make I an end of this treatiſe, deſiring them that ſhall take profite thereby, to defend it againſt enuious diſdaine, on whom I haue ſet the aduenture for the loue that I beare to my countrie, requiring all honeſt Phiſitions to remember, that the intent of my labour was, that mē and women reading this worke, and obſeruing the counſayles therein, ſhould adapt thereby their bodies to receiue more ſure remedie, by the medicines prepared by good Phiſitions in dangerous ſickneſſes, they kéeping good diet and enforming diligently the ſame phiſitions of the manner of their affects, paſſions, and ſenſible tokens. And ſo ſhall the noble and moſt neceſſary ſcience of phiſicke, with the miniſtets thereof, eſcape the ſlander which they haue of long time ſuſteyned, and according to the precepte of the wiſe man be worthily honored, for as much as the higheſt God did create the phiſition for mans neceſſity, and of the earth created medicine, and the wiſe man ſhall not abhore it. Thus fare ye wel gentle readers, and forget me not with your good report, and pray to God that I bee neuer worſe occupied.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   